[Music]
so it feels really interesting to be
here because we've featured on our
channel quite a lot the intellectual
dark web and it feels like this is one
of the places that gave birth to the
intellectual dark web as a as a thing
what do you make of the intellectual
dark web as it was and where do you
think it is now sort of maybe a year
after its first emerged yeah well I
guess if there's a physical center of
the intellectual dark web it's right
here I mean it's in my garage because I
think this is where not where the ideas
all started but at least where most of
the connections between the people
started and you know people ask me my
role in this whole thing and whether it
is a thing at all you know whether it is
some sort of card-carrying organization
or it's this loose affiliation or
whatever it is I think my role in it is
I've been a little bit of the connective
tissue between the people because I'm
not a biologist like Brett Weinstein or
Heather Heying I'm not an economist like
his brother Eric Weinstein I'm not a
psychologist like Jordan and you know
the list goes on and on but I'm an
interviewer or at least I've become an
interviewer and for whatever reason over
the course of the couple years that I've
been doing this as someone that came
from the left I started seeing all of
these issues related to free speech and
open inquiry and the constant labeling
of everyone else as a bigot and a
homophobe and a racist than the rest of
it I started talking about that from a
leftie perspective and and you know it's
interesting because a lot of the IDW we
get labeled like we're somehow all right
wing or were conservatives or something
like that most of these people at least
were lefties and I think most of them
actually still consider themselves
lefties to some extent so I started
talking about these issues and you know
I've been in a couple studio since we
started this show so I originally
started the show at aura TV which is
Larry King's digital network then we we
left there for a little bit and we did
the show at I can say this now I didn't
say it for a long time I was actually
renting Roseanne Barr studio in LA
before the whole the Twitter fiasco and
all that and then eventually we started
doing it here in my home
about two and a half years ago now and I
think because I came from the left I was
uniquely positioned to talk about these
issues with the right people in a way
that would get lefties who were going
wait what has happened to liberalism
what has happened to free expression I
was uniquely positioned to get people to
talk about it in an open way so if there
is a center I suppose it's here the
center is not too far also of course
from Joe Rogan's
studio and just any of these people that
are that are openly and honestly willing
to engage in ideas to sit across from
somebody and look them in the eye and
figure out what do they think how does
that match up against what you think
what don't you know what does someone
know that you don't know sometimes I sit
across from somebody who it's very
obvious to me they're not really a
master of their thoughts and I learned
something because of that so
so whatever the IDW is and whatever it
may become I'm very proud I think if I
do nothing else you know in the rest of
my career or a professional life like we
created something partly in this room
that has woke people up around the globe
I mean I just did you know basically a
year on the road with Jordan Peters and
a hundred twenty plus stops all over the
world you know from Sweden and Denmark
to you know to right here in California
to Canada to wherever and it's like wow
people real people not just Twitter
trolls and Russian BOTS are waking up to
some of these ideas and that's
incredibly cool and I guess why I really
identified with with this as well is
that I sort of also have also done
identified myself as a leftist and
feeling sort of more and more
politically homeless as time has gone on
and kind of feeling that the the left is
kind of going off in a direction that
I'm not comfortable with and but the
intellectual dart web has always been
like some of the most exciting
conversations were for example Ben
Shapiro and Jordan Peterson talking
about religious truth and just having
the sort of sense of an evolving
conversation going somewhere into an
area that's way beyond politics do you
see it as primarily a political thing or
do you think that it's it's a much
bigger conversation
oh I think it's a much bigger
conversation I think it's cultural first
and you know sort of the meme out there
right now is that politics is downstream
from culture that's what everyone's sort
of saying I think Andrew Breitbart
originally said that but it really is
true so for example the the one that
you're referencing when I had Shapiro in
here with Peterson we didn't really plan
anything I said I said Ben I got Jordan
in studio Ben's not too far from here
I said if you got an hour why don't you
swing by and let's just see what happens
now I knew there's an interesting
discussion to be had there here you have
Jordan Peterson who I think is the
leading intellectual of our time and
after being on tour with the guy I mean
to say I'm in awe of him is actually not
doing it justice I mean the guy is truly
the real deal but here's someone who
talks you know does these biblical
lectures really has has awoken a let's
say a religious spirit not necessarily
for people to become religious per se
but he has woken up something related to
belief in a lot of young people and a
lot of end people all ages and here's
Ben Shapiro who comes from a traditional
Orthodox Jewish background I thought
there's a great discussion to be had
here and what I think I can do in those
conversations is I can kind of throw the
softball up let them start playing and
then there are moments and I think there
was a particular moment in that sit-down
where they're going you know and Ben's
talking really fast and Jordans doing
everything with his hands and there's
there's so many big ideas happening and
they're talking about all sorts of
things and there's a moment where I say
guys guys we got to get this to a place
where the average person can have a
little more understanding because that's
what I consider myself like I have a
good handle on these ideas obviously and
I I lived this and I breathe it and but
when I'm watching these things happen
I'm also watching a little bit as a
viewer myself and there was a moment
where it was getting so high wire I was
like okay we what we're doing right now
is we're taking some really eternal
messages about belief and truth and all
of these things that a lot of people can
understand but now we're taken to a
place where if we keep going it's less
people are gonna send less people are
saying and then there's only to be one
guy I understand and you know I don't
know who that's gonna be at is that is
one criticism is that you're not an
intellectual well I don't know that it's
for me to say whether I'm an
intellectual or not I mean
and I understand these ideas I love
learning I mean I more than anything
else if I've done anything right in my
life it's that every week I get to sit
down across from somebody who's got
something interesting to say some people
are far more interesting than others I
don't think that makes me an
intellectual per se I mean you know I
come from a stand-up comedy background I
like interviewing people I like public
speaking or all of those things I don't
think it really matters I think there's
a there's a certain elite or like I'll
see this where people say oh well you've
got the psychologist and the
harvard-trained lawyer and or whatever
and it's like and then there's Ruben and
it's like all right I am a piece of this
you know you mean like I would say a
good basketball team you can't have five
Michael Jordan's on the team you need a
guy that can set picks and you need a
guy that can pass and a guy that can
score and do all of those things and you
need a guy that comes off the bench and
I do think just it's just my nature I am
a bit of a team player generally
speaking so whether I mean whether I'm
an intellectual per se or someone that
has a I would say if anything I mean
it's sort of uncomfortable to do so but
I would say if anything I think I'm a
communicator of ideas so not all of
these ideas have all just magically
appear I chose well probably yeah well I
would say I would say communicator and
and for the purposes of the show itself
the curator is the right way to describe
it because all I did when this show
started was I started talking about what
I was thinking there's something wrong
with the left it's loosely related to
free speech are there other ways that
good decent liberals can get their goals
accomplished of say equality gay
marriage things like that that don't
have to do with government intervention
and that's what that opened me a little
bit more to some libertarian views and
that really was how I was able to truly
understand what classical liberalism is
and the fact that I you know even the
phrase classical liberalism that that's
even spoke of now it is a little
something to do with something that we
did right here in this room so I'm very
proud of that and whether whether I'm an
intellectual or a guy that's sitting
across from these people in curating
some of these ideas or communicating
some of these ideas or whatever that is
I don't even think that really matters
and it almost is not it's just not for
me to say I'm just I'm really just doing
what I think is right and I'm thrilled
to be part
of whatever this is really and obviously
this is happening in an American context
where we're based in the UK so and I
think probably about 50% of our
audiences is us but it's really
fascinating to see so we're kind of
exposed to the American conversation but
it feels like it's happening at so much
of a fever pitch compared to how it is
in the in the UK even where it's still
like we've brexit especially it's still
quite a kind of intense conversation but
there is something about the American
polarization that just seems to be
ramping up and up and at the same time
there the IDW originally was designed to
be a sort of space beyond that
polarization but it feels that that's a
very difficult space to hold do you
think it's even possible to hold that
space in the US so I think that's
basically the key question almost for
every Western democracy right now is
whether the center or some version of a
tolerant middle that can agree to
disagree can that hold you know it's
interesting because after being on the
road and visiting all these countries in
the last year you know I was in Ireland
when the Brett Kavanaugh thing was
happening and the fact that so many
people in Ireland after a show and I did
my meet and greet we're asking me what I
thought about Brett Cavanaugh the
Supreme Court justice in the United
States
I thought something feels off to me here
why would the average person in Ireland
not only care about this why would they
even know about this so in a weird way I
suppose the United States has almost
exported a little bit of our craziness
but that's just a nature of the way time
and information operate now I mean we're
all walking around with devices that
connect us to the world and right the
second you know I mean I could send out
a tweak right now that would ruin my
career you know cause all sorts of
repercussions and you guys the whole
thing I mean there's a lot of power in
that and also I don't know that we've
quite figured out how to grapple with
that power so when when the IDW started
to come together before the intellectual
dark web phrase had even been uttered by
Eric I think we really were just trying
I think unknowingly perhaps we were
trying to protect the middle I think
that's what it was and if you look at
of the original crew of this thing so if
you were to take Eric and Brad who I
already mentioned if you took Sam well
right there you have three lefties these
are these are guys who have been on the
left their whole life now you could take
a guy like Ben who obviously is a
conservative and you could take Jordan
who say more conservative or more
traditional some level but we really did
have people did and do have people all
over the map and that's what you should
want in a free Western society what you
want is a lefty like Sam Harris to do be
to be able to debate the nature of truth
with a conservative like Jordan Peterson
and at the end they don't it's not about
somebody winning although in the day of
internet everyone wants somebody to win
or be destroyed or something like that
but it's not somebody has to win it's
that they to true intellectual
powerhouses got to debate not only if
they done it on podcast but they've done
it in front of live audiences and
they've done it in the UK in front of
thousands and thousands of people and
they did it several times and in a
Western society it's like everyone hears
the debate you then make your choices oh
you know Sam did make a good point about
this but I agree maybe with Jordans
macro view of the world or you know I'm
eight maybe I'm an atheist personally
but I see a value of a society being
based around judeo-christian values or
something like that it's like that's
what you want in the West that's what
you want in a free society so I think
that's really what we've tried to do
there has been no topic that I know of
that we haven't been able to cover and
agree to disagree or at least shelve the
portion that we that really upsets us to
each other so for example in this very
studio in that chair ben shapiro sat in
that chair which is in my home where he
knows i am married to my husband and he
has expressed you know that he
personally through his religious
understanding of the world he's not
thrilled with gay marriage that's a
light way of putting it but now he takes
a more libertarian approach i can live
with that i don't need to somehow impose
my view of the world on ben shapiro and
on his religious beliefs what i need is
for him not to impose those beliefs on
the way i can live and we've gotten
there we've
there I'm married and he's not trying to
impose anything on me and and that's
good so that's like the type of and
guess what we're doing that in my home
and this is the same guy who will say he
won't come to a an anniversary party at
my home because he doesn't in his strict
religious sense of the world doesn't
approve of my marriage it's not that I
love that I don't love that you know
people I see lefties will attack me on
Twitter I see you're sitting there with
this homophobic bigot and bah-bah-bah
I'm like you know what then and I have
much more respect for each other
then you guys seem to have for either
one of us and you're telling us were the
intolerant ones meanwhile we're trying
we're really trying to work through
something and I would say more than
anything else when it comes to that
example where this is a true I mean this
is a fundamental like how you live your
life difference that we have my belief
is that over time if Ben and I or anyone
that I was having this conversation I
think we can keep having that
conversation and now I'm a couple years
older than Ben so now I'm 80 let's say
and he's 74 or whatever it is I suspect
that he will have come more along my
line of thinking in this case than I
will have come to his but there's only
one way to find out and that's by not
killing each other and not be
platforming each other in the rest of it
so we have to keep doing this and and to
the real point of your question can a
center hold I don't know but perhaps
that's the most relevant reason why we
need to keep trying we are living in a
time when the sides are fraying there's
there's no doubt about it at the same
time what I would say is that perhaps
the center the sane center I would say
maybe that has shifted a little bit
center-right right now because I see
something very rich happening on what I
would call is the center right so sort
of conservatives with a more libertarian
bent which I'm definitely seeing from
young people then you've got classical
liberals you've got sort of the X
lefties who are looking for refuge and
there's something really interesting
happening on the center right and I see
none of that on the left or there is no
center left really anymore there's a
couple stragglers but that's about it
so we have to keep fighting for that
ability to do agree to disagree that
that's all you have in a free society
and Aki Aki built it but your point
about whether the center can hold I
think that's the the most key question
so on rebel wisdom we don't really we
don't really go down at the political
level that often we're much more
interested in what are the what's the
meta conversation and the meta
conversation for for me if you wanted us
or take it up to a slightly higher level
which is why I think Jordan Peterson is
so interesting because I think he is
coming from this very psychological
metaphysical level but then that has
ramifications further down in culture
and politics but effectively it's
something like the the shifts that we
saw in the 60s went too far one way and
there was a lot of traditional stuff
that was basically thrown out the baby
was thrown out with the bathwater and
the kind of synthesis we're looking for
is kind of some of the freedoms that
we've seen through the 60s but with some
of the traditional wisdom that actually
has a huge evolutionary history and
political history and so that's kind of
that's kind of for me the point on the
other side of these culture wars in some
sense what do you think the center looks
like from that kind of meta perspective
well it's interesting because no matter
how frustrated I am with the left now I
don't argue that somehow the left has
never been good or that some of the
ideas that have come out of the left
have not been good so you know equality
for women voting rights for women good
the Civil Rights Act good gay marriage
these are things that came out of
progressive ideas now all of those
things what did all of those things have
in common they all helped make people
equal equal in that they had equal
opportunity and they were equal under
the law that's all the Western society
can guarantee you I would say that's all
any functioning free society can offer
you is absolute equal playing field it
doesn't mean you're born into the exact
same circumstance so some of us are born
into a rich family some of us are born
poor some of us are born handicapped
some of us are born with great athletic
skill I mean all of those things are not
privileges per se those are just the
nature's of reality so I acknowledge
that there there was a decent left and
it's
too long ago that that left existed now
what I would say on the right is right
now as I just said because there is this
interesting you know you've got Trump
people and neo cons and never Trump errs
and libertarians and classical you have
this really wide group of people who are
all sort of agreeing to disagree right
now and I go to colleges and I get up
and I let me get invited by
conservatives and libertarians I never
get invited by Democrats or lefties or
liberals or anything like that and I
give a different speech every time but I
would gladly go and talk to those people
I just don't get invited to them now
you'd think well how does that make
sense you're gay married you're pro pot
you're pro-choice you're against the
death penalty I'm for reforming the
prison system I believe in strong public
education I mean these are all left you
know thought of as lefty ideas but
because I talk about identity politics I
focus on free speech I'm frustrated with
the core of what leftism has become um
I'm an apostate to those guys so I would
say the center the center now has
shifted a little bit right and if you if
you have a basic understanding that what
you're guaranteed let's say in the
United States is the right to life
liberty and the pursuit of happiness
then you're gonna have to live in a
society with people that you disagree
with I have no idea what my neighbor
thinks politically I I just don't know
on either side of my house I don't see
these people that often they seem like
decent people but I suspect we disagree
on a whole slew of things well they're
welcome to do that they can't do it on
my property but beyond that they can do
that and I would much rather live in
that society than a society that's
forcing us all to think all the same
things so yes we need you know Jordan
talks about sort of a healthy tension
between the right and the left we do
need some of that but I would say right
now because what is happening on the
left has become so toxic that
freethought is really being crushed and
destroyed and if you dare go against any
of those things look I just gave you my
lefty cred wood is there anyone on the
left that will tolerate me no I mean it
just isn't now there may be an
individual person Brett Weinstein still
thinks of himself on the left he's nice
to me but I mean in terms of the
institutional version of the left there
there is nobody so
I'm very happy to keep talking to these
conservatives that maybe five years ago
I thought were the bad guys
or these people on the right because
they seem very open and let's keep let's
keep enriching that and see what happens
and if the center and sup becoming a
little more right then maybe I wanted
ten years ago all right you know you
don't get everything exactly as you
wanted but I think that would be the the
space for the most freedom to be able to
flourish and the the intellectual
darkweb as first conceived was a sort of
alternative sense making framework it's
kind of the naming of a lot of
alternative media and it feels
especially with maybe the Covington
thing this this year that the the
mainstream and probably the Muller
report as well the mainstream media is
kind of hemorrhaging credibility at a
faster and faster rate and in a way the
naming of the IDW was kind of the coming
to fruition of a of a new alternative
media and what it feels to me that's
happened since I'm thinking specifically
of for example Joe Rogan's into Jack
Dorsey he got more pushback than I've
seen him ever get from his audience for
not holding Jack to account and this is
really interesting it feels like over
the last year some of the expectations
of the mainstream media and now being
applied to the alternative media like
that that now but it's kind of flipped
in a way but with that flipping comes
some kind of new responsibility
absolutely so that makes sense it not
only does that make sense I mean I think
that actually is the reality of what's
going on here look first off when we
talk about the mainstream media we all
use phrases - that are sort of blanket
phrases to talk about small things so I
don't say everyone in the mainstream
media is horrible but by and large most
of what the mainstream media offers us
is some version of propaganda and we see
this over and over again and we're now
you know between the Covington's story
between the Jesse smollett story between
the Miller report between all of these
things you start realizing why are
things always framed through this sort
of leftist social justice prism or that
you know anyone that's conservative is
default the bad guy or that Trump
have been a Russian operative I mean the
Trump Russia thing is one of the most
interesting ones because I've had plenty
of people on this show that were that
have been vehemently against Trump from
the beginning say say Sam Harris who's
been one of his biggest critics I've had
people who have you know they like some
of the things he says and then criticize
him on others say ben shapiro
and i've had people who were supporters
of his like scott adams and that's why i
wasn't that surprised when the election
happened because i had been listening to
people from all over the place i had
mike cern Abidjan and i got a ton of
crap for it
but i thought where is a trump supporter
that maybe can explain a little bit of
the gestalt of what's going on here and
Serna vich was a published author and
this was before he became sort of no no
he's quite a household name but an
Internet household name let's say and I
thought let me let me talk to somebody
who kind of gets it so when the election
day rolled around and I was on Joe Rogan
I think that I was either on the day
before the election or maybe the day of
the election I kept saying I it's very
possible Trump could win because I had
been hearing those conversations but if
you had only been listening to
mainstream media you wouldn't have
gotten any of that so I would say look
I'm not happy that we're watching
mainstream media fail if mainstream
media would just be I tweet this all the
time if mainstream media would just be a
little bit better then there would be
less need for all of what we're doing if
they would be willing to have some
honest conversations if they would be
willing to talk about policy without
labeling half the country deplorable or
racist and what about the extra
responsibility that places on to the
alternative well so then what that does
is well okay so now so we have
mainstream media kind of crumbling and
then suddenly there were these voices on
YouTube mostly on YouTube but now
through podcasts who started having real
conversations so for example the first
version of the Rubin report where we did
a where did a straight-up interview it's
only about three and a half years ago
now it was September of 2015
and I had Sam Harris on and we were
there to clean up some of the mess
around all of the things people had been
saying about him and it all started with
that Ben Affleck gross and racist line
and we finished the show and I we sat
there for about an hour and a half I
thought wow we just did something
important it felt important and real and
honest and relevant
to me where I never saw any of that
anymore you could even look look at CNN
you know when they got rid of Larry King
I really think you know Larry's now a
friend and a mentor in the fact that he
thinks I'm even remotely decent at this
is incredible but I don't think it's a
coincidence that when CNN got rid of
Larry King whose show by the way was
either number one or number two show on
the network but they wanted to go
younger I don't think it's a coincidence
that CNN started to crumble because
whatever you thought of Larry and I I
loved him and loved him now he was
having real conversations now you maybe
didn't like the way he interviewed or
this or that but he was he was basically
a trusted decent human being who was
having real conversations and once he
disappeared they replaced him with Piers
Morgan then that failed then the last
little bits of remnants of trust in
cable news basically just eroded and
then that that spread then into into
Network News and then I think it spread
into the the BuzzFeed HuffPo Vox monster
whatever you want to call that so yes
there is an odd amount of pressure on us
now which which is weird because I'm not
a journalist I'm again I'm an
interviewer I do the best I can I don't
lie to my audience I will flub things
now and again I try to correct myself
when we do but I don't know exactly what
standards we should be held to so Joe in
the case that you're talking about when
he had Jack on originally I think he did
look he must have acknowledged at some
level that he didn't get it all right
because he saw the push back and then he
had Tim Poole on to sort of act as the
interlock er between them and I think
that was the right move but should Joe
be held to the standards of if he was on
CNN and doing that show I don't know
exactly but he is by his audience I mean
that's the key right so if you're held
by your audience so that's good if
you're how about your audience as
opposed to the mob I guess that's the
distinction that we have to make that
there's a never moving amorphous mob
coming for everybody all the time the
second you say something that doesn't
sound right to them or if they can
selectively edit something you say to
make it sound like something you didn't
say or anything else then the mob will
come for you being held to account by
your audience is good so if I brought
someone in here and really dropped the
ball relative to some some question that
I should have got to or some follow-up I
should have had sometimes people will
tweet at me or Willie million so you
know I wish you would have asked this
person out of it and I'll go alright you
know like I'm learning on the job too
and I hope to keep getting better at all
that so I like being held to a high
standard I don't know that we can be
held because we're not a unified front I
mean Joe and I happen to both do things
on YouTube and we're podcasters and
we're interviewers and we both happened
to do stand-up but we're not we don't
work together you know so there isn't
sort of a layer of a network effect that
would keep us in line with each other
but what I can say is generally speaking
the the crew that we're talking about
here these people have very high
standards they have high integrity we
don't impugn motives we don't attack
people we try to talk about ideas more
than people and hopefully if we're held
to some higher standards even if it's
not quite fair hopefully we can live up
to them so do you think that your job
might be changing as the as the the
culture changes
well it's changing in that all of our
profiles are higher now you know like I
don't think anything I'm doing per se
you know I'm working on my book I'm
doing the interviews I do public
speaking all of these things those
things are consistent I mean hopefully I
get more of those gigs and you know the
audience continues to grow in all of
those things but I guess by the nature
of things growing and more people caring
about the ideas of the intellectual dark
web and if not if the IDW has done
anything I would say we created a space
where people could just think a little
bit and you know most people you're
watching these videos on your phone so
it's a salt it's a solitary experience
where you're listening you know in your
earbuds or whatever and you don't know
if well if you're at the gym and you're
listening to me talk to Peterson it's
like is anyone else at this gym
listening to Peterson does anyone else
know about any of this stuff and that's
what's so cool about going to the live
events because then you look around the
room and you go whoa there's thousands
of people here and they come from every
walk of life and what do they want to do
they want to have honest conversation
they don't want to rip apart all the
goodness that the West has offered us
they want to agree to disagree and and
they they look diverse actually even
though that's not the diversity that
matters and that's that's incredibly
cool so we have to keep
we have to keep opening that space that
which I think you're referring to is the
middle it's that space to be a thinking
human being that we have to keep
defending no matter how hard it gets and
actually the harder it gets to do that
the more important it is so I suppose
our work is cut out for us because I
guess my my concern or my question is
whether the the intellectual dark web
because it's it's often characterized as
being merely reactionary that it's that
it's it's and in some sense it is
because it is reacting against the the
way that some conversations have been
shut down so there is a reactionary
element to it in terms of we need to
carve out a space for genuine dialogue I
guess my concern looking from the
outside is whether it's genuine and
pushing forward to a new synthesis or
potential synthesis or it's just stuck
in because you'll always have an
audience for saying the left is going
out of control yeah but it is it pushing
forward to a new synthesis is that
something you're interested in doing
yeah well I don't always want to be
reacting as a human being I don't want
that and I don't want my conversations
in here to be oh what happened this week
let's react to it I don't think that's
how you can actually forge a better
freer society we have to come up with
good ideas get those ideas out there and
then hopefully the good ones will stick
and they will be the things that
societies are built on and care about so
I would say mainly if we can open up a
little bit of a space to have those
conversations if we can keep that space
open right so we have this we have this
opening right now and we know that it
can't that it's being attacked on both
sides let's say and generally more from
the left but it's being attacked but if
we can keep that space open well there's
all sorts of rich conversations to have
that are not reactionary in nature so
when Jordan is talking about personal
responsibility which you know this is an
idea as old as anything out there that's
not a reactionary position for whatever
reason right now and perhaps more with
young men there is a real need to
understand what personal responsibility
is there is a real need to clean your
room get your life in order before you
get the world in order and that's not a
reactionary position yet it's an
incredibly important position to
right now we have constant conversations
right now is there a difference between
gender and sex or do these words even
mean anything anymore well we can talk
to evolutionary biologists like Brett
Weinstein about that now that is maybe
reacting to a conversation that's
happening culturally but yes we have to
figure out beyond just talking about
these things is this a political
movement is this is it a political party
is this a road show is this a podcast
network or a TV network or a cable news
network or is it nothing are we of just
a bunch of bounty hunters that are all
and I don't mean bounty hunters and that
we're all searching for bounty I mean
that we're just a loosely affiliated
group of people doing our own thing who
occasionally come together and people
like seeing us together I mean maybe
that is what it is actually we're going
to agree and disagree on things you know
I think there's also advantages to not
being that tightly associated with each
other in case one person gets taken down
yet at the same time there's strength in
numbers so you know there are advantages
to being grouped together as well but
we'll we'll see but I would say the IDW
is good at this it's good I don't think
we've all sat there and been like all
right well this is what this thing is
and that's what it's gonna be and we're
gonna go get it it's more that it's
evolving as we're evolving with time and
also we live in an extremely tumultuous
time right now especially our political
system our our media system all of these
things seem to be shaking right now and
we're trying to navigate through and
again hold that hold that little space
where people can stay in there and come
along with us and then I think whatever
it's supposed to be you know maybe Ben's
supposed to run for office and you know
Brett's supposed to start a university
and you know Joe is supposed to get a TV
show and you know we'll all go on our
merry way but hopefully if we can hold
this thing Society won't spin off into
the oblivion because there's a there's a
sense with a lot of the people in the
IDW and I'd say Jordan does this kind of
as well as anyone like there's a
self-reflective Ness
to it I remember at the end of one of
your recent Rubin report shows I think I
think it was Warren with Eric Jordan and
Ben Shapiro perhaps
you had a you all reflected on what you
which criticism you thought were kind of
valid and I think you said something
about political PTSD which is something
that breath and Erica talked about can
you explain yeah well so the so the
reason I asked the question at the end
of that interview with with it was Eric
Jordan and Ben was you know we have done
some pretty heavy idea lifting during
the hour hour and a half of that and I
thought well what what could I ask them
that's a little bit a little bit
different a little more personal because
people do want to know who we are and I
can truly tell you that this this whole
crew what you're seeing on camera with
these guys these guys aren't actors I
mean there are some people you sit down
with and you know privately they're very
shy or very quiet whatever then the
camera goes on and they just light up
these guys it's the same thing we've got
to dinner it's the exact same
conversations exact same interactions
with each other all sorts of stuff but
I've been thinking about it about myself
that have I missed something do I have a
blind spot here am i overestimating what
post-modernism is doing for the left is
there more of a threat on the right than
I'm acknowledging I really was thinking
that for myself and I thought well who
better to talk about that with and
question that with them than this crew
so for myself I talk that maybe I have
some level of political PTSD because I
was part of the left I now see how they
treat me and anyone who holds virtually
or somewhat similar ideas as me I would
say interestingly Brett who you
referenced there who was the first one
to say to me you know Dave you know
maybe you have some version of political
PTSD I suspect if we were to sit down
with Brett right now he would probably
be a lot closer to where I am than where
he was then because he's now only being
treated horribly by the left as a matter
of fact I when I do stand-up now I
usually I do about an hour stand-up and
then I bring one of the IDW crew and
I've brought your Deborah Cristina I
brought both of the Weinsteins a couple
other people and most of my audience now
leans conservative I usually do a little
fun poll I try to figure out where
everyone's at and now you get Brett
going up there and he talks about being
a progressive and guess what they
applaud him and they like him now he
knows he can't go anywhere and get
applauded by progressives so maybe I
have a little political PTSD but I would
say it's also a bit of just reality
so I like asking questions like that you
know Ben Jordan do you have a blind spot
you know and and and are you aware of it
and if it's that blind I guess you
wouldn't know about it but that's how it
also shows a little bit of a human part
of this because we're people too I guess
you're you're criticized more than
anyone else because of your biography
that saying I'm a liberal who's seen
that the left has gone too far and some
of the some of the criticisms are saying
that that's some kind of an act I guess
or always so some like my question I
guess is first can you see that that is
quite a powerful story like in a way the
the concerns or the cynicism towards it
is partly because that's a very powerful
story in itself well I suppose it's a
powerful story because any story about
evolution your personal evolution is
what a story is I mean every movie is
about a character evolving you know you
start somewhere and you end up somewhere
else so I suppose that's a powerful
human story but if the implication
somehow is that I've done that I that
I've somehow planned this or something
like that it actually couldn't be
further from the truth I mean the true
truth is and you can watch I mean I
would say anyone that that really
believes this if you want to spend the
time you can watch my direct messages in
my interviews when I started waking up
to this stuff watch my shows in fall of
2015 before Trump was elected and you
can hear me saying I'm a lefty guys
what's going on here we've got to stop
labeling everybody we can't call
everyone a Nazi because then when the
real Nazis come you won't even know that
we're painting ourselves into an
intellectual corner we've got to be
better at this as a matter of fact when
I did the Prager you video which was
titled why I left the left I never said
the phrase that I left the left that was
never uttered by me either in this room
nor in that video and when the video
went up that morning I was laying in bed
and I got a notification and I was
pissed because I was like wait a minute
I'm still on the left and it's important
that the left has counter voices because
the whole problem here is that it's
become a movement of groupthink now I
quickly realized within an hour that the
video was going so viral that
is gonna be okay but can I honestly say
I'm part of the left anymore of course
not now if some of these guys if if Sam
and Brett and and Eric perhaps or
whoever else want to say they are I
don't but I don't begrudge them that
they should identify however they think
they should but for me personally I
don't know that anyone in this space has
been more open about their evolution
then I have I think that's partly why
people care about what I do because
they've watched me they've watched me
learn they watch me change they've
watched me actually Institute you know
everyone talks about free speech
everyone talks about tolerance and all
of these things but I think people have
actually seen me not only experience it
but express it and that's scary to a lot
of people so the people that criticized
me well first off you're welcome to
criticize me no one's above criticism
that's fine but the truth is they just
don't really want me talking about these
ideas they don't want their Achilles
heel to be exposed and that's that's the
problem I mean there are a million shows
on cable news and everywhere else where
you can watch lefties and progressives
talk about all sorts of things I created
a little bit of space here where we
criticize where often we criticize the
left although that's not really the the
purpose of the show it's I'll talk to
anyone that's interesting but we happen
to focus on that and what do they hate
they hate an apostate more than anything
else because this this this monster that
we're fighting it is it does not want
anyone to be free it is an authoritarian
monster it wants to tell you how to
think about everything and that's why if
you were to take all of the lefty things
right now
that are out there I could tell you that
I'm for a good portion of them but once
you pick one that you're on the outside
for you're really in trouble and then
because of the ridiculousness of
identity politics well if you're gay and
against those things now you're really a
sellout or if you're black and against
those things now you're really an Uncle
Tom or something else so I don't mind
the criticism because I think if you're
doing anything that's real and honest
you're going to get criticism you know I
find some of the criticism boring it's
just these trolls you know all day long
but but but I would say more than
anything else legit criticism I'm
worried than happy to discuss and I've
done it many times by the way I'd like I
mean Jordan Peterson has said before
that he doesn't think journalists should
just sort of play devil's advocate for
the sake of it I think I agree with him
on that that actually if I'm going to
put a criticism to you it should be
something that I actually think deserves
a response and I do think a lot of the
criticisms of you are not true that
they're bad badly intent intentioned and
I think I think you're right in the
terms of being an apple state that is
something that people really really
riles people but even Sam Harris has
said in the past that he thinks that you
might have been captured by your
audience and I feel that as well just in
the pieces that we're putting out
YouTube has a certain bias and I can
feel it's something that Eric had said
that the members of the IDW are free
because they are independent of kind of
organizations I don't actually buy that
because there is there's a huge pull in
terms of the audience in terms of what
they want what do you think of that
criticism by Sam well well I I know that
was in an article and something or other
I forget what it was in look I suppose
at some level everyone that has an
audience could have some level of
audience capture so I'm sure I could say
that about anybody I could could I tell
you that Jordan maybe has some level of
audience capture does Ben have some look
Ben's audience loves it when he destroys
a leftist on a college campus so is that
something that he might do more of it
even if he doesn't think it's the most
high intellectual work he could do
perhaps if Sam makes some joke about
religion is that gonna get atheists who
laugh probably so we could all play that
game so without getting into the real
nitty-gritty of that I would say look if
I really if I cared about audience
capture to the point where I wanted this
just to be about garnering a bigger
audience to make more money and all and
that sort of thing I mean look at the
way we treat our YouTube channel I mean
you should anyone watching this could go
look and we don't do clickbait we
intentionally do things that I know
we're going to get us less views which
will ultimately get us less subscribers
but we treat the channel and the
material that we put out the same way I
treat the conversations here so audience
capture I don't know really
don't know what that means I don't know
how I I truly I don't know how I could
be more honest with my audience than I
am being when I don't know something I
am willing to admit that and I'm willing
to explore certain ideas so I think yeah
there's no way that that can be answered
that I think really can give a very
satisfying answer other than I am truly
doing what I think is right if people
want to watch if they want to support
they can can I tell you that there's no
level of audience capture that I
subconsciously can't even explain well
the political PTSD you talked about
before they're kind of more focused on
the left well of course I'm more focused
on the left I believe that this that the
modern left that the postmodern leftist
which now have taken over academia which
have taken over the media which have
taken over the political establishment
of the Democrats I believe that is
without question the biggest threat to
individual freedom to Liberty and to
human prosperity that exist that is far
bigger a threat than I think Donald
Trump is or even could be I think it's a
far bigger threat than the alt-right or
whatever that is I think this idea not
to say this this group of ideas based in
a competing set of interests where we
have to put black people here and gay
people here and Muslim people here and
trans people here and this ridiculous
system that will turn neighbor against
neighbor
it will literally will do that you will
be walking down the street you will see
your neighbor walking his dog and you
will go off he's a cisgender white man
he has privilege I should treat him this
way ah here's a intersectional black
disabled lesbian she should get this
it's the most psychotic set of ideas
that could ever be assembled and it is
but in it is a threat now it has
actually become a threat to the left so
if having political PTSD is that I
criticize the thing that I think is the
most dangerous to Western society and to
human freedom then I gladly have PTSD I
would say we all focus on certain things
also the funny part of this is no one
focuses on this in the mainstream so the
irony is I'm being criticized for
calling out something I suppose that
million
and millions of people are seeing yet
very few are willing to talk about so
they watch these shows often privately
because they don't even want their
friends to know that they're listening
to these shows so if I'm focusing there
I don't see that as a problem I mean if
used if you saw a problem would you just
talk about it for a month and then be
like and then the problem still existed
or was getting worse I mean that's the
irony right this thing is getting worse
and worse and worse the ideas of
democratic socialism are becoming
stronger so why would I stop talking
about them I don't think that's audience
capture I think that's I see a problem
and for whatever reason I'm not afraid
to talk about how to stop it
yeah and I would agree with you like the
overall frame is what we're seeing is
the Reid tribal ization of society and
it's coming from the left it's coming
from this the intersectional worldview
that is not looking at the commonalities
between people but it's looking at the
differences between people and seeing
those primarily I think that's
absolutely true
I guess my my genuine concern is and
I've also been on that channel we've
been a little bit critical of Jordan
Peterson as well because I think
sometimes his relentless focus and the
kind of clear reactivity he can have
around this stuff can actually be be
more polarizing than than it would need
to be sometimes and that it that it can
be and I guess I'm coming from aspect
evolve one as a journalist and two as
someone who's really looking to see what
is the place beyond all of this all of
this conflict and my Michael the
criticisms that I see any view that I
think have some some validity is
sometimes you draw this you talk about a
new center evolving but you draw that
new center around some people that that
I would consider on the right like
Stefan Stefan modern you for example
well I've never said that stefan
molyneux Zinn the new center i really
have you ever heard me say that i
thought you had no but people were so
this is one of the things that people do
before exams another example would be
the Katie Hopkins interview yeah and
Katie Hopkins I mean I know Katie
Hopkins pretty well coming from the UK
and the way that that interview was
framed was that she was sort of being
shut down for in a politically correct
way but the actual article that she
wrote was calling from
gunboats to be used against migrants and
compared them to cockroaches I mean that
was did you know that about the article
before the interview were we talking
about a specific article yeah there's a
specific article in you had an interview
with her where it was framed you've sort
of framed it as that she was
investigated by the police for this
article and this article was actually
taken down by the paper that produced it
she was interviewed by the police but in
that article she called for gunboats to
take on migrants and compared them to
cockroaches right so so the interview
was about two years ago I actually don't
remember every specific instance of the
interview I mean that's just that's just
the truth I see I mean this is one of
the strange things it's like everyone
calls for more tolerance we should talk
to people we should interview people we
should sit down with people but then the
second you actually do it then you're
the enemy so it's like you know we
should all be tolerant of people but now
can Joe Rogan sit down with Alex Jones
well a lot of people were really pissed
about that now did anyone get killed
because Joe Rogan's but he was he was
criticized for not bringing up the Sandy
Hook thing and then when he sat down
with him again he did bring up the Sandy
Hook thing you know in a fairly strong
way okay and that that would be the
question is that and the criticism that
I've seen is that you don't push back
hard enough against people when they
maybe deserve it that you've given easy
ride to people listen I would say I'm
interviewing people the way I like to
interview them I like to sit across from
somebody look them in the eye and figure
out what their ideas are and if you let
them talk long enough if they have bad
ideas or they don't know their ideas
I've said this a million times you can
actually watch them wrap the noose
around their neck and hang themselves so
are there specific instances over the
course of however many hundreds if not
thousands of interviews that I've done
that maybe I asked a question in too
much of a leading way or didn't have the
perfect follow-up or something like that
I'm sure there are I also have no I of
being here I don't have a producer
yelling at me what to do I'm doing this
on the fly I very rarely look at my
notes I'm actually sitting there and I'm
trying to pay attention and do the
follow-up properly in the rest of it
could I have asked Stefan Molyneux some
different questions perhaps I actually
and I think I probably prepared for that
interview more thoroughly than I had
ever prepared for an interview because I
knew what the fallout was gonna be no
matter what I did if I did the greatest
job I was still gonna get hate and if I
did a horrible job I was gonna get hate
I think the right question was the one
that I repeatedly asked him which is
which was why do you care about this I
thought that was the right question now
people can say I did a bad job or did a
good job or whatever else I have often
talked about a new center I can tell you
that the new center that I would
envision would have nothing to do with
white nationalism just as it would have
nothing to do with radical left ism so I
don't know that I have talked about the
phrase new Center but I don't know that
I've ever said this specific person is
part of it what do you say Mike so none
of it just in the new center I mean so
these are these are the type of
questions that I don't think are that
productive actually but I mean I'll
answer it I don't think it's that
productive because if we just start
drawing lines everywhere and I get it I
get why people want to draw lines and I
get why countries have borders I mean
they're you can't just always be
absolutely open to everything do we want
murderers in in the new center or
something like that of course not I
would say someone like Serna vich who
maybe has done some trolli things or not
maybe has done some trolli things has
done some over-the-top things over the
over time he was also part of the
machine that broke the fake news monster
that we've been talking about it
attacked radical left ism in a certain
way that perhaps the IDW couldn't do
because we talk about things in a really
decent way and a respectful way and not
everyone always responds to that so
somebody like milo i would view as a
necessary piece of all of this because
milo went in there and in his fabulous
over-the-top ridiculous way also had an
incredibly sharp mind and he blew up
things and we were able to put some of
those pieces back together so i would
say some of those people are necessary i
would also say that Serna vich has
really evolved and i would say in the
last year I think he's extremely mod I
would say none Madhuri
himself but I think he's he's becoming
something I think much more rich or
something in the last year or so so you
know we could do this litmus test with
the gajillion other people but I always
do think it's funny people will only ask
me this about people on the right right
so you can ask me well is stefan
molyneux in the IDW is Serna bitch in
the new center but no one will say
anyone no there's no left that's too far
left to be considered I've never heard
that question once and even if I would
say I asked you that right now I'm
guessing you can't even come up with
somebody because that's just sort of a
nature of it so yeah if we live in a
free society you're gonna have to
interact with some people that maybe you
don't love and and maybe over time if
you do it honestly you might actually be
able to wake them up to some good ideas
I guess what I'm what I'm saying the
criticism is that do you think that you
can sometimes slip into a fairly like
it's such a powerful though there's so
much truth in the idea that the left is
constraining debate the left is kind of
making certain topics off off off the
off the table that that can turn into a
bit of a simplistic narrative that's my
concern is that if everything is seen
through that narrative all the time and
the reason I mentioned the Katie Hopkins
piece is that I thought I don't know if
you if you'd read the article before
you've had her on but I did I did think
the way that it was framed made it sound
like she was some free speech martyr
whereas actually the language she was
using I feel hugely uncomfortable with I
know Jordan Peterson for example talks
about the danger of framing people in
disgust language like he talks about
kind of Hitler used to do that talking
about people as vermin or as cockroaches
and she'd done that in that particular
article is one kind of coming back right
so I would say this so we could I would
answer it this way let's and this is the
overall point I'm making do you think
you can sometimes have a tendency to
frame things in a way that is that is in
some sense laundering people with much
were much worse views or very like Katie
Hopkins very difficult or very
reprehensible views I don't think I've
helped
launder anyone's views to make their
nefarious views let's say any more
palatable I don't think I've done that
let's pretend though that the Katie
enter the Katie Hopkins interview they
did was literally the worst interview
ever let's pretend I just grant you that
this was a V I just completely dropped
the ball I misunderstood something and
she's she's a true racist and all of
these things I've done hundreds of
interviews I would say if you know
everyone gets one I would say you get
one or two so you know when people focus
on the two or three little things that
they didn't like okay you know it's also
the nature of how everyone views
conversation these days because again I
said everyone talks about tolerance but
they don't really mean it they mean it
they mean to be tolerant for the things
that you like and I've tried to perhaps
because of the PTSD of the left because
the left has become so hysterical have I
been a little friendlier maybe with
people on the right that that maybe I
wouldn't have been years ago perhaps but
I don't regret any of those
conversations I don't no one got hurt
because of any of those conversations
you know what's funny after the mob the
molyneux one which you know people
criticize me for all the time I got a
lot of emails from people saying that
you know they had heard about him sort
of and then when I had him on and I
asked him these questions that they
actually just weren't that impressed
with them so it's not like you get you
sit down with someone and automatically
you strengthen them there's no automatic
maybe they'll be strengthened if their
ideas are good and I don't think I'd
ever argue that you shouldn't sit down
with someone I think my main point is
whether people are being challenged
enough because and that goes back to my
point before about has has it shifted
because because now there are
expectations I mean we're seeing this
for Joe Rogan I think we're seeing this
with you as well that there are
expectations that you will hold people
to account in a way that when you're an
upstart kind of alternative media
channel yes we're not there right so as
I said earlier look the bigger you get
the more relevant you get the more
haters are gonna come out but the more
that legitimate criticism will come out
too and again I address this all the
time what do you think is the most
legitimate criticism it's not really for
me to say what the legitimate criticism
of me if someone wants to say that they
don't like the way I interview
that I don't ask hard enough questions
or something like that well I suppose
that is a legitimate criticism of me
it's not the way I like doing my
business and you know if you don't like
what I'm doing then I would say you
don't have to watch doesn't mean I'm
doing it perfectly I'm doing I'm doing
something that I believe is good
apparently a lot of other people think
it's good too and and apparently it's
pretty rare these days so within that if
I don't do it exactly how someone wants
well I guess that's just that's just how
life works but yes we are gonna be
scrutinized more and I don't mind I
don't mind scrutiny so I would say it's
a it's a function of success which is
which is good since the IDW is announced
in probably maybe it's just over a year
ago do you how has it evolved and how do
you feel that your position within it
has evolved well there is definitely an
interesting moment for the IDW on the
horizon as we roll into the 2020
election because you know I think we
have people now let's say there's a
certain set which I would say probably
is ben shapiro jordan peterson myself
maybe douglas mari that are a little bit
more right-leaning at this point right
and then there's the the other side
which I said would say is the Weinstein
brothers and Sam and a couple other
people that are maybe a little more
left-leaning now what's gonna happen is
I think as we get as we roll towards the
election of 2020 it's fairly obvious to
me that the left for all intents and
purposes and I don't mean every leftist
obviously but the apparatus of the left
and the media and the political
establishment they've bought into the
socialist Democrat view of the world
they've bought into this postmodern view
of the world now could any of us that
are that are loosely affiliated with the
IDF with the IDW could any of us
possibly vote for one of those people I
don't see how that would be remotely
possible every single idea that they're
putting out is the antithesis of
everything that we've talked about here
I mean everything that we've discussed
that the IDW has talked about for lascal
years has been against identity politics
has been against these group
associations and collectivism and all
that now one side is really veering
towards that the other side whatever you
think of Trump is in
estimation is not really veering towards
that so I think there's gonna be an
interesting moment for the IDW where
it's gonna be like all right because
we're we've been lefties and Democrats
our whole lives or something like that
well now can we possibly have to vote in
a different direction and I think that's
gonna be a very hard pill for some
people as well
that being said whether we all end up
voting for different people are the same
person or anything else I hope that
we'll continue those conversations
respectfully but I do think there's
there is an interesting split in that
regard I don't the last little bit of
the guys that are saying the left is
salvageable I don't think there's any
evidence for it I think there's a plenty
there are there's plenty of evidence
that there's no nothing salvageable left
so we shall see and this I guess is the
sort of the broader context of what I
see from the outside is there's almost
like an America has is almost like
machine for creating polarization even
when something like the IDW is conceived
as a space to hold the center it's still
fraction eighths and I guess the sense
you you just said that you're sort of
feeling yourself pulled in one direction
during it almost like the logic of the
logic of the culture war now is that
you're it's just always splitting well I
would say the logical answer if you care
about the ability to talk about the
things we've been talking about related
to science and related to gender and
related to climate or political
conversation any of those things
there is it is obvious to me that the
road right now as it is whether I want
this to be or not the reality is that
the road right now is clearly veering
right it doesn't it's not going far
right and somehow we're gonna become
ethno nationalists and racists that's
everything we're fighting against but
the road where we're gonna be able to
have these conversations is clearly
going right right now
now you may really want it to go left
and you may be holding on to the
steering wheel as hard as possible it's
not that it can't go Center but I think
sometimes if right now where we exist we
can see some conservatives that are open
to talking about ideas and we can see
some libertarians who are open to
talking about it is why not talk to them
they're willing to do it so that is
going to shift us I would say a little
right now when you say right people some
there's a there's a association that
that somehow means authoritarian or
scary what I would say right means is
basically you believe in individual
freedom and you believe in human liberty
and limited government those are all
good things that are completely
congruent with all the ideas that we've
we've talked about here but but
interestingly you know when the article
about the IDW came out you know that's
when this thing really leveled up
because finally it was in the New York
Times so now you get the political
establishment and the media
establishment care and it was suddenly
like within within 24 hours of that
article coming out the amount of hit
piece is written on us were we're insane
and it's like ah so this really is how
you guys operate we're out there we're
building audiences we're having
interesting conversations we're agreeing
we're disagreeing and it's just building
and it's and it's all actually quite
pleasant and decent then we get in the
New York Times and next thing you know
all of the the usual suspects start
coming out of the woodwork and you know
we're racists and it's a group of white
men and all of this nonsense and it's
like all you guys really do is just
react to things that are that are
different than you you're proving our
point yeah I guess that's that's my
central point is that the paradox of the
IDW is that let's create a space beyond
polarization immediately in the American
context becomes polarizing itself almost
straight away so I would say that's
probably a commentary more on just
American political establishment or sort
of media establishment more than the IDW
itself I think all we could do and I
would suspect if you ask this question
to to any of the crew that we're talking
about here I think most of them would
say I'm interested in either doing the
research that I want to do or having the
conversations that I want to have or
interacting with a certain type of
person or whatever it is or you know
maybe eventually writing laws that will
lead to more freedom or whatever else
and and that's it but I would say in the
in the broad sense what is that can that
exist forever I don't know if it can
exist forever but I would I just think
we have to just keep moving
that's it if we just keep every week I
try to do a show that I feel is relevant
and it's honest and is the best show
that I can do and I think that that has
worth to people and you know if in five
years from now there's 20 other people
that are doing this better than me I'll
find something else to do and who who
are the figures on the left that you
think are capable of having these kind
of conversations that you would because
because one of them oh I see well this
well here's the irony right so I could
so who are the people on the left that
can have these conversations well Sam
Harris is on the left right but that's
not really what you mean right
Bret Weinstein is on the left but that's
not way when is recline Eric why is that
on left but that's not what you mean as
recline I mean you know I suppose if he
wants to have a conversation with me
sure but you know I view him basically
as a bad actor in this space I mean you
could watch you could listen to his
podcast with Sam but but even more than
that when that ridiculous data and
society alternative influencer Network
study came out which was not a study it
was just a bunch of names with arrows
drawing drawn to people where there were
many mistakes by the way and the whole
idea was that it was trying to link all
of us to the all right and to real
racist and they were trying to prove
somehow that by watching ben shapiro or
Jordan Pederson or Dave Rubin people are
shifted to the right now they've
actually done some follow-up studies Tim
Poole has done a video on one where they
actually proved that by watching our
shows mostly we've moderated people the
other way but Ezra tweeted out that
article and even tweeted that this is
for Dave Rubin that he was tweeting so I
don't view him as someone that's a
particularly good actor in this space
you mentioned the alternative influencer
report that's the Becca Lewis report I
think yeah it was really interesting
reading that how they seem to focus on
you more than just about anyone else in
that report yeah why do you think that
is well I think as an interviewer I'm
going to sit down with the most people
now Brett Weinstein for example may sit
down with some of us but it's not his
job to sit down with people so as an
interviewer I'm gonna sit down but as
I've said many times look Larry King who
again this is my mentor and I think is
the best interviewer of all time in his
heyday so picture 1991 CNN primetime
Monday Magic Johnson Tuesday the cast of
friends
Desmond Tutu Thursday Bill Clinton
Friday Jack Hannah the animal guy did
anyone think he endorsed all of these
views or liked all of these people
no nobody you would have to be out of
your mind to think that somehow now if
you sit down with someone in 91 that was
okay now in 2000 idea if you sit down
with something you obviously love them
and endorse all their views it's it's
actually completely bananas I think that
perhaps I'm most focused on in that in
that data and society report partly
because I'm an interviewer but also I in
a weird way and this is this is I don't
even think I've ever said this before
and I don't take any great pleasure in
this I'm the biggest threat to these
people I have walked away from the left
and survived I have no desire anymore to
reform them they can go and do their
thing what I see is a rich decent
basically honest and open center right
that I think could truly be a good
future for America and I'm willing to go
there and do that and I never get hate
from them they can agree to disagree
they keep inviting me places where I
tell them my differences with them and I
go to college gigs too conservative
events and I go if you've got a
disagreement come up first and guess
what we always do it respectfully and
shake hands at the end so in a weird way
I'm a threat to them because I've shown
my life experience which is not audience
capture it's it's who I am my life
experience has shown you can escape and
you will be okay and that is the last
thing they want to show because because
leftism has become as Peter Bogosian
said on this show it has become a
secular religion it has all of the
markings of religion except there's no
Redemption narrative especially if
you're a straight white man so they
can't just have somebody walking away
and living to tell the story so you know
if they want to attack me for it it's
okay they proven thank you very much
[Music]
you
[Music]