all right no that's taking so much hello
I will be posting us on Facebook's hello
replay viewers because I don't think any
home we join us live it's unfortunate
because YouTube and Facebook have their
own like Facebook it's easier to kind of
interact with people and have people
involved in YouTube it's easier to then
post it on Facebook or as I think it's
clearly possible to there's ways but too
technical for me to post from Facebook
to YouTube but it's very easy to put
this from YouTube to Facebook so we're
gonna be live on YouTube and then post
it on Facebook and hopefully people
backtrack and join the live part on here
eventually but today is Thanksgiving in
Canada
Happy Thanksgiving I am super grateful
to live in the country I live in
even with its complex history and
current greatness that is however talk
too much today
today I want to talk about what it is we
need as a species with this whole
Cavanagh of compartment and what not
nothing to do with that and get
everything to do with that we need to
stop no that's not right people who are
involved in politics I want them to
truly continue doing what they're doing
they're doing amazing work people who
are like getting into politics for the
first time whether that's voting whether
that's working a volunteering for people
who are voting or sorry who are running
and or running themselves because they
realize there aren't enough politicians
that are quality to vote for all of that
is needed but also that is a long
arduous process and we need solutions
now and so that's one of the things we
need is like ideas and innovations and
solutions and we need a way to get the
best ones out into the market into the
world into wherever it is they exist
continuously and we need to do it in a
in a safe way and we need to do it so
there's there's a lot of things that we
need and a lot that the system gives to
that and a lot that it takes away and
I'm proposing a new somewhat systems and
what organization so what I think we
need I think personally I would really
like access to information but I needed
to me trustworthy because even if I
trust this accurate information I'm
having a debate I'm having a discussion
with someone who's a policy changer
unless they can trust the information I
have there isn't really a point like
when I watch a documentary I somewhat
trust the documentary and then when it's
like but do your own research it's like
well then what was the point
what was the point because if I can't
trust this and we can have a discussion
on this and I have to do my research and
you have to do your research where do we
find the common ground because it's like
I can research all day long but if it's
not going to help you understand it and
it's not gonna help me get you to the
same meeting ground so we can make
decisions it's not really gonna have a
point so we need information that we can
point to that's accurate and trustworthy
and for me that means it has to be
transparent I need to know who funded it
where it came from how accurate it is is
it the best of the information we have
because there is no such thing as
perfect information just the best of and
if it's a scientific piece like what
percentage of papers are pro vs. con or
like this side versus this side and
seeing the bigger picture of information
and like we have enough information out
there it exists it's online like all of
human information is online but it's not
usable because it's not trustworthy and
it's not one place we go to the closest
we have to this is Wikipedia like it's
because it is kind of a place where we
go to do we trust information a little
too much probably but we can also go to
the back end and see how trustworthy it
is see the discussions see the toward
the bottom and see the references and so
yeah but it's one entity it's like an
online encyclopedia there are ways that
we can have information that isn't an
online encyclopedia that's even more
powerful but it needs to have that
trustworthiness as well as having
information we can trust that is access
it has to be accessible which means it
has to be able to be not just for the
like intellectual elite in that in that
category there any pieces of that there
could be like oh if you're really versed
in this topic having the deep deep
conversation but it has to also be
available at a surface level for
everyone to be like ok and now I
understand blockchain technology now I
understand or voting on it has to be
able to be understood by different
learning styles by different
neurodiversity and so making information
accessible so that we're truly honoring
our diversity we also need people we
don't exist on Islands we need people to
create with and to organize with and to
make life more enjoyable and more
efficient we need people we already do
that right like we come together like
we're not gonna run a hospital for one
person a hospital needs to be for a
community for it for a society we need
people to create with we need people to
create for and if we create to be able
to work with people we need tools we
need tools to be able to collaborate the
old systems infrastructure was roads and
is we still need those delivery systems
the railways the internet like all of
that is infrastructure that we use and
we will continue to use but there's new
infrastructure which is like the usable
information definitely still the
internet creating systems that we can
create from the bottom up together I get
a little sidetracked here people to
connect to the tools to collaborate with
is what we need so Facebook YouTube all
of these things are amazing but they're
not designed for collaboration we can
use them for collaboration but they're
not designed specifically for that
purpose they're designed for profit and
there are amazing tools out there that
are not accessible because they're too
expensive they're like 10 bucks a month
per person using them well no no I I
what like I use Facebook for free why
would I go base ten dollars a month to
collaborate with different people we can
create a tool that anyone can find a
group of people with if we design it for
that purpose that you can go on and
you're like hey this Park needs cleaning
who in my neighborhood wants to go out
and it goes out to everyone your
neighborhood and you design a park clean
up right that's a simple entity it's
like hey we need to figure out this food
system like why are we throwing out so
much food
well what when you're creating from the
bottom up you're creating like what's
the problem what the information we have
on that problem how do we combine that
information together what is solutions
brainstorm wonder what is something we
can do now cuz maybe the solution costs
billions and takes thousands of years
yeah but we need something that's gonna
take a year and cost a hundred thousand
dollars to create so we're creating yeah
having the tools to collaborate
get organized gives us our true power
that we already inherently have but kind
of been told that we don't have life no
all those people in power you mean the
people with money ie the people who are
spending money than regular consumer in
a capitalist system and the voters in a
democracy we're both of those things
most in a democracy we need an efficient
use of our resources
which right now is somehow the market is
somehow if you can pay this price then
you can use it however you want that's
not a great system because we're wasting
our finite resources like it's not
supply and demand because it's okay it's
a finite supply this demand isn't just
momentary demand it's the demand for our
whole species lifetime if we're using
 up instead of recycling it
infinitely then we need to take in
consideration the demand over the life
of our species not just the momentary
demand now everyone wants iPhones no we
want to be able to have our kids kids
kids kids kids they'll have a world to
live on so we need to be able to take
care of our finite resources actually no
more stuff is and the truth is if we're
designing it from cradle to grave
technology if we're designing it so that
it's like from extraction through to
when no longer using this product and
we're getting the resources back that's
available to us in a way that it's not
available to the current industry
because there's no incentives create it
that way we have the incentive it's our
planet so and we need did I say this one
first I said it first before but I don't
know if I said personal a video it's the
sixth point but it's also kind of the
first point which is that we need ideas
we need innovation we need to be able to
have new things come into existence to
be able to assess them for risk and be
able to implement them and then track
them keep them going like not just oh we
sure it was safe and now we're never
gonna look at it again I know there's
like short term implications long term
implications and the more people we have
lukina problems the more easy we're
gonna be able to see them work more
we're gonna be able to troubleshoot them
yeah together it's just better so I just
but those are the things that we need
and yeah yeah weak a lot more than that
but that's what I'm creating is the
solution to those things information
that is accurate and trustworthy because
we're gonna decide on what that is
together that you can connect whether
you have a group of people you want to
create something with the tools to be
able to create with that group of people
that you've already created and also if
you don't have a group of people to be
able to find your group of people and be
able to that means be able to move
between groups and find which one's work
and which ones don't and who you are as
a human being and who you work well with
and don't work well with and what kind
of projects you work well on and what
position you hold on those projects are
all things that we can use technology to
help people find because it's better for
them it's so great to know who you are
and what you're here on this planet to
do and feel and feel like you have a
purpose and it's also for the betterment
of society that more people have that
right like the more people who are
living their purpose and like living
their best life the more we all get that
innovation and creativity
I mean access to what they came up with
and we don't need everyone doing that we
need like a tiny fraction of people to
be innovating and creating stuff and if
we unleash that they'd sky's the limit
we can do all of this like what I'm
proposing is somewhat complex some point
there's if I have trouble explaining it
in you know elevator pitch but at the
same time like it's like oh here's the
scientific website here's the history
wanted here's this it's like if they all
existed think of the world we could live
in it's like yeah but that's a lot of
stuff to do right but there's a lot of
us and if we have enough funds to make
it and we have enough people to create
it both they're like free hours of the
greater work of the crowd and also the
people that are like putting in the long
long long hours who are like sustainable
over time like they're putting in you
know ten to 40 hours a week that they
need to be paid for because they need
food on the table and a roof over their
head we have enough of all of those
people to create these things and we're
doing it efficiently so it's not like
one not each app has to run their own
company in their own entity and then
therefore each of them has to charge ten
dollars a month per member which is why
the other tools do because they don't
have enough people using them and they
have to be able to fund their employees
to keep this thing going
we can do that on a massive scale so
that it's going to cost us a lot less to
create each project it's going to cost
us a lot less to keep each project going
than what it would with the others
because we're breaking down that system
we don't need to mark it we have a ready
based market we don't need to fund it we
have ready funding we have there's a lot
of barriers that you face we've already
assessed the risk we're not creating and
spending millions of dollars and then
saying by the way we needed 10 million
people to use this where are there 10
million people who want to use this
worse is flipping that and saying how
many people want to create this together
I'm 10 million people awesome can we
create this for 10 million people and if
there's 10 million people are willing to
give $5 like that's 50 million dollars
we hope to create this with what could
you create 50 million dollars pretty
much anything technology wise the
currently exists anyway like different
entity iterations of what already exists
so yeah the other thing I wanted to talk
about and I'm probably not gonna be on
for a full hour today I'm just gonna
talk until I'm done the talking points
but can I get a mic a doc for an hour
all day every day there is a lot to do
yes
that's the point yes there's a lot to do
a lot this is this is a big huge
undertaking but it's not a big huge
undertaking for any one person there's
gonna be tons and tons of us so and no
one has to take on more than they are
capable of more than they want to take
on more than they want to stretch
themselves to grow and learn and so the
fact that there's like a dozen different
projects might seem overwhelming but at
the same time it's the world of people
like there's more than enough people to
work on those individual projects in the
beginning we're only gonna create one
project at a time because we want the
momentum we want the energy we want all
of that behind one project but when that
becomes overwhelming or we have too many
people to work on one project too much
money to fund into one project how sad
that we have too much money we have more
money than we can spend than we can
spend on different projects when it
makes sense when we have a higher
threshold of people that he's needed on
one project we can open two simultaneous
projects and eventually we get to
there's tons and tons of projects and
that's when we get to the more in each
technology anyway you're creating an app
for a very specific group of people
because
you live a common life that needs this
specific thing that the other tools
aren't gonna work for anyway quite um
eat this dress from a daily life I don't
often you'd say that
the whole life is stressful it can be we
all have our daily that we need to
do that we have put food on the table
and a roof over our head clothes on our
backs that we have to deal with the
insanity that is our current world
whether whichever side you're on and all
of those things are made better together
like if you're a family unit deciding
what groceries to buy what's on sale
where you're spending your time that's
gonna be stressful more stressful than
if you're doing it as a community and a
greater community and so the more were
able to come together and create
solutions together the better it is for
everyone
mainly because I love type of a leader
the mandatory Ness of it the politics
versus the economics clear to everyone
like without a minute right we're not
creating a whole again these notes don't
make sense I should read them I did the
points that with what we need made sense
the notes after were just the random
thoughts so one of the thoughts I've had
over the last week which is one of those
things when it comes here like why why
was this not what I was always is
deciding between a political in an
economic system and I still remember it
for like high school so it might be a
little fuzzy but communism is both a
political and economic system it's this
like centrally planned political system
and essentially planned economic system
which works together to in historically
not work there shortages there's
violence there's we kind of suck at
central planning it's a species we just
do we suck at breaking things down into
the components and understanding them
both as as their individual entities and
as their complex together nests we do
one or the other and we need to
understand that's why the capitalist
system somewhat works is because it
isn't centrally planned it's like oh you
see a problem come for the solution to
make a profit but there's a downside to
that agreed the inefficiency the yeah
there's a downside to it we're
destroying our planet with that system
there cannot be finite growth
an infinite growth on a finite planet
sir can be fine i growth on an infinite
planet but that's all so politics
certain in our system or democratic
which is our political system and
different if you think we're democratic
we are maybe not perfectly democratic
but we're democratic and then our
economic system which is capitalism
they're very intertwined and very like
ok our corporations are in charge have
given money to the politics they're kind
of in charge the politics the media
that's supposed to kind of talk about
them neutrally is owned by the by the
the capitalists they're really they're
really the 1% of the capitalists so it's
all intertwined but it's not actually
it's the flipped clinic on a set
intertwined where's communism it's like
designed to be intertwined rather than
it became kind of intertwined anyway
another point politics is not voluntary
politics neither is your economic system
really but under economic system it is
let's explain that further so if I vote
that's my choice in my political system
once there's a leader of my country I
don't get a choice of other like my
choice is voting once they're in charge
they're in charge of me I don't get to
opt out of taxes and opt out of them as
my like leader of my country I in
capitalism I also don't get a opt out of
capitalism I don't get to just like not
put like me I could go live in the woods
you know but even that I think is
illegal and we can't have everyone doing
that I can choose where I spend my
dollar though daily I don't have to vote
for McDonald's because I don't ever have
to step foot in their in their
restaurants and spend any money so in
that way it's voluntary and that's the
side we're concentrating on because
changing the political system means you
have to have like in order to get into
office you need to have a threshold of
people believing in the possibility of
your system you need to have in
capitalism in the corporate entity you
need to have a threshold of customers
that are agreeing with your business
model in order to support you we are
creating from the bottom up so as
customers we are the map where the
people who only organ
we're voting on the organization so
we're bringing democracy into it but
we'd because we're not a political
system in the greater sense we're not a
citywide province-wide
a countrywide political system it is not
mandatory it is voluntary like shopping
at McDonald's is voluntary you get to
come on board and whoo-hoo McDonald's
right it's like whoa who is McDonald's
going to appeal to someone who likes
fast food someone who wants her food
fast wants delicious maybe not healthy
but right like it's a certain a certain
person that they are advertising to and
bringing in we get to advertise - I hate
this is meme advertised you and bring in
people that are uber cooperative that
are going to start a corporate culture
so it's like we don't need to convince
the everyday person then this is going
to help you if you want to come on if
you are someone who cares about the
greater good who wants to put your time
and energy and money into creating
something that is hopeful for the future
that's who are going to draw on board in
a beginning and so we get to create from
that entity which is completely
different than a political system where
you have to get 51% of who exists on the
planet in your country in your city now
on board with the same ideas and it's
frustrating because that's not like even
if you are someone who cares about
everyone everyone cares about everyone's
you have to get the money out because
it's voluntary we get to we get to do
things and political system can do I
just exist without a threshold already
because we don't need 250 we don't need
51% of Vancouverites
to agree with us to be able to get into
power we need let's say 10,000 people to
come on board to start with right well
because of how we're organized we don't
need it to be in a geographic one
geographical location some of the
projects we will they're about
thresholds of the geographical location
like that we need 10,000 Dane kuva
rights to start this project but
words make sense please so because
politics is not voluntary and you have
to convince a certain number of people
before you're ever there like I get that
what I'm proposing people are like yeah
that sounds great but it's risk it's not
risky because it's not we're tearing
down the system and recreating it that's
violent and risky we're creating from
where we're at the only way we get to
exist in a market is if we're better
than who already exists there if people
are shopping at Amazon because it's
convenient and cheap and whatever other
reason they're there shopping therefore
it can be our second median right Union
Jeep we don't get to come in and take
over from Amazon unless we are equally
as competitive and cheap equally as
giving people we delivered directly to
them that it's that same price that it's
that same we don't get to like no one's
gonna come and be like so for 10 times
the price of Amazon but please come and
it's like even as a member that doesn't
sound great we are creating from the
bottom up so we're saying okay how many
people are supporting this and then how
can we and we're not replacing Amazon
but it's not something we're doing from
day one we're not replacing anything
today what in the beginning we're
creating things that haven't been
created yet or things that have been
created but are inaccessible because
they're too much money per person so we
can create food apps that help us eat
better that are the same as the ones you
have to pay ten bucks a month for and
yeah you were also strangely paying ten
bucks a month for it but we're also
going to create apps and apps and apps
app so you're getting all of them for
$10 bucks the beginning you're getting
like the one app and that's not even our
funding model in the beginning because
that doesn't that wouldn't speak to me
if it was from someone else I was like
wait I'm paying $10 month and then in a
year I get a food app that sounds weird
if I'm putting in $25 not per month just
$25 and then once it's done I get that
food out that's okay to me and then
retain $20 for the next project and the
next project the next one is till we
have the systems in place to collaborate
so we have the Facebook that's that's
designed for until we're unlocking
unlimited projects and then we're
putting in $10 month but because
it's never mandatory until it is in the
way that okay so Walmart comes into a
into a town they wipe out the
competition they lower their prices so
that it I mean they do have low prices
so that it wipes up or not but then they
raise their prices because now they've
now they're probably now they can they
they pay an okay way just I don't know
if they lower their wage once everyone's
wiped out but they still it's like it's
a place where people can work so people
definitely come on board and work there
because it's a job once there's nobody
left in a village to compete with them
then they can raise their prices again
because they're a for-profit entity that
all makes complete corporate sense for
them to do as individuals it also makes
sense for us to be like oh wait am I
gonna shop at the general store am I
gonna shop at Walmart well unless you
can see the full big picture of them
putting the general store under and then
they're gonna raise their prices of
course you're gonna show up a longer if
you're just making it based on your
convenience and your money you're going
to make that decision but if we're the
Walmart like we can create an entity and
let's say there's a town that doesn't
that has a food desert has having enough
people saying okay well would you buy
from here what would you like to have
what would you we're creating it from
the ground up to see what the products
are to see what's ours but the point is
if we come in and wipe out all the
competition in a market and there is no
equivalent it's somewhat okay because
we're not Walmart we're not gonna have
to we're not going to then raise our
prices cuz we're the people paying the
prices we're not going to lower the wage
because we're the ones getting in some
of us are the ones getting that wage
that why we might do but we're also
human beings were like okay well if
who's gonna want to work there when
they're yeah there's an incentive to
work there
you like my brain is not doing justice
on this long long weekends Monday to
this topic but I'm here I'm showing up
and that's all I have to do is show up
and imperfectly explain this the best of
my current ability there's just like so
much like I do a much better job when
I'm talking to myself on camera what I'm
talking because this is exact something
that not a single person has come in
it's me talking on camera one way versus
you talk I don't know what the
difference is maybe it's just that I did
this for an hour
first my brains frezzle that could
absolutely be the case but there's like
what we need and then how we come
together and actually create it and I
have the system of how we come together
and create it it's once we get a
threshold of like 10,000 people who want
to fund this together I'm puttin $25
each
that gives us $250,000 to create our
first project with once we've created
our fur and how we create that project
for $250,000 when it's a multi-million
dollar project like it's it'll be worth
multi-million dollars we're only going
to spend $250,000 creating it and
marking it and doing all that stuff
because there's cheaper ways we can
create together than a corporation can
create like we're can be more efficient
than any corporation out there but not
really from day one but the point is is
there's a reason there's multinational
corporations there's a reason they're
that they have more efficiency and they
and then it's impossible to get into the
market when you're competing with one of
them because they can undercut you we
can do that on a massive scale to the
corporations because they can't compete
with us we can compete with them they
cannot compete with us because we are us
well think I could explain that better
good luck coming in and and undercutting
the law the Walton Walton Walter
whatever the ball our people are family
but like as a new family right a new
family that's like and we're gonna make
me hundreds of millions of dollars no
you're not good luck with that because
how are you gonna break into that
marketplace they have store it
everywhere they have the big the buying
power you can't create a for-profit
company that's gonna compete with that
it's gonna be so hard I mean I'm sure
there's a way but with a lot of a lot of
money involved but we the people
actually can easily take over from that
not ten thousand people but if we have
ten million members who are like yeah
here's what I buy here's where I buy it
from I'm willing to buy it from us if
it's that price or lower or ten percent
more like whatever you can we get a set
it and then like it makes sense for us
to now create these things as we have a
threshold as we have enough people who
use toothpaste you know like have tea
and
to buy it from us and we have a ethical
healthy alternative that people are
willing to use because we've asked them
not just assumed then we can create it
for that number of people like once the
cost makes sense to invest that's when
we do it not let's make the toothpaste
and then market it and see if we can
bring and draw in enough people and sell
for profit and convince them that it's
healthy it's like no is it actually
healthy because we're gonna have and
while we're creating or overnight we're
not creating - Thursday 1:00 at all
we're more collecting information on the
toothpaste companies so we can see where
the holes in the marketplace are or it's
like we can pick the best of what's on
the market without the advertising
they're still going to advertise to us
but we can ignore that and say okay how
does Colgate compare two columns I think
is that one by the same company anyway
compared to like my local person who
makes toothpaste but a guaranteed there
is so helping the mom and pops get into
business because you're my neighbor
being able to make a toothpaste saying
hey I don't like honey the ones are on
the market here's mine here's what I'm
creating I can create a hundred of them
who wants to buy the other 99 that we
can create those systems in place so
we're not supporting Colgate and we're
supporting our viewers where it makes
sense or like hey neighbor how much does
it cost to make those hundred if we were
able how much time do you spend making
that if we're able to use your recipe
because you don't want to spend that
time and we're able to create a million
things of it and you get you get it for
life because you're though I made it or
whatever the weird incentive is that's
not millions of dollars but is for you
anyway we can create from the bottom up
much more efficient more efficiently by
taking less risks and spreading those
risks out amongst us right us each
putting ten dollars in to have a life
not electrons like toothpaste but a we
know we're getting ten tubes out of it
at the end or whatever it is the risk is
we never get those ten tubes this
project fails never made of toothpaste
okay but I put in ten dollars I didn't
put in a million so I'm okay not getting
my ten tubes it's like and as so that's
the first project to base but our first
project and it fails it's like okay so
then there's any people who are like I
mean everybody Modi'in again that was
horrible
and other people who are like great and
our next projects gonna be even better
our next one's gonna be lessee
I don't think the first one is gonna
fail I don't I am such risk-averse
person that I only am putting my time
and energy into things that I know are
gonna succeed I have very limited time
and energy and definitely limited funds
so I'm not putting those things towards
something that I know is gonna fail I
can see this succeeding even though it's
not succeeding even though it's not yet
like I get that this is not the best
package for one of them delivery and at
the same time it's gonna draw in the
perfect people that are going to help me
1 make the package prettier and more
accessible to more of the masses but
also it's going to draw in the people
who don't need the pretty package we're
looking at the true essence of what's
inside and your uber co-operators or
people who want to work for the greater
good starting with a way smaller group
of those people is much more powerful
than starting with a bigger base of
people who are combative who are
trolling or wanting to to create havoc
or work out of ego or do that it's like
it's not like we're not going to have
ego involved of course we're gonna have
you going involved but if it's ego
coming from a space of people who want
to collaborate and and work towards a
better world they're much more likely to
step back and be like yeah that was my
ego sorry about that oh yeah that was my
ego read yesterday's meeting she just so
we're clear that were able expecially if
those systems are in place like looks
like we are when we honor our true
diversity it means our emotional
intelligence is diverse our spatial
intelligence is diverse our kinesthetic
intelligence all of it and so the more
we can honor that have same tools so
that people who are on the one end of
the spectrum can help people on the
other end of the spectrum and vice versa
the better off we all are I would you
just honor that we're diverse and
different and we think we can we can
create literally hundreds and hundreds
of apps and websites and Technology
together that work together to make our
lives better own it together run it
democratically together have transparent
running of it
have it be run for the greater humanity
and as people find it like the beginning
people are gonna be over co-operators
we're like oh you don't have a product
all you're selling it is hope yes take
where can just like take my money
those people starting it are gonna start
such an amazing culture and an amazing
entity then it's gonna draw we're not
gonna then open it up to the whole world
and billions of people come on and alter
that culture we're gonna grow
systematically we're gonna say okay what
is growth that works sustainably for us
a hundred percent a year awesome
two-hundred percent a year great it's
like okay so then everyone gets to
invite two friends who do you want who's
gonna be part of this who do you know
that like needs this now not a bit like
they want to contribute and maybe
they're less of an uber cooperative in
our last people but they're still it's
like now that we have a product they
don't only want to use this product and
yes most of us have some cooperation
that's very few of us or uber
competitors where it's like zero
cooperation all competition and very few
of us are co-operators with zero
competition it's a spectrum exists and
people are on both ends of that spectrum
but most of us are somewhere in the
middle and so we start with you more
co-operators and we move out to have
more and more people eventually we get
to the point where we just have so many
amazing products that just like Amazon
just like Walmart we're just drawing to
the masses cuz we have a cheaper better
product for people they're like oh wait
I can go to save on and get my money in
whoever owns save on I can traverse
named chip Addison's alright or I can
come and get my money into a cooperative
that I am part owner of and get a say in
and I can transparently see where that
money comes from where it goes where
yeah I want to I want that one things
especially this is delivered to my I
have to go shop for just delivering it
to my door this one I put in like four
hours a month time and energy because
that's what we've decided is worthy this
way I just in pain the funds for it
this one is accessible only to two
people that are as wealthy as I am this
was accessible of everyone like you get
to decide when you win this is enticing
enough that you come on board and you
don't know if it's not like an
all-or-nothing thing it's not like
you're in your only shopping here and
never it's like no every project every
thing is like an individual choice do
you want to buy your burgers
us or McDonald's if you buy them from
McDonald zero guilt why are you buying
them from them how can we take your how
can we get you into here oh because they
have it they have a store across from
across from your work what if we deliver
it okay well that's not sustainable yet
because that's too much it's too much
money to deliver we're not going to
deliver and it's going to chart CalSTRS
$20 to give you a five dollar hamburger
but if we had a thousand people ordering
hamburgers in the downtown core every
day and we were able to deliver it well
then we've given you more convenience
it's going to be healthier because we've
decided that's the parameters like we
can create from the bottom up much more
efficiently we draw in the right people
at the right time and grow organically
where eventually we are open to everyone
but like you we can't be a million and
they'll send me a billion that's
probably not sustainable not if we're
offering every like when you come on
board you're equal to everyone else
other words the words I think I'm gonna
go now those this is a half an hour one
instead of an hour it's just more like
people to watch it if it's half an hour
versus an hour but this I just wanted to
talk about today it was what we need as
an as people and this is what I'm
offering is that we are gonna create
accurate information that is trustworthy
so we can use that information to
innovate we're gonna create a system of
innovation so anyone can come on board
find people to create their idea with or
help other people improve their idea
we're gonna own everything together
we're gonna fund it together we're gonna
create it systematically if what I
propose and the creation method doesn't
work that doesn't mean we throw
everything out it means other people are
on board that are like actually this
didn't work because people don't like
creating that way there aren't enough
people who like creating that way turns
out we do need a tiny group of people
that are creating for the larger group
we can't have a million people created
together expect in the beginning we
don't have the technology so like we the
whole point is when problems arise we
have a way to deal with them when people
have an idea they have a way to get it
out there and it helps everyone
including like if you have a for-profit
idea a new gadget a new thing to
crowdfund for and we want that we want
to help you succeed so like okay as long
as it is truly a innovation as long as
it you're gonna give us as much
transparency
we need ie what does it made out of or
did you how much does it cost you
to make it how much money are you making
how much it doesn't mean we don't
support you it just means you want to
access to that information and then we
will support you like it's like ok where
am i by using or am i by my pop from
okay why buy from coke here's what that
means if I'm buying it from the generic
brand here's like you get to make better
choices in the current system it's all
individualistic it's all voluntary but
with the individualism it's like we're
bringing in people who are uber
co-operators because that's who else is
gonna pay money for a product that
doesn't even exist yet right that it's
like okay we're our product right now is
hope our product is that we can create a
better world together that we can create
technology and I get that some most
people aren't going able to see that
vision with how I'm explaining it and so
they're not on board yet and other
people are gonna hear and be like yes
take my money and take my money now and
I don't have a way to take your money
now so we're gathering the people that
want to take you that want me to take
they want someone to take their money to
create this and then we're gonna launch
it not trickle in money and like you
give any $10 and you give me $10 I can't
accept that that's not gonna work that's
that's not gonna work for my life or
this this project so it's like okay once
we know more or less we have enough
people to launch the crowdfunding
campaign then we launch it and if I can
launch it to 10,000 people who already
have been participating and watching and
want like waiting for it to be done then
yeah 10,000 people aren't gonna be
actually signing up let's say 5,000
people of those sign up and I realize
that's way more than what math says
would happen but this is a different
project and people who are on board and
wanting to stay on board and we're
asking we're literally asking would you
sign up right we could create a website
that is like wouldn't you sign up would
you pay the $25 when we have 10,000
people who've said yes to that and then
we send out that email to them now it's
launched 5,000 of them will probably
want to come on board and say yes if
they've read that note and you then have
5,000 people who you're like okay so we
turns out we didn't get 10,000 we got
5,000 we need 10,000 who do you know who
would like to come on board and invite
them to all invite one person or in by
10 percent of them to bite 10 people
right like we use masturbate
and say okay well when we get to this
this point like we're at 5,000 we only
need 10,000 we're willing to take on a
hundred thousand we're not willing to
take on one hundred one thousand so it's
like we're stopping for our first
project one hundred thousand so that
it's whatever that's the limit for our
email server then that becomes its own
it supports plaintiff and um it creates
demand it's like okay well we're not
like if you have 30 friends that you
want to get involved you better tell
them soon because if they're if we
already get 200,000 they're not gonna
get to come on board for this round
later on they can but like so we wait
until we have a certain number of people
for me to launch the crowdfunding
campaign and then we launch the
crowdfunding campaign and there's going
to be ways to stay involves we're gonna
create like a baby beta that's gonna
have you be able to vote for the board
of directors not just vote for them but
like change your vote between them
because it's not going to be one board
member one vote it's gonna be liquid
democracy so that it's true democracy
we're running this with the Board of
Directors is directly responsible to the
membership because you you can lose your
power even though you're getting paid
and sitting on the board for a year you
could have we're only retaining euro on
a single vote and other people have tens
of thousands of votes you're like yeah I
can be as what's the word obstinate I
want no no one's giving me their row
back I can be the the antagonist here
which is needed maybe no point is yes
we're going to maybe beta to do to
change your vote and to be able to
hopefully put out votes like polls and
stuff to the greater membership and we
want to pull the greater membership
instead of me voting on this issue and
then you transfer your vote I'm just
gonna say no this is enough of a thing
like it's it's a logo okay well if
you're voting on whether the logo is
gonna be red or blue I don't want to
take like to take my 1 million votes and
vote for red went really it's an
aesthetic thing and it makes more sense
for everyone to vote individually on the
aesthetics and enough people are like I
don't I don't what logo is like yeah
those people are gonna vote it's just
gonna be the aesthetics people who vote
and I'm going way beyond by 30 minutes
and I'm rambling and I'm good with that
I'm probably will stay on for another
till an hour I just love doing this I
mean if it never goes anywhere that's
gonna be sad because that means our
planets probably mean someone else woke
up with a solution there's so many
people out there with solutions right
now the point is to organize them and
that's what I'm proposing the point is
it's like I'm creating the field for us
to play on and I'm not even doing that
because I need other people to do that I
don't have a code I don't I'm not
funding this I'm not allowing angel
investors I'm not looking for grants I'm
looking for ten thousand people who want
to put in twenty five dollars to create
an app which app we're gonna vote on
that because democracy so we it's like I
want 10,000 people who aren't looking to
create a food app but are looking to
create a democratic entity that we
create technology worth going for
because it was just the food app they're
not going to want to fund the next one
or the next one or the next one and the
point is is that in you don't need to
stay onboard those 10,000 people aren't
necessarily the next 10,000 to the next
10,000 the next 10,000 every in the
beginning it's going to be every project
is its own entity and you're have voting
power on that board during the course of
this and then once it transfers over to
$10 a month then you have that one and
the board is different and it's a little
different and so if you're watching this
if you've stumbled upon this and watched
it for 41 minutes you can follow cried
democracy on YouTube which I will be
doing this every Monday even though it's
a holiday today I'm here 10:00 a.m. till
11:00 the idea is once more people come
on board this is going to become our
board meeting this is gonna become the
way we move it forward and decided what
we're doing for the next week and then
do it right now it's just me explaining
it in my at my level of communication
skills and so and with that in mind I
get that I'm never gonna be able to
verbally explain this in an hour
there is the website which is I linked
on the information for proud democracy
on YouTube and Facebook
it's a Wix website it's free and Twix
and I might start paying for it once I
have born from each there and it is a
bigger picture of what I'm trying to
create but right now I'm not because
it's not there like once maybe
once we get to like a thousand members
or a hundred members I will then pay to
have it be public sorry have it be have
its own like URL and be able to be found
by Google and all of those things or
maybe it's not when I get a hundred
members it's when I feel comfortable
paying for it cuz I'm gonna physically
be the one paying for it I expect to get
that money back when this is successful
but I also um it's a risk because what
if this might not resonate with anyone
ever than it does it's like okay so I'm
gonna change the iterations until
resonates with enough people that they
want to come on board and co-create a
better world together okay there's the
website that explains the bigger picture
which is like the blog posts and the
website itself I have to figure out how
to but I put the phases that we're gonna
go through in a spreadsheet I need to be
able to figure out how to put that
spreadsheet online as a spreadsheet and
not as me explaining the phases verbally
because in written form because that's
just not the greatest you started to
have the spreadsheet of like you freeze
one and here's our when our members are
and here's what the cost is and here is
to be able to explain because there's
different things in the different phases
and it's hard to keep it straight in my
head let alone I through people's heads
who don't know what I'm talking about
so website to get the big picture and
then the weekly meetings for this is
what I'm committing to doing until it
moves forward as well as the Twitter and
Facebook to just stay up to date with my
rent thoughts throughout the week Casey
wanted to stay up to date with us and
then where we are what we need what we
need now is people people people people
who are gonna be mega cooperators and
unfortunately beginning they do probably
have to at least not hate me have to at
least not annoy you to no end that you
want to be a part of this because I'm
the figurehead I am the person who chard
because it's my idea until I'm not the
board of directors the beginning is full
transparency is gonna be people who work
well with me who because the board of
directors gonna be like yes come on I I
work well with anyone
they might not worry about me but I work
pretty well with anyone so as long as I
you don't annoy me to no end and I can't
even think of anyone who that would be
yes Opie people
we work well with together as a unit
until our first project exists or until
we can vote on our board of directors
which is the baby beta once we create
the baby beta that we can then vote on a
board of directors and then write so
it'll be our first crowdfunding campaign
has like you have to have money on the
table you have to have put your $25 in
to be able to vote once you voted and
that boredom correctors exists that's
what the Board of Directors is the
chances are it's gonna be who was
already there because we're gonna vote
for something you've never seen you've
never heard their ideas you've never
maybe because if we're gonna have a way
to be able to get that information to
the best of our ability right then it's
like okay what's your what's your see
what is your resume where have you
worked where have what have you done
what have you if you're already here
it's gonna matter less because you are
on camera we've seen you we've seen it
where as lady right like for the process
was a process to the board the beginning
it's not over Democratic because that's
just not how the world works like for
not if we just had a hundred thousand
people putting $25 I mean you create the
baby beta and and then people could put
forward that they wanted to be on the
board and then we can vote on them
that'd be great but that's not how this
is gonna work there's gonna be people
trickling in people being like yes I
want to put my time and energy here it
turns out I'm available 10:00 to 11:00
on Monday and I know how to do this and
I know how to do that so yeah people
coming on board wouldn't like we need
their expertise specifically people who
are available during this time period
people who want to work with me work
with my personality style and and then
that entity of seven or so people
meeting every day deciding on then no
one's voting for us as no one's had no
one has money we're not getting paid and
there's no money in the game yet then
once we're able to put money on the game
we're gonna move forward so we get the
card fronting campaign we're gonna say
okay what do we need to can't describe
how do we get to 10,000 people how do we
get the video made and the and the
incentives of the crowdfunding campaign
we're gonna do that together moving for
you're gonna see how we work well
together who is doing more work who is
putting in great ideas so you're gonna
know who resonates with you on the board
and then when the baby beta exists where
we can vote on that then you vote
and you get to watch the board of
directors medians and as people piss you
off and they voted against your your
self-interest you can switch your vote
not during the meeting because that'll
be it's gonna be like liquid in an ice
during the meeting and then liquid again
after so you get to transfer your vote
before and after the meeting to whoever
you want to vote so as a board of
director we have different levels of
those but we know before going in
someone can have a majority wouldn't
even need to vote anything like whatever
I just if I 51% of the vote whatever I
decide on goes which might be we don't
like how meetings run like that so we're
gonna make sure no one has 51 percent of
the vote before we go into so if I see
someone has my vote and there's heavy
one percent maybe I'm taking it away and
giving it to anyone else if I don't want
someone to have controlling power in
that meeting if I do if I really think
that that person runs it really well and
they're a great leader
they're great their ideas are the ones
that should be listened to then yeah I'm
gonna leave them with my vote even if
they have 51% like that just makes sense
and so and different meetings are gonna
run differently this is the financial
and here's what we're voting on here's
what it's decided on maybe I picked
different people for that one than I do
for for another one and we can even once
we have that where technology allows is
where we're Democrat where as democratic
and transparent as technology allows so
once it is in place it maybe I can give
my financial vote to someone and my
aesthetics vote to someone and my so
that within one one board meeting in the
voting on these five things I've given
one men I've given like board member a
my vote for the first vote because it's
on finances and this person because it
like it's an environmental policy so
I've given it to the environmental
expert which is being run by the elite
but like not the elite because we voted
on it right like we've decided this
person's the best in finances not just
because they've said but they've proven
time and time again they make the best
financial decisions we can see from
their CV that they're the they've work
did banks they have a dream finance that
they know it they know accounting
whatever it happens to be we can see
that they're the expert you have a vote
and then they just it up if we can
take it back like it's like we that's
the beauty of liquid democracy is its we
have the power ongoing it's the same
with our economic system that we vote
every day with our dollar
and we get to go every day with our
dollar
my brain is is rustle now I feel like I
have to stay on for number ten minutes
but I don't I don't need to just fill
time for ten minutes but I cannot let's
talk we got into all of it what we're
creating what we need is like a way to
get solutions out there and a way as an
individual I want to contribute from
where I am which is like at my home on
the Internet I want to be able to use my
time than I normally spend on Facebook
surface connecting with people to deeply
connect with people and have an actual
effect on the planet it is good if that
was available to me if the time I spent
on Facebook instead of being like that
is time wasted and we all get it we all
feel gross afterwards we can make it
useful time because we can design the
entity that makes it useful it's like
well I wouldn't want to do that well
what if it was as fun as being on fect
like how much time he spent on Facebook
why do you spend that time on Facebook
you could do that same thing but instead
of just liking people's posts you were
actually moving forward towards a
solution I don't know I think I want
that that to exist maybe I'm the only
one this will never go anywhere but like
if there's a way to easily save the
world
yeah that's what I want I don't want
people and it is I don't know how to
shift that and that's where I haven't
quite stepped into my message from like
I will need to probably will end up
doing is I don't know no same but that
that like we each have our own
individual gifts truly where I think
we're all put here for a reason
and it works together very beautifully
but other people don't believe that they
neither believe were put here by God
which I kind of event what do you have a
definition of God and therefore and
there's like one set of rules that we're
supposed to follow which I also don't
think actually think if there's a God
why couldn't they have put us under
different religions and be like actually
you're supposed to follow these tenants
because that's what calls to you and
you're supposed to follow these tenants
cuz that so-called senior that's to
follow any of them because you think
religions ridiculous like that getting
us beyond to God because I don't think
that's beyond to God
like if
anyway that's a whole other like that
like I have my spiritual beliefs that
definitely affect what I'm doing but you
don't need to have them but also like I
believe in reincarnation I don't believe
in it enough for it to be like the truth
it's like I'm like I think it's the most
likely thing that it's gonna happen and
I live my life like that like I the
chances that in my next life I have the
same position of privilege that I do in
this one are small because I can see the
planet and the planet means I'm more
likely to be poor Chinese or poor Indian
than I am to be Canadian and white like
that's just that's just numbers and so
I'm more likely to be poor on this
planet I'm more likely to be a person of
color I'm more likely to be I mean
straight the next lifetime but like
there's I'm 5050 male female gender is
becoming more diverse so that's that's
uh
up in the air but what is the I want to
make life fair for everyone cuz I'm more
likely to become any of those people in
my next life my children people that I
have loved that have passed on or maybe
those people now like that's just my
belief said you don't need to believe in
reincarnation to think that this works
you mean atheist you can be any but
there is that does flavor it I'm like I
don't I don't know but there are ways
that that can be problematic like
cultural appropriation isn't a huge
thing to me because I believe in
reincarnation so if I why do I have
access to something in this life and not
in another life based on what I look
like when you believe that that is the
end I'll be like I get it from both
sides it's not like I'm like them so
it's not a thing at all I don't wanna
listen to anyone from that side I'm not
I just haven't gotten there yet like I'm
like I'm gonna continue to use yoga as a
white person because it helps my body
not feel in pain all the time it's a
solution to my actual problems that was
invented that I'm gonna use so are you
not sorry I don't my brain doesn't work
that I can learn the you know Sanskrit
words for yoga I call it downward dog I
get that that's not the greatest
terminology but my brain doesn't work
with language as well so is it ablest is
it like whatever I'm getting into we
need if rhetoric that I was gonna go on
but there's
like that piece of like okay Who I am
and do I want to hide myself and do I
what and I don't I don't I believe in
every entity hiding ourselves is causing
more harm than good and that includes in
the ways that we require people to like
police their own language and place
their own it's like okay if you're a
racist human we should probably know
you're a racist human instead of
requiring you to hide that one
you're never gonna get you you're never
gonna grow beyond it if you have to hide
it and we don't get to love you through
it to the next level if we don't know
that right and love you through it might
not look like love you through it with
racism but like we can only act where
people are um that there's like my
belief system that corresponds with this
that yes then shapes in alters it and at
the same time I know that and I want
like other people's belief systems on
board too so they shape an alter it and
we can do it together I don't want to
say this is my belief systems this is
the rules because that doesn't work like
that's not democracy
that's not oh it's transparent if I'm
say about but it's not democracy and so
doing it together so that but policing
people to the enth degree oversight okay
no one's ever allowed to say any of
these 25,000 words it's like okay that's
not that's ablest
I gotta tell ya that's so ablest looks
like what Trump's what what is more
important because requiring every like
it's like it's common nothing is common
sense nothing it's like well they're
just not they don't know how to treat
people they're unkind it's like or they
don't have access to that level of
intelligence that you do in that area
can you help them out and get there I
don't know like our whole system is just
very broken and we're all hypocrites and
we're all because we see things and
other people that annoy us about things
in ourselves but we attack it in the
other person instead of seeing it for
what it is it's like okay if to require
people to not be homophobic it's like
okay were you ever homophobic no you
were never homophobic then you can't
tell people who were how to get beyond
it only people who were and now arts can
help those people this is or they're
gonna have more tools to help those
people you can't require
able to be at an evolutionary point
unless you can't help them get there and
that means having been not and then
gotten there you can't require everyone
to be the same amount of woke as you are
because it's a waking process some
people wake up to one thing before
another to require feminists also be not
racist yes any feminism I'm a part of I
want it to include trans women I want it
to include women of color I want it to
include men I wanted to include like
everyone but that doesn't mean that that
just because they're not that level of
folk that they're not also a feminist
feminist only means like your whatever
not so complicated like your gender your
sex whatever it is like that's the the
entity that you believe it like you
can't wake up to everything all at once
you can be a feminist and be pro
pro-life you can be a feminist and still
have racist thoughts and racist beliefs
and act from racism because that's what
like that's where you are that's who you
are in the moment so it's not like to be
able to be woken up to what like even if
you're the most woke human being on the
planet there's things you haven't woken
up to because there's a species we
haven't woken up to them yet there's
like always the next next level and the
fact we have this bar that everyone has
and they're like no and even the people
who've reached it don't reach it right
like even if you're not if you're like
hopefully it's non racist as possible as
non-sexist as possible as long like
homophobic you still have those things
subconscious because our society is
those things so to just yell at everyone
for being it not realizing our own
is problematic and so I don't know
because all that this is not I got a
little sidetracked on me in there I
shouldn't probably cut this off the
outer armor but being able to create the
tools so we can work together that
definitely will come into play and we'll
have to but I don't think my ideas on
that topic is the that's why it's not
part of the values it's not like and
people have to allow other people to be
homophobic it's like no no that's not in
the values it's we have to love people
like we're it's it's diversity though
diversity not just in that we have
people of all genders and all races and
all but also that some of those people
are going to not be at the point where
they can understand that there's more
than two genders
they live in a binary gender world they
haven't gone through the gender yet
like can we not have compassion for that
do you remember going through it
yourself like it's it's that's the one
that's like okay we're very it's it's an
evolution and once you're awoken to it
it like breaks apart everything in your
world so maybe yeah people aren't they
got more going on they're not ready
they're not capable emotionally
intellectually of that yet why is it any
less prejudice to require them to do
that when they're not ready mentally and
and emotionally then that they're not
using the right language that they don't
know pronouns like it's like okay well
there has to be a balancing there has to
be like yes we make save spaces for
people like everyone deserves a safe
space and nobody gets everywhere is a
safe space that's just gonna have to be
how it is like it's like okay we all
have our own triggers that we can honor
those triggers and find when we need to
and and find safe space and not have to
do emotional labor when we we don't want
to our diversity is our strength we
can't say that no one ever has to do
emotional labor some of us love doing
emotional labor requiring everyone to do
emotionally from quiring just women to
do promotional labor is what's broken
being able to say hey who's willing to
take on this emotional labor who's up to
it today is a better system saying okay
not don't ask anyone at question ever
because it could be offensive is
ridiculous and it keeps us separated to
be able to say okay this person doesn't
like these questions but they're open to
these questions and more we have access
to that information the better we can
work is diverse species and so giving
people access to that information and
honoring our intellectual and emotional
and evolutionary differences that we are
different and in different areas and
it's not up to me to tell you how to
grow it's up to me to give you the tools
for you to decide how to grow and it's
not even that's not up to me but at the
same time I think we can do that for
each other so why not
why if we're if we're requiring people
to grow and evolve let's make it easier
let's create the tools to allow that to
happen
which somewhat requires the tools to
allow that to not happen to allow people
to have space
to explore their ideas and not require
that their ideas be up to par with ours
that there's even a par that it's like
okay my ideas are more evolved than
yours is already less of all right like
it's like okay right one minute I've
been off topic for a while on topic it's
definitely to do with me but like that
that level of focus and more the more I
step into who I truly am the more I'm
gonna draw on people who are that I just
think asleep are unique I mean there's
less of them out there that are both
uber co-operators and are willing to
accept to some degree super operators
that are less that like have more
problematic thoughts about gender and
race and not even thoughts like
subconscious beliefs right that are like
under the surface and that's where
unless we're willing to own our own
subconscious believes beliefs were just
gonna pick apart everybody else's that's
where we're hypocrites and that's where
my point at anime that's still the
I'm working on it's not the intellectual
side it's not the one that I know better
I'd indicate so like at that one it's
like okay how we work together as a
diverse species is by allowing us to be
diverse which means we are where we are
we have 7.5 billion people in a lot of
us aren't okay with people being gay a
lot of us aren't okay with or be more
than two to genders and we need to find
a way to make a safe space for like
violence is never okay violence is never
never ever okay whether it's against
people who want to commit acts of
violence and which is a little more okay
if it's if it's actually stopping the
violence right that it's self-defense
anyway violence is never okay so stop
being violent acts stopping people from
having microaggressions committed
against them all day long is very
important and changing the system so it
is less rated the system the group is
what we need to focus on changing the
individual if our society wasn't racist
sexist and homophobic having an
individual that was wouldn't really be a
problem we would see it for what it is
which is a like five-year-old tantrum I
could be like oh yeah okay yeah that you
think that way means you're not mentally
where we are like it's like that's we
can have compassion for that but where
there's so many of those people and they
have a system like they have positions
on the supreme
and our political leaders and owned all
the property and have all the jobs so
people are less likely to find housing
and have opportunities in employment
that's the systemic issue that's the
problem if they're more likely to enter
the criminal justice system get more
time get less like those things are real
problems that we need to address that
like my grandfather a torch I've never
even have a grandfather anymore but like
the grandfather's racist is like less of
a problem they don't have power it's
like okay you can love them through it
and be like it doesn't mean you let them
be it it means though that like I don't
know how to explain it it's like okay
that's where they're at telling them
that just not allowed to feel that way
doesn't stop them from feeling that way
it doesn't stop them from thinking I
giving them a space to explore that away
from the person they're hurting is maybe
a solution and the more we can we can
decide on what that solutions we need a
solution we can't just work we can't
just mandate that people not be racist
we need a way for people to not be
racist is I guess what I'm saying
so unless you can give people a way to
knock your racist just mandating that
they not be is makes them defensive in a
way that's like foo that I'm just not
but you are because we all are like you
can't live in this world and not be
racist
you just can't we're so we're such a
racist society on on the group level
that you can't exist and not have
unconscious bias and not have all of
that the only way to get beyond it is to
acknowledge the unconscious bias so
becomes conscious and you can like be
like well that's let's get that
over there and yeah that we the left
needs to figure out how to be more
inclusive with people that aren't
inclusive in order to be able to move
forward together alienated everybody who
didn't join anyway I will see you next
Monday bye bye happy Canadian
Thanksgiving