welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
this is my favorite part when you
introduce to strolling by the way okay
because I like to do I feel like the
weather lady you know they put those
women up in me they're supposed to be
doing weather but they really have like
a supposed to do this is this is the
archetype I'm channeling okay so welcome
to the stoah stoah is a place to cohere
all right
disco here in dialog or debate or
argument at times around what matters
most if this knife edge razor blade road
of the moment should you wish to
continue please please stay on the line
okay my Frank I missed you last week
sorry I had a class it was a very large
class and last month when I had the
class I made them wait so I felt that I
would be excommunicated from that group
if I didn't arrive on time last week so
but what I did is I really enjoyed
watching the video and I took notes of
all your questions and I got very
enthusiastic about looking at these
questions and looking at them as a whole
so once again your presence last week
without me was a gift to me and I
thought we would be fun to look at these
questions and go deep but also play with
some of them some of them are very deep
some of them I thought we could play
with and I wanted to start with Peters
question but I wanted to invite you all
to help out in a certain way so if you
have a pen and paper just take jot down
some notes so you can do shares and
Peter's question was how to be strong
enough to live a full life now when I
read your questions if they don't sound
relevant in the way you said it last
week you can go
I didn't ask it in a different way but I
tried to transcribe it pretty pretty
faithfully okay so Peter asked this
question how to be strong enough to live
a full life and if we're doing something
like collective insight practice or
looking semantics Prime's what do the
words mean or mental models the stuff
we've been doing or Cohen work we were
doing some Cohen work if you look at a
question like this most people would be
attracted or be interested in well what
is a full life but I want to hone in on
this word strong I think that's strong I
mean obviously they're coupled together
he's got a mental model of a full life
and what is it to be strong so this word
strong is very interesting to me and
what I would like the group to do for
Peter is to create a list of strong like
what I could say for example strong like
an ox right or strong like or tornado or
strong like steel and let's see how many
we can get in five minutes and then
we'll share and people will people will
you know there'll be some redundancy so
just keep going into all the things that
you've thought of have been said and the
question is how to be strong enough to
live a full life strong like what some
use some powerful metaphors here
yeah you could put it in the chat too
and we can read them from the child good
idea
okay one more let's do 45 more seconds
this is beautiful toddy Brice
okay
so let's let's Peter reflect on this
first first go-round so what I was
noticing is that the words that I
probably would resonate with say in the
past like mountain or lion or thunder
just wasn't landing for me it was sort
of the more unusual ones let's see like
ants or sunlight yeah a deliberate
choice change yeah and then I just start
started just witnessing the words come
in after that does anybody want to talk
a little bit about some of their one of
their words that really kind of held a
lot of meaning for them you thought
about it speak that Peter
and you know so yeah strong my change
was one came to me and nothing you know
change is the only constant and it's
this thing that class it is even though
it's thinking we think of some often
thing of strength is like this unmoving
thing actually yeah everything the
person Israel yeah yeah I like that
because it for me it was like you know
you hear strong like you know when a
tree blowing in the wind it's responding
to change but you said strong like the
change itself like the force of the
mover the force of the movement itself
versus was being strong enough to follow
the movement you can you close that gap
with with with just putting it like that
that was cool
mine that was really resonating was a
warrior which I realize is maybe a
little cliche I possibly fascinated by
maybe seals Spartans and Vikings they
often puzzle it how drawn amber like
solar energy but very lunar so maybe I'm
just always looking for the compliment
mm-hmm not wondering about my femininity
but like masculinity is Wow but as I was
watching the things come through like
mycelial web like oh my god yes and just
all the subtleties so it was really
lovely receiving from everyone because I
was kind of stuck on my usual
fascination like strength this it's not
about the physicality there there's an
essence running through all these strong
things that I won't be able to
articulate really right now but really
opening up where I can find more
strength than my experience yeah and so
you're saying that we could turn that
around
on itself so if you think of all those
different types of strengths there
themselves on mycelial web right there
are interpenetrating all these strengths
you know all these strengths are
available because they already exist
they exist in the universe I mean they
they're not you know like strong like
and unicorn you could have said look
this is more of a fantasy right or a
metaphor but these are things we pointed
out that actually exists there yeah any
other share yeah someone put two
year-olds will to say no I don't who
that was but and I and I laughed and it
also there was something there's like
there's something more there like I
wrote an impulse than Alliance and I
feel like yeah that if there's something
that you know that that two-year-old you
know they're saying no but they're
saying yes to something there there's
something they're drawn to there's
something that makes sense to them yeah
I mean you know what you know they can
feel the they dig their heels in for a
reason there's a really good reason
something really strong
Marion Marion um yeah I noticed I was
sort of like oscillating as I was
reading each one of these there was kind
of like a rock-paper-scissors going on
in my head thinking oh yeah this is
totally strong except that it's this
thing seems stronger in relation to this
one oh but then there's this thing
that's stronger in relation and so I was
sort of like picking up on there seemed
to be something about things that are
able to affect change like strong things
were would affect the world very
strongly and then there was another
sense in which some of the strong things
were just strong because they resisted
change and so as I was reading through
all the words I was like does this
affect the change or is this resistant
to a change and in relation to each
other which one is stronger is there
going to be a change or is there not
going to be a change yeah that makes me
think of like it's not a question of
quantity strength is not a question of
quantity I'm gonna get stronger it's a
question of skillful means I need to be
strong like in this context and then it
doesn't require effort or building it
requires picking and you know I don't
need to be stronger pair of scissors and
to beat the rock I need to be strong
like paper and this notion of this
fluidity of skillful means rather than
quantity yes isn't it be that the
essence of the movement I mean what
you're saying that the purpose the
perseverance and you know what struck me
about the oscillation
you know we're we're us elation can work
both ways to your point is that you know
we isolating and maybe in the
contrasting that with being stuck mm-hmm
so mine that came up to me when I was
watching your question last week was a
kind of a favorite of mine and that is
the octopus you know like the octopus
lives under like five hundred thousand
whatever some you know barometric
pressure of huge amounts I forget what
the unit of measurement is there and you
know we we build these these crafts
these these these diving crafts and
these suits and stuff that have to with
withstand all that pressure but how does
the octopus with boosting all that
pressure all that water pressure its
water in water right water can't be
compressed in water and it's it's kind
of that way of matching what you know
matching the environment you're in earth
or yeah strong like what and I think
people humans we have pretty much as a
culture a very limited toolkit strong
like what you know it's always like
let's build a bomb looks like bigger
machines to go through that you know
let's create anti-viral thing to you
know what's the proper like strength for
a covert virus this is an interesting
question it's probably not the kind of
strong we talk about
so I just really loved the question
because it really brought out that
inquiry yeah did you want to comment
before we move move on yeah I like that
because what I got where I'm taking away
from that is it's like you know there's
our strength and saying no and they're
just strength and saying yes to change
you know things that happen to you and I
had a bias towards the the know you know
like the mountain you know the lion the
thing that can resist something and so
it put some light onto that that bias I
had any last comments something has
energy for you yes I put when strong
like an orgasm and I think about orgasms
generally being pleasurable I'm
mysterious and can be overtaking and
cause relaxation and yeah there's
something about the coming in and going
out and coming in and going out and the
mind-bending aspect of it that can
change people's perceptions of what they
want for their lives
yeah so for me that really tied into
this notion the other part of the
question of the fulfilled life you know
in when you said strong like orgasm it's
more it's like this the way I relate to
it is continually building the pressure
of the tension to see just you know it's
almost like you know the I think the
French word for gas
means little death like really pushing
the constantly building up the strength
how much can you how much can you
contain and for me that had a lot to do
with the word fulfill like keep filling
and filling and filling and filling and
filling and filling until this strength
expresses itself it goes from tension to
strength so that that was really cancer
it kind of imagery for me now it's
interesting because then I just switch
to a male perspective yeah it's
interesting so strong like orgasm when I
switch to a male perspective really
shifted that's interesting
can you say more about that for like
from the female perspective is you know
it's just like being able to absorb more
and more and more and more more and more
and for the male perspective I don't
know if I can only have a projection
really of the male perspective but part
of it is could be that you know that
also be part of that kind of movement
but it also could be this is such a
projection okay so so I think that's
involved I mean I think that's obvious
from the male perspective but like I
don't have a penis so but I would
imagine in my my kind of imagination
it's different it's kind of like instead
of it's instead of being able to absorb
more and more it's it's it's like almost
like not being able to tolerate that so
you know these words aren't easy because
I don't have the first-hand experience
but it's almost like yeah if somebody
can help me out here yeah drive versus
absorption or like they feed off of each
other you know the more you can absorb
the more yeah I don't have a lot of
words you know that felt sent shifted
for me and like I said I can't release
yeah I have to get into more of a
projection or empathic projection to
think of it from the other side and I'll
just in from a from a genderqueer
perspective thinking about all the
different kinds of orgasms that I have
like there are some like yesterday I was
listening to too
[Music]
talk and connect on a really deep level
and it was just like waves of pleasure
through my body and also like the
relating that I have with plants
sometimes and it's there is I really
liked what you said about the building
up and how much more can you maintain
how much work in you contain and it
feels like that like walking down the
street smelling roses there's another
and there's this building of the
capacity for appreciation yeah you know
this is a funny image I'm gonna spoil
all that all the heat here but there's
this like video series like about
different kinds of strange love like
people love machines and stuff and it's
quite often that men will marry or
partner with really fat women and to
become their feeders it's kind of like a
projection of that you know they feed
and feed and feed and have you seen
those it's really really quite odd and
you know the men have the women on
strict routines and they want to get up
for like 8 or 9 pounds but it's kind of
like displacement of that that same kind
of kind of the feeders yeah the
archetypal of those it's interesting I
just thought about it it's okay yeah
well first of all it's fun talking about
orgasms just now it's got me thinking
okay I did this exploration where I
guess I can have multiples and I think
the most I've ever had in a row just by
myself there's like eight lady and I
really started looking at it he's
totally detached from any kind of
sexuality in a way there was nothing
about the opposite sex and I just kept
looking at that like peak moment and
like what is it what is it doing to my
body and it was just like a little bell
I could hit I'd be like the very center
of some kind of fractal spiral so I did
some meditating on that
it was I was just abstinent as far as
interacting with others for four years
recently and I started having my orgasms
to of an image of a swirling purple
galaxy I couldn't get enough of this
like star cluster and I would experiment
sort of midway I'd be like let's throw
like some male genitalia in here let's
let's get some human human action in
here and it was just completely I would
get back to that galaxy and so and it's
a bigger discussion maybe but there's
something about the orgasm that almost
isn't sexual it's I mean it is I can
make it sexual
but there's something just so primal
about it but transcends all of the form
I've never said that anyone remember
we're talking about I don't know if
you're in the earlier we talked about
the effects and then we didn't we left
left aside well we're really young
we can't regulate our own ethics like we
need we need a primary caregiver then we
go off to school we have peer groups
they're not going to help us with our
anxiety we learn to regulate our own
assets and it's the same with lust
when we first alerting we need a dyad in
general but you can regulate your own
orgasmic system or experience it or
follow its rhythm or catalyze it without
another person this is this is quite
clear and you don't even have to do it
by touching yourself
imaginative Tantra is really powerful
and I think that's what you're calling
your you're talking about
and so yeah I actually think like you
said the more imaginative the more space
the more
you know people used to call it muse
you're visited by a muse because yeah so
then the question is what are organisms
for you know why is that evolved in us
you know and it's also true for other
animals you see male and female cats
especially when they're sleeping and
dreaming and they have like so it turns
out that this is yeah another thing that
seamless with the continuity of life you
know in the in the chi gong we called
the microcosmic orbit you're these
energies are building up within between
you the heaven and the earth and in your
body so they're still heaven on earth
they're still masculine and feminine
principle but the orbits happening this
way versus versus that way Peter did you
want to comment on that this is your
question no no comments coming up yeah
so this is good this is just a little
way of showing how that these questions
you know when they're asked when they're
asked authentically they're like little
portals into all kinds of all kinds of
things
okay can we move on should we move on so
Donna is Donna here asked is this Donna
did you ask I didn't put down your last
name so how do we measure community
house and
digital space yes that was my question
okay this was a really interesting
question and so I wanted to back down
and say how do we measure communitas in
originally like how do we just and then
ask how do we measure it in digital
space no I actually had a little
download answer in this question that I
thought I would share but then open it
up to discussion because I actually have
done research in this with Dave Snowden
sense-making technology you know you
design a scan and then you see the
results on high school students and we
adapted it for communities that are
doing a collaborative housing mutual
stake holding property building and
stuff like that and it turns out that if
you want to think of it as the protocols
that that code for communities there's
three major ones and that's belonging
voice and meaning we showed with the
research and I'll get to what those are
but we show with the research research
that people that had higher or more
complex understanding or ways of
belonging voice it meaning reported
larger kin group size how many people
that they felt intimate with who they
could share intimacy with so it turns
out these three things actually have
correlated to how you know like your
Dunbar number let's say right so if you
make meaning if these things were were
[Music]
not complex we call them one deep too
deep in 3d you would report having one
or two or no close friends and if they
were complex he was report having more
than 10
let's say so and what we mean by these
is meaning is basically in this group am
I am I able to participate with what
matters most to me like it doesn't
matter to me do the things we do they're
the things we talk about are they
relevant to what matters most to me you
know sometimes we participate in groups
and we're happy to do that because we're
accompanying our mother but what's
really going on is like bingo it doesn't
really matter to me
so meaning is all about whether the
interactions the engagement the
participation is what matters to you and
that could be terrific
what we you know it's not trivial like
some people like baseball and and soccer
and football really matter to you so
it's not a highfalutin thing
it's very context relative to the
context you're in so so that's that's
one leg of building communities the
second thing is and you see this across
all different levels you know if you
have like cheerleaders or high school
kids or girls that are really into
makeup and stuff and dresses and
shopping it doesn't matter if it's you
know what form it takes it just matters
if the participation and the engagement
how you spend your time is what matters
most to you the second thing is voice do
you have can you always take you do you
have I always given a turn to say what
you have to say when you when you want
to say do you or do you feel like you
can never get in or something so how
much your voice do you have so not only
can you have your take your turn but
does what you say change the direction
or the choices so it has to be coupled
to consequences and the third thing in
voice is can you say something without
feeling like you
shouldn't say it when you're a minority
position so those are the three ways you
can get in in terms of voice what we
call voice so meaning and voice and the
third one is belonging and belonging is
a little harder to describe because it
it's different than identity like or
affiliation and what belonging means is
has to do with a specific self other
relationship in the group do I feel that
I am in the group both I'm in the group
and the group is in me like that the
group but the group is a manifestation
of me and I'm a manifestation of a group
so we try to get get get to this notion
of if someone just feels like I'm in the
group well that's a lower level of
belonging but if they feel like the
group is nothing without me too you know
then this is kind of the
interpenetration so these are the three
protocols for for communitas that that
we have shown are correlated they're not
causal but they're correlated to how how
larger a kin group you have so I suspect
that they might be transferable to the
digital space
it's just that how we make sure like I
think turn-taking is hard in the distant
digital space because you can't like we
have two screens here you can't
sometimes I don't even know someone
starts talking and I don't really know
who's talking
regular participatory spaces it's quite
clear you can you know you can you can
feel this person hasn't said anything
but you can't feel an energy but then in
real space you feel like this person you
can like sense it you're like I don't
know something wants to come up here I
find that very difficult
yeah that study is is is not available
right now
it's its own but it's a work that I did
for foundation so it's this it's going
onto a much larger scale with these
community building and if it holds true
for that then we'll probably publish a
white paper one of the problems is it's
Dave Snowden's work and it has to be
very statistically robust so as opposed
to okay I have a question yeah so can
you contrast that to sense-making I'm
assuming that meaning-making and since
making is two different things
yeah they're two different things so
since making is kind of a collective a
collective activity so you all kind of
understand each other and you're using
language that is translatable and you
have theories of change or theories of
models of what's happening that you all
agree with you're following the same map
it made sense of your shared experience
you can share a lot of meaning with
someone like let's say you're your
partner and you have children right so
you're always engaged in like what
school are they going to go to and this
or that and like when you're engaged
with them it means a lot to you but
maybe your partner wants them to go to
public school because they don't want
them to be like elitist and you want
them to Montessori because you want them
to be like a new human and so you're
engaged in what matters most to you but
you can't come to any like sense make
you can't make it's no difficult like
sense around these two points of view
because it depends upon your theory of
the human your theory of culture your
theory of this
in the world so the sense-making is
breaking down even as people are trying
the very they're working very meaningful
participation with each other is that
helpful absolutely in fact it kind of
brings a question to mine is why why
Buddhists why they didn't choose since
making no study was to try to figure out
what correlated with Kings pen group
size that's an interesting question at
what point does I can say that how is it
I can't remember so I'm not going to say
it but the question is does the erosion
of sense-making break down your akin
group size what's the correlation with
that that's interesting
you know one of the reasons why we were
doing this is to make a case that you
can ground kinship
I believe and we didn't further this
study but I believe that the assumption
that people have to be able to make
sense together to feel like they belong
together is a very very modern thing
when I was growing up I mean your
friends were who was around and you
didn't like test the semantics what you
know like we're all hung up on words you
know I don't want to use this word in
that word and we're constantly trying to
make sense in these kind of completely
identical ways in order to feel like we
belong this is certainly did not exist
before the little linguistic turn where
words and semantics lighting and all
this mattered more so this is actually a
research - you know David Graeber who
wrote Det he's an anarchist he's like
really I don't forget which book but you
know he's like it's ridiculous to think
that you have to have shared values and
shared models of reality to get along
you know that's that's not that's not
what that's not appealing it's not
consistent with the human condition so I
think this is that it's it's it's one of
the reasons well I don't engage in the
media space and the war on sense-making
I think the one sense-making is
amplifying the war on sense making if
you say you know words are weaponized
well you've just weaponized the word the
word word and there's yes so this is
probably not true in other cultures
right yeah you can't understand you can
travel other cultures you can't
understand and you can laugh you can't
understand why the family relations are
the way they die and the food they eat
and the crazy things you do but because
you have let go of you know because the
gap is so wide no one expects you to
understand and therefore you can touch
base with with how you can ground each
other and somehow you know our whole
late modern and postmodern deficient
modern world is everything is about the
words in the models and getting it right
and the information we share there's an
illusion that things held together in
the past because we all agreed on the
same thing in the past we didn't know
that nobody actually thought what you
thought you know the diversity of human
experience is under underrated and the
need for people to yes so
and then there's other cool things about
sense-making you could put a little bit
of it in my article on the side view
people that study since making like Carl
like it turns out it's it's different
than we think of it also is making us
retrospective sounds making and they and
in my article I tell the story of this
Hungarian it's funny because they're
Hungarian the new polish joke right
so this Hungarian military squad was on
was in Switzerland doing you know these
military exercises and they were sent
out into the Alps and they got caught in
a freak snowstorm like happens sometimes
and they got lost from a whiteout and
there were three days that you were
panicking and they didn't know how to
find their way back and they thought
they were going to die because they were
unprepared for the that that kind of
weather and on the third day they found
their way back to camp and they
lieutenant who had sent them out was was
how did you get back and they said well
we thought we were dead but on the third
day this this other guy found an old map
he had in his pocket and that's how we
were able to find our way home and they
give him the map and it turned out the
map wasn't a map of the Alps it was the
map of the Pyrenees oh what time is
it
and so since making is a is a ritual
thing we do it's not actually rational
and now I have to run for five minutes
because I told him I was on a call until
11:00 he woke up at 11:15 he's here now
already but if you bear with me I can
get him started I'd like to do one more
question before we end but I'll be right
back sorry
you
you
so well she's gone yeah like to kind of
throw it out there that you know what
showed up for me was was
I think that we are attractive we are
all kind of coming together because
we're seeking to understand versus you
know the communities that are seeking or
people who are seeking to get along and
what kind of showed up for me was you
know is wow yeah that's kind of where
society is shifting away from being that
from that our therawtarian.com up seek
into this yeah well we just have to get
along so if we you know we don't want to
cause conflict so is that you know
resonating with anybody else
you
I think that that getting a long part
gets to the context of my question
[Music]
there's a you know there's a certain
there's a choice that we have to be here
and you know if this
for example the stoah if this you know
what we talked about here if this seems
relevant then I can participate and I
can experience belonging here I can have
a voice here but I can also leave and in
a in a physical community there is no
leaving there and it doesn't matter if
you get along or not you are still part
of the life of a community and so my my
question is is around that and I and I'm
not exactly I'm just exploring it I
don't really know how to ask it in a
really articulate way but there's
something about a physical community
where that life extends the life is you
can you can sense your interconnected
part of it that's beyond choice
and then in in a digital community
choice is very important and how far
does this interconnectedness extend and
how deep does it reach in each of us and
and how do we measure that and and can
we hope to experience that
interpenetrating in dissolvable
connection that we have with each other
in digital space when we have the choice
to leave so what sook is for you in this
context do you see any distinction
between choice and commitment well if I
make a choice to join a physical
community there's a lot of choices that
I say no to in my when I when I commit
to live there and be a part of a
physical group of people I'm kind of you
know I've kind of cut off a lot of
choices like well I used up all my money
I quit my job I am now a part of this
I'm totally invested in the life of this
community
[Music]
but there's still a lot of choices
available to me in a digital space that
I don't have to you know cut off or say
no to just to be a part of a digital
space so how deep is that level of
community and community AHS even though
we experienced communitas how deep
really deep is that level of commitment
to each other just it's a good I like
the way you put you posed that question
yeah I'll add to this Thank You Donna I
feel like the like digital community is
still not very well understood in some
ways so things that we took for granted
with physical community like proximity
what you're talking about when you're
when you join a community physically
there's a you can't leave in a way I
mean you can leave but you'd have to
physically leave so you know things like
meaning and voice and belonging all of
those seem like they are not limited by
the physical space but we
it makes me wonder what the effect of
proximity and physicality is and like
how that translates to the digital world
and I have kind of a weird analogy came
to mind which is
you know crypto currencies and Bitcoin
is forcing us to understand money in a
new way because it's money that's
decoupled from the traditional mediums
of exchange the physicality of that and
so in a way community has we have the
same challenge of understanding
community decoupled from physical
proximity
and would you say that you know the
value of you to use that analogy you
know the value of Bitcoin is somewhat of
the collective commitment it's based on
people saying in yeah that makes sense
there has to be some kind of social
consensus or any sense making system to
hold up yeah but curious what other
people think or there's any other
thoughts floating around I feel that
most of the very original thoughts and
ideas come completely out of social
consensus they're completely contrarian
and they require and mention of a new
world and even terminology altogether um
if I can riff on that I might suggest
that to be contrary you have to have
some consensus to be responding to or
reacting against so maybe there's a
dialectic relationship there yeah I feel
like there's a default assumption right
he's based on my deep dive in investing
worried there's a default assumption
that contrarian ism is sort of shaking
the opposite stance but that is
something that appears from the outside
I often find that from the inside when
you are thinking purely independently
and you come up with an insight it might
be aligned or it might be opposed to the
consensus and that when it is opposed to
the consensus from the outside it looks
as contrarian but from the inside the
person's conceptualized a new model of
reality you know
away there's this fascinating article on
I can't remember with okay it was not a
yawn or Croat but maybe I could find it
I have someone posted it and they talk
about sheep and they say sheep the
difference between sheep in wolves and I
liked it because it kind of reframed and
she said sheep they don't follow the
leader
they don't have a social structure where
there's a leader what they do is they
follow each other they're more like a
swarm of locusts so you have all these
like if this net one next to me rules
that way I moved that way and this one
move that way they flock right so they
don't actually have a social system
where you follow anything like one
leader so they're not like they're not
like that kind of social system they
they care what everybody else thinks
what everybody else does
they're always adjudicating like the
next the next relationship and she was
saying this was actually the way we are
sheep today we actually don't do what
president tells us to do but the
momentum some momentum gains gains and
then we are afraid of being ostracized
and then little by little the thing
conforms based upon this logic of social
cohesion and and then but she says
unlike wolves they don't just obey a
leader they're all leaders and the
leadership is constantly very
sophisticated social relationship
between roles and leadership sand
debating you know if you see dogs more
months to go here and the other wants to
go there and there's like debates and
there's there's a lot more going on it's
not just authoritarianism there's not
just the alpha alpha alpha dog and so I
think in our modern society I think
we're more like sheep in that first that
sense that she said you know I mean
whole things happen in
our culture because people just are
unconscious they don't like follow
anything that you don't have consensus
they just kind of move like like these
small actions if you ask people why they
do things there's no consciousness
behind it I think it's more like just
kind of bodies and space moving with
other bodies in space
you you you walk into an environment
you'll notice your body starts moving
like other people's bodies and you
intuitively start picking up the social
cues and you start replicating them this
is all unconscious very unconscious you
may feel like you're doing sense-making
but I think it's really something more
organic then and so what I think the
role of the contrarian is to break that
habit is to like you know wake people up
what choice are you making here I'll
give you a really extreme example I
shouldn't say this but my mother will
never see this you know my mother was
born in there a rural area in Maine
Maine is still very backwards she grew
up in a one-room schoolhouse they didn't
have running water until she was 13 and
she really wanted out of there so she
got a job punching holes in like the
original computers were key punch holes
and they put her up in a woman's
boarding school and she met my father
got married a month later and not until
her wedding night that she realized she
had a vagina so like and then she had
kids and all this stuff happened to her
without without her ever agreeing to
anything really a master like why'd you
get married like like so much of the
world a lot can happen you can grow up
go to school get a job have kids you
know beyond the kind of unhappy and then
have grandchildren and go forth you
could do you can live whole lives and
never consent to anything unfortunately
this is
true for many many many many people this
is like gorgeous so unhappy and and why
people buy the products they do why they
argue that this product is better
another product you know maybe we're a
select group we have to recognize this
in ourselves but it's really true if you
look at it that the mask mask
consciousness is not yeah doesn't have
[Music]
have a lot it's not that rational it's
not that well thought out and to finish
the story in the Karl Weick book when
Karl Weick told a CEO of the company
this story he said now he said it would
have been really impressive if the guy
who had the map of the Pyrenees knew it
was the wrong map he said because that's
what learning a company is like he's
like you don't know what you're doing
but if you can rally around something
people buy into then you can move them
as a unit so these things most people
live a completely unexamined life and
even the way we tend to relate to the
scent one sense making series has more
this quality to it ok this is kind of
viral and popular and and other people
this is why the internet works other
people you know I mean well you know I
want to look at things that other people
with yeah I had a conversation with mine
today you know she's very very high-risk
she's older and she's had pneumonia
every flu season very high risk of cold
it and she's been pretty good about you
know she just go to church everyday work
with the first mass and she stopped
doing that and and so now she's like
she's like oh I went and went to the
store now everybody's you know
everybody's out and about and driving
I'm like exactly this is exactly the
time you don't go out you know it's like
more dangerous now than it was when we
had the lotto
it's just comments
you know now I said now's the time you
don't go out don't you know now cut back
even more because the action logics is
ridiculous but most people are today you
know and they don't examine this we have
low numbers because we're in lockdown
there's no low numbers doesn't mean it's
safe to go out so now we're all going to
go out and we all know this the internet
knows this the CDC knows there's now
going to have this big huge spike so
now's the time not to go out but of
course everybody's going to go out and
we have this like rolling swarm kind of
behavior and people are not making sense
out of it and that's kind of like who we
are I think more than can we all get
together and make sense of things I
think that's kind of a hyper-rational
[Music]
fixation or obsession today the question
in Moore is given who we are then then
where's the leverage points for growth
or waking people up
yeah so that was a great question she
had to go Susan but there was a great
question asking how did sense making
into this sense making survey around
belonging meaning and voice and then uh
yeah that was your question very
generative very generative do we want to
do one more question and just kind of
seed it maybe it's a big question and
maybe we get start with it tomorrow ah
next time we'll go over I'll give you my
five minutes back
so right the third question was from Ray
and that this a very deep question
that's what I wanted to get to it and
the question was how do I keep living as
simply as possible without ignoring the
suffering of others and one of the
things I mean I know Ray so I kind of
know the con or the context of this but
the way that I wanted to speak to it is
when we work with in by we I mean people
who teach consciousness or awakening or
meditation practice is when the question
of the suffering of others comes up the
first move is always from the conceptual
the image to the lived experience right
so always this is the move embodied
practitioners always make and the
question in this question is where those
are suffering arise where is the
suffering arising
so what you're not ignoring the
suffering of others where's the
suffering arising in your lived
experience when you see you know there's
something that really gets me on the
internet and it's these they have
trigger warnings you see I don't even
know if they're real they seem so
unacceptable to me but you see like
these Chinese people
barbecuing live dogs right and if I'm
honest right then I there's this toggle
it seems like the suffering is arising
in the dog right but if I if I go with
my experience and I'm really honest -
something's arising in me it's the only
place that can come very it's very
tricky I'm not saying that at some point
a dog didn't suffer
but in my lived experience what they're
suffering of others what do I first
notice to be honest as the suffering is
arising in me and that's the only place
you can work with it now that didn't
answer the question
but I think in your question was you
know why am I not out there chasing this
problem and your job is to eliminate the
amount of suffering that arises so now
you have a Cohen if the suffering arises
in me and my job is to eliminate the
amount of suffering that arises and
that's the only place I can work with it
that's that's that's the redirect it
it's not a simple answer and it's not
solvable probably by ninety nine point
nine point nine nine nine percent of the
people in the world
but if anyone but that's that's the move
it's a it's why the dalai lama just
walks around the world and laughs you
know what he does incredible work in the
world they just starts from himself and
he tells people to get more sleep when
they're worried about the suffering of
others well you should get more sleep
pieces so these are the paradoxes but
it's it's when you start with experience
you have to realize that yes it seems
like and yes that is a trigger for the
suffering that arises in you but where
is their suffering arise it arises in
you and that's where you have to work
with it so hopefully that's helpful and
speaks to your question okay here's my
weather lady coming on the store is run
by a gift economy your presence here and
I truly mean it is already a gift but if
you wish to add some more giving to the
system you can do that at the Stila
website and I think it's been modified
or updated so it's easy easier to do and
I want to thank all of you and it's the
stone would see a slash gift and I want
to thank all of you especially Peter for
yeah being the thing that makes it
happens Thank You penny to have a good
day