so welcome everyone
the voices with for baekje I'm going to
be talking with Daniel Gregg and his
sorry I got your name wrong again why do
I do that whenever we go into something
that's recorded that's I'll start again
no it sounded fine I think it's just
like a syllabic thing it's a very like
it's very close to other syllables I
think that's all it is say it out loud
Daniel Greg no Greg am I saying it right
there you go you got it okay let's start
again I'll just edit that up welcome
everyone to voices with Verve a key my
guest today is Dana Gregg and he and I
are collaborators on a Brooke book
called a cognitive continuum from
insight to enlightenment we're working
on that together you might some of you
might have seen the IndieGoGo campaign
to raise money to help support Daniel as
he endeavors to work on this project I
want to reiterate once again that that
campaign is not going to bring me any
income
I am a tenured professor with a nice
stable salary Daniel is not the intent
is to try and raise money for him so
that he can put the kind of work into
this that we both think it deserves and
I know that Daniel passionately wants to
give it because he's deeply invested in
this project and cares about it very
very deeply so the BA the broad purview
for voices with Verve a key is
discussions about sort of the
relationship between science and
spirituality in the context the
historical cultural historical context
of meaning crisis and that's why Daniel
is collaborating with me on cognitive
continuum but what I thought we'd zero
in on today is something that Daniel has
some particular expertise on he's got a
quite a bit of work on he's had a huge
influence on myself and if it's
perfectly pitched at the intersection
between science and spirituality and
meaning crisis which of course is what
has been called the psychedelic
Renaissance before I turn things over to
Daniel I just want to ignore
on both of our behalves that we are both
also deeply indebted to anderson todd
who has also done a lot of work and with
both of us and is also doing a lot of
work on sort of the kiya cognitive
science of psychedelics but today I want
to focus on what Daniel has to say and
what he thinks about the psychedelic
Renaissance what it says about the
intersection between science
spirituality and the meaning crisis and
I do have a lot of things to say about
it yes very happy to be talking about it
there's a lot of issues that have been
coming up as I've been sort of engaged
in the Toronto psychedelic community and
more broadly than that so one thing that
I think is an interesting problem so a
lot of people have been focusing on the
psychedelic Renaissance but I think that
that's actually just one subset of a
larger issue which I like to call now
the consciousness revolution right some
people sharing memes being like we need
a consciousness revolution but I think
that it's actually already ongoing and
that it's been quickening ever since the
early 1900s so maybe we could reframe it
then that what we should be talking
about is a renaissance around the
importance the potential at least the
potential importance of altered states
of consciousness and therefore we could
see things as well as like the
mindfulness revolution and the you know
other related phenomena even escaping
into virtual worlds as ways of trying to
play with altered states of
consciousness as a way of responding to
the meeting crisis is that a better
reformulation do you think yeah yeah I
think that's great
any VR meditation psychedelics there's
even like a whole bunch of weird
practices emerging on the periphery I
think even circling counts it's sort of
a collective altered state induction oh
I would definitely say that circling
counts I think and you and I have talked
about this you know the proliferation of
psycho technologies and supportive
technologies for getting people into the
flow state I think also part of this as
well yeah and there's also people trying
to in
to create virtual reality with like
transcranial direct stimulation that
will like do some flow hacking as you're
involved in a fully immersive video game
so these potentials are really
interesting but also a little bit
worrying yeah because you know it's not
inherent to these things that we will
use them for good and in fact I think
there are a bunch of interesting
cautions which are some things that I've
been playing with perhaps including in
the book so for altered states in
general and for wisdom because in more
ancient trends and philosophy altered
states and wisdom go hand in hand very
tightly integrated together deliberately
so in fact yeah yeah I know Plato's got
this one great dialogue the phaedra
swear he says well through Socrates that
you know altered states prophecy it's
like a divine kind of badness which is
better than any kind of like sober
waking state because we get great things
when we go into those states of divine
madness but there's the issue of like
for one false prophets people who dress
things up as though they are seemingly
the answer to all issues but then
actually those were things that are
going to accelerate or decline in
disguise there's the issue of the tyrant
which comes out in Plato's philosophy so
the person who has the sole most capable
of being the philosopher king also if
raised in an unfortunate context has the
most power to be a horrible person
basically and there's also the sorcerer
you know there is no sorcerer who didn't
first start off with a motivation
towards the good but the capacities and
the powers that people get when they
engage in altered state induction
they're kind of value neutral you have
to do some extra work to yoke them to
some idea of the good otherwise you just
end up with a person who has a lot of
power and a lot of potential for
interpersonal manipulation right so that
person isn't trained in ethics and then
how to connect those abilities to some
what's the word I'm looking for some
broader higher sense of the good then
yeah we might end up with a society
filled with sorcerers so it's there's
you're arguing for a deep connection I
hadn't thought about this before this is
really interesting I mean so I've I've
argued on one of the talks that gave
about sort of a worrying possibility
between you know all
States and bullshitting in the technical
sense of the word and proclivity for
self-deception but you're making it a
novel connection here that you and I
haven't discussed in depth I'd like to
pursue it a little bit here I'm gonna
use a term from Weber or charisma so I
don't just mean it as we mean it today
which is sort of like kind of you know
extra attractiveness I mean what you're
talking about there where people get a
kind of Iraq Euler Authority because
they're able to explore more of the of
the cognitive space through their
altered states of consciousness and
produce what seemed to be insightful or
even inspirational proclamations or
claims or whatever so what you're saying
is there is and maybe this was what
Plato was in fact recognizing with it
with the notion of you know of man Dyk
the mania right I believe that
individuals that come out of these
states often have what Baber called a
charismatic Authority which is not an
authority based on institution or office
or not even an authority based on sort
of past deeds it's precisely an
authority that's based on this ability
to to seem to be a fount of insight and
inspiration for people right yes I think
that is definitely a possibility and
definitely a problem to go for and and
the - of course problems are necessarily
distinct either right no so one of the
things that makes people susceptible to
the charisma of others is also a
susceptibility to bullshit as well right
right and and also the the charismatic
person this is kind of a weird paradox
and this goes towards a traitor's notion
in the folly of fools that my capacity
for to deceive you goes up if I can
deceive myself even more because if I
can keep secret from myself the fact
that I'm doing something deceptive that
actually enhances the confidence and all
of the subtle cues that I'm giving you
when I'm trying to manipulate and
control you right so I think that that
the thing you're describing there is the
character of the false prophet the one
who thinks he's in line with
who says listen to me because I
genuinely do have the answer right but I
think so with the character of the
sorcerer we have something else
happening where that person can be
genuinely maliciously motivated that
person knows full well that they are
utilizing charisma that they're using
metaphor rhetoric to manipulate you and
they're doing that on purpose maybe you
know your whole thing that you've
mentioned with wisdom is that there's
this capacity to a see-through illusion
and into truth right right if I can see
where you truly are if I can genuinely
see where your emotions are and where
your insecurities lie I have a much
greater power to control and hurt you
yes yes yes it's funny wow that is so
timely so I was lecturing in psych 371
remember that's the psychology of wisdom
course I teach at U of T and I was I was
talking about various things and I
actually stopped and I said with this
kind of ability I could actually be you
know terrific super villain in the
ending in both senses of the word
terrific you know really good but also
really terror you know and it's sort of
it was funny at the moment but there was
a bit of a of psychological after chill
and I like whoa I sort of brushed up
against something there and it was a
very very very palpable experience so I
mean that renders to me very plausible
the idea that people could become
sorceress in the way that you're
describing
there's the false prophet what else what
else what I mean isn't there also the
possibility of people also just also
getting sort of just overwhelmed by
things am i getting either something
like experimental neurosis or learned
helplessness because of you know they
get exposed to state spaces within
cognitive possibility that they cannot
properly assimilate yeah so I think
that's definitely a problem as well so
with psychedelics especially psilocybin
we've been looking at we referring
loosely to the psycho to the scientific
community at large particular kind of
mystical experience yeah the mystical
experience of divine Union yes which
isn't the only mystical experience right
body-based mystical experiences as well
as more visionary prophetic states but
this unit of state well its firstly
really easy to study because it has a
particular set of phenomenological
characteristics it also it also has an
epistemological advantage which is it
generally doesn't come with a lot of
heavy metaphysical statement like which
makes it right right except that it does
okay no fair enough
it looks like it doesn't right it looks
like it does again yeah the number of
entities are involving and you're
describing something that's fairly sort
of abstract please go ahead yeah you're
right in the sense that it is a little
bit easier to get on board with from a
scientific perspective yeah um now one
thing that I've always sort of been
harping on is an issue with the
scientific framework that's come out of
psychedelic research so we have the
mystical experience questionnaire which
is what the people at John Hopkins are
using one of the items on that
questionnaire specifically is deeply
felt in positive mood but that
completely ignores like the majority of
Judaism for example where in as per
proverbs wisdom lies in the fear of God
or the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom and I think that there is a very
real way in which terror and horror and
fear need to be accounted for when we're
thinking about the variety of mystical
experiences so Otto Otto's notion of the
numinous right yeah yeah contains within
it something that is is horrifying in in
horror in the sense of a threatening
sense that one is losing his grip on
reality what is one's cognitive
resources are being overwhelmed which is
what I was alluding to a few minutes ago
so this seems directly pertinent so so
is that what you're talking about that
sort of that new at least let's keep
terms let's say there's let's let the
scientific community call what it calls
the mystical but then we'll say there's
there's there are numinous experiences
just because I want to have different
terms for talking about the anthers
right I'm not making any deep claims
here this is merely pro-tem so for ease
of communication right and the point is
these are these are
both within the repertoire of altered
states of consciousness that allow
people to go through deep
transformations towards increased wisdom
is that a fair way to put it yes
definitely
both the loving-kindness kind
experiences and the ones that are
horrifying can both be wisdom promoting
but not if you don't know what you're
doing
and you know to go back to the point
which got us here which was the one you
were making about people getting
overwhelmed I think that's a very real
possibility we had to look for and
there's a guy he's a professor of
Religious Studies his name is
Christopher desh he just put out a great
book called LSD and the mind of the
universe I definitely recommend anybody
who's interested in seeing what's the
sort of darker side of psychedelic
exploration looks like explore that
particular book because he explores
States so he did a series of experiments
around the late 80s early 90s where he
was trying to approach psychedelic
experiences as much like an analytical
philosopher as possible
I'm so he do the same amount he'd
standardized the procedure he did you
know about a decade of psychedelic
experiments where he'd go very deep into
these experiences doesn't try to map out
what's going on there and he gets in
touch with a lot of like horrifying
terrifying experiences like where he's
confronted with an entity who like
commands him to tear apart his dog
something like that and also he's like
immersed in like
oceans of suffering I think he calls it
the ocean of suffering and these are
places that people can go and they're no
less or more mystical but one thing that
he mentions in his book called I was the
one that he released before this it's
has something to do with the dark night
of the soul but unlike a global scale
the name is escaping me now but it has
something to do with that but he
mentions that one of the qualities that
most people associate with the mystical
experience as for the scientific
research is that they often can't say
anything about it which is what makes it
amenable to scientific researchers it's
like oh you know it's just an abstract
cognitive experience but base says you
know if you don't know where you are
chances are you just got lost I think
it's very good if you don't have
anything you can say about it then it's
really hard to integrate that experience
into your everyday life so it might be
something that promotes a radical
reorientation of your affect of your
ability to relate to people but it's
just this you know Cloud of Unknowing
that hangs in the background but if you
look at for example bill Richards recent
book sacred knowledge he talks about I
find it really funny the examples that
he uses for unitive experiences because
a lot of them have like really rich
mental imagery so they're kind of
already not the kind of experience he's
saying they are but there is really no
difficulty in people describing their
unit of experiences if they're able to
integrate that may have very clear
language about it they might say for
example there's a little bit more of
this than I can render into words but
they are still able to articulate most
of the experience it's like people have
sort of ability to a intelligibly Ostend
I noticed that when I was reading Steve
Taylor's book what was it was it waking
up early his book on awakening
experiences although many people say
there's something inevitable if they do
as you say they do
purport they are able to report
transformations in their phenomenology
nevertheless now the inevitability is
interesting as well so I think that you
know there are definitely modes of
knowledge which are pre-linguistic of
course yeah although Bea's perspect I
love participatory knowing if yeah it's
hard to you know sort of relate to other
people how I might relate to you here
and now this is the focal kernel of this
particular interaction that's right but
I don't think that that means that we
can't actually describe these things I
don't think that they're as ineffable as
we think we are I think that we just
need to change our pista Milad djegal
standards and right now literal language
has a very high regard in the hierarchy
of valuable knowledge but one of the
things that the introduction of
psychedelics and mindfulness in these
other altering consciousness altering
techniques are bringing into our
awareness is that there are many
different ways of communicating things
and so I think artistic expression you
know a painting um oh um you know a poem
I think it can much more readily a
transmit to you the likeness of my
seemingly ineffable experience in a way
that I couldn't with just literal
language so in Asiatic wisdom traditions
Taoism and Buddhism come to mind poetry
is where most of the fullest
work is being done talented yet for
example is just a an extended poem with
verses or Narga joonas work is his
poetry even though many people consider
a you know you know world class
philosophy so the distinction between
philosophy and poetry is not made in AZ
attic philosophy the way it's made in
Western philosophy right and I think
we're having a bit of a transformation
in that so I've been reading a lot of
stuff about object-oriented ontology
recently Oh Harman and Martin yeah I
like these people a lot as well
yes they have been this has been a very
timely thing for me to discover these
particular theories because in
object-oriented ontology Harmon says
that we've actually been kind of
mistaken all along making philosophy
this thing where we try to point as
clearly as we can to a thing that's not
really what it can do and it's not
really what it should be trying to do
and within object-oriented ontology
aesthetics is actually placed at the
center because art and metaphor are ways
that we can communicate the thing in
itself much more readily than we can
with literal language right and the
Harmon I mean I think I'd make a strong
case that Harmon are used for that that
is he argues for an inactive
participatory notion of metaphor it's
actually the way in which I mysteriously
emerge from my own depths and also
always mysteriously withdraw into my own
depths right that gives me the enacted I
I instantiate that I don't just refer to
it I instantiate that and that gives me
right a participatory sense of how this
thing is always a thing beyond itself
how we'd always how it's also emerging
always emerging from its steps and
always withdrawing into its depths right
and another thing that I like about this
is that he also claims that that sort of
relational experience between myself and
an object and my self to myself as an
object is not unique to human beings but
also you know these two books are also
somewhat withdrawn from each other at
all yeah yeah that's one of his big
criticisms of phenomenology but and
that's the way he's trying to in some
ways break from Heidegger as he's
he thinks that I mean his argument is
that if there are no relations like that
between objects then were ultimately not
realists that's part of the argument
right right but yeah Harman is precisely
the opposite he says this isn't
something that's very special and in
fact it just is a part of reality that
there is this sort of mutual withdrawal
from all objects that doesn't mean
things aren't real it just means that
things are a little weirder than we
might hope that they were yes so and so
you think that the object-oriented
ontology is basically providing us with
a new epistemological and metaphysical
framework that will revalorisé
aesthetics as a way of under I mean it
does it revalorisé aesthetics or does it
really I see Harman is really blurring I
know he uses that language so I
understand why you're saying that but I
see him is actually deeply blurring the
lines between aesthetics metaphysics and
epistemology a part of the argument is
that separation is in fact inadequate in
an important way yeah I think I could
get behind that because the idea
basically is well how do we know things
right there is something in here which
is trying to address how we are
epistemic lis bound and if the
parameters of our epistemology are such
that it's much more useful to relate to
the universe if we personify it as some
anthropomorphic thing then that has
priority over the literal description
because the metaphorical rendering gives
us a greater capacity to interact with
something it makes a worldview viable
over longer periods of time and I think
that when we're looking at what should
have a center in our epistemology we
should be looking in terms of what is
viable for the longest period of time
because if like you know be so there's
another philosopher who really lines up
well with these kinds of ways of
thinking his name is Federico Campania
and I gave you one of his talks to add
in the description of this video yes yes
so he already in one of his books I
haven't read it yet though yeah so it's
amazing would recommend to everybody
it's very elegant and he really fully
embraces this sort of aesthetic
metaphysical blend and so he bases his
his theories on an emanation astir you
via Platonists and then for each of the
emanations that come out of the
worldviews he describes he attributes a
particular character right and that you
know gives us an idea of well how do we
relate to this thing how do we relate to
this particular aspect of this
particular reality system so the reality
system sees describing in his book
Technic and magic are technic and magic
right and so Technic is building on
Heidegger and his analysis of technology
and at the center of Technic is absolute
language so that's very much dominant in
the sort of scientific worldview we
think that we can break everything down
into something like a set of atomic
linguistic units that everything is
governed by rational laws and that we
can reduce everything downwards into
these sort of sentential linguistic
logical laws but then on the other side
there's magic which has at its centre
ineffable being the thing that cannot be
immediately spoken just the simple
acknowledgement of the here and now
and what that view of reality promotes
is a sort of wonder as sort of awe that
everything is always overflowing what I
can possibly know and therefore there's
a bit of a humility that comes out of
that as well yes yes and he argues that
a lot of the issues that we're having
now the meaning crisis these sort of you
know political conflict issues those can
be more readily addressed if we look at
these sort of reality systems that we
are implementing within us so I want to
go too much in that direction but I do
want to at least highlight let's see
let's see if we can bring it back around
so is the is the argument that taking a
look at these emerging I'll just call
them philosophies in right the like
object-oriented ontology and and there's
related things around it are you
proposing that that gives us a better
conceptual vocabulary better theoretical
grammar for helping people to explicate
elucidate and integrate what's happening
when they have various altered states of
consciousness yes absolutely
okay so I think that's great and I think
that makes that would also given what
you said about on Wonder right that
those of course I have well in in Plato
and Socrates they've been deeply linked
to wisdom and honing your capacity to
realize what is significant as opposed
to making evident what you think is just
true right so a sort of knowledge wisdom
to string distinction along that lines
so here's the question then how do we
how do we I think that's a good argument
by the way then but how do we do that
again without just giving license to
people to fall into self-deception can
follow to sorcerous manipulation and to
fall into false prophecy how do how do
we so what my question is if we how do
we if if you'll allow me to expand the
notion of rationality to mean systematic
and reliable overcoming of
self-deception especially self-deception
that ultimately might not just be self
harming but harming of others how do we
bring rationality into that way of
thinking right
okay so rationality is an interesting
thing and you know I want to just first
highlight the fact that rationality
doesn't inherently mean this sort of
like formal logic kind of way of
thinking and and I indicated that right
away I mean if there's rationality that
extends beyond argumentation in fact I
clearly argue that has to be the case
and there's gonna be rationalities of
respectable and participatory knowing
rationalities that don't work in terms
of argumentation but work in terms of
attention work in terms of processes of
identification work in terms of
processes of aspiration all of that
stuff and there's other people arguing
this agnes collards book aspiration
argues for a whole new form of
rationality it has to do with
transformation mmm-hmm so okay so
there's there's two links that I want to
bring into this space of reasons one of
them is a ontological argument and the
other one is a sort of cognitive
functional argument sure okay so the
first one has to do I think with well
how do we connect to the real yeah now I
think that the cognitive continuum that
we've been talking about this function
can
that involves insight flow and the
mystical experience right what I think
these are doing are linking us up with
the real I think that they give us a
capacity to you know see through our own
biases see through our own illusions to
break our frames and to flexibly remake
our frames in relation to that which is
real now I think that an important step
in making the cognitive continuum do
this is integrating it with much more
embodied practice of course of course
that there is like a sort of there's a
right hemisphere dominance in this
cognitive continuum and an interesting
thing about mindfulness meditation for
example is that it seems to well you
know mindfulness in general it helps to
you know give you this ability to
flexibly reorient to be more cognitively
flexible to not be so taken by your own
biases and such to accept your own
emotions and to not like it too wrapped
up and what your emotions present to you
is being true and there's an important
connection with mindfulness meditation
to the right anterior insula which is a
part of your brain involved in embodied
awareness if your reception yeah and now
she does have direct links it's
maintaining constant informational
updates from visceral signals in your
stomach yes yes yes yes and so one thing
I've been thinking about the last few
days is that if we can have a clear flow
between this brain body Network then we
might be able to just have more
computational power at our disposal I
think that's like I mean yeah I agree
and I think I think many of many Taoist
practices like Tai Chi Chuan comes
readily to mind about trying I mean
there's a way in which you can think
about like what they call Chi as a
resonance between that kind of interior
flow like you're talking about the
connectivity and that being in resonance
with your sort of coupling to the
environment and those two are in a deep
kind of synchrony with each other in a
powerful way right so there's the
problem after you train this sort of
network to you know have increased
resonance within your sort of fully
embodied network of processing and then
trying to get that to sort of like
mashup with the world you can't just do
this as an entirely in
kernel process right you need to follow
Hogarth's recommendations for educating
your intuition and make sure you're
putting yourself within feedback
environments that are giving you correct
and accurate feedback right right right
so it's not just about doing the
individual practice it's also about
doing the individual practice such that
you become more sensitive to feedback in
the environment and then putting
yourself in environments that right and
so I think circling actually is great at
doing this well one of the warm-ups for
circling that I've been really enjoying
is you'll sit with one other individual
you you'll have to say um so I'm
observing say that you're wearing
glasses which makes me think that
perhaps you like to read a lot that land
and the person says yes or no right
they're not often in our regular social
environments do we get a chance to check
our perceptions about other people so
this practice allows us to say I'm
having this inference based on what I
observe is that observation correct the
other person has a chance to give us
feedback about that so I think something
like that in conjunction with a practice
like mindfulness is a great way to get
this flexible insight based cognitive
continuum to link up and actually latch
on to the real it's not enough to just
train that function it has to actually
latch on to the real outside of oneself
yes just as possible that you can sort
of latch on to these worlds of your own
making and become incredibly
self-deceptive yeah yeah for sure for
sure for sure so it would it also be
important to have what am i when looking
for a complimentary practice in which
you are also spending time for in
dialogue trying to get a more what am i
trying to say I don't want to just say
Co here because that she sounds logical
I don't know what word I want but a you
want to do a something on the
ontological side where you're trying to
get clear about what your implicit
ontology is and subjected to as much
self and other criticism as possible
bringing as much
self-corrective individual and
distributed cognition to bear on your
implicit worldview your implicit
ontology and also try to get it to
internalize the capacity to being
self-correcting so that your ontology
also isn't just sort of ossified because
i could see somebody right doing the
work like you said and then doing the
Hogarth stuff that Leo and Aaron and I
talked about in the article and they do
all that but nevertheless they're sort
of committed to a particular ossified
worldview and that's also going to lock
them down in important ways yeah so
that's where the ontological argument
comes in so that's a great bridge so you
know for a while I had been working with
the Buddha's pragmatic assessment of
enlightenment where you don't really
talk about the metaphysics too much
because it's not that practical but as
I've been reading object-oriented
ontology and as I've been reading the
work of Roberto Unger I've been
realizing that no actually we have to
get the metaphysics right because if we
don't get the metaphysics right then we
might just be latching on to some world
of our own imagining okay well let's
slow down here for a sec okay this
you're invoking a normative term and
it's gonna come with all kinds of
connotations does right mean final
complete comprehensive what does right
mean the metaphysics getting the
metaphysics right are we looking for a
kind of cognitive closure here no no
okay so for example look um Robert one
of the main things and Roberto hungers
metaphysics which is ultimately
important is that the future is open
that change is the only constant mmm so
there's no closure in fact we always
have to be sort of updating our
understandings because we can't really
understand the things in themselves
because as we've talked about things are
always somewhat withdrawn well do is
reveal to ourselves what our current
relationship with things are so we have
to take seriously our epistemic
boundedness and we have to use that I
think like that quality of epistemic
boundedness should have a central role
in our understanding of metaphysics
because it gives us a little bit of
humility right it helps us to step down
from the idea that perhaps we do have
the final answer because yeah I don't
think there really is a final answer I
agree with you
agree with you so but notice how once
you give up sort of an epistemology of
certainty or completeness or closure
specifying what getting it right is
becomes very problematic in some ways so
I would say that instead of a
metaphysics of certainty we can have a
metaphor this metaphysics of
authenticity mmm we don't have to have
certain literal language about what the
things were in touch with are to know
that we are genuinely in touch with
things beyond ourselves so this sounds
like something I was talking with Jordan
Hall about that we moved to an
epistemology where we emphasize
continuity of contact rather than a
coherent completeness of assertion yes
yes so I want to flesh out a little bit
of some stuff that I've been thinking
about with Timothy Morton's idea of
hyper objects right so let's see where
to start this is like a pretty big
argument I mean I guess I gotta start
with the most sensational
sensationalist statement and step down
from there okay so everybody everybody
should caveat okay right go ahead okay
so I think that in order to effectively
integrate altered states of
consciousness into our culture we have
to admit that the gods are real so what
are the gods
okay so Timothy Morton has this idea of
a hyper object so a hyper object is
built on top of Harmons idea of what an
object is so Harmon first let's flesh
that out a little bit says that objects
are kind of a middling ground between
two tendencies in philosophical thought
to reduce objects either too little or
too much verbs
Harmon says that you can either try to
undermine an object by trying to break
it down in its into its constituent
components its atoms and then there's
the problem of over mining where we say
that this thing is only its actions or
its relationships it's just it's just a
node in the network of relations right
and then it like passes away like bruno
latour i guess is the guy who argues for
that mostly and i think even in a
Buddhist metaphysics this concept yeah
there's I think there's versions of that
in in Nagas or maybe in North Korea or
at least you know the metaphors of
indras net and things like that right
everything is like relationally
dependent there is like no thing so that
what you could look at as an over mining
view so he says rather that there is
something in the middle of these two
which is the object and that object is
always a little bit sort of outside of
our capacity to fully grasp it there's
always an element of it that withdrawals
but based on our relationships with the
object certain parts of it show up to us
in such a way that we can act on them
because that's also how perception
emerges right perception emerges in
organism environment relationships it's
sort of pulled into our awareness via
consistent learning through sensory
motor loops so that's that's what an
object is it's this thing which isn't
only its parts and it isn't only its
actions but it's this sort of middle
ground between those things so some
philosophers are also talking of the
intrinsic nature of a thing trying to
find a place in between components and
network of relations this is coming up
for example in new arguments about
consciousness wrestling in monism and
things like that right okay go ahead
yeah so I like that you brought that
term in so yes you can say that there is
an essence to a thing but you and I only
have an eye Doss of the thing there's
the real object and then there's a
sensual object of our imagining so then
we get into hyper objects which are not
something that human beings can ever
fully experience here and now
so Timothy Morton refers to climate
change as a hyper object he's really
concerned evolution would also be a
hyper object yeah you could say
evolution the agricultural revolution I
think also counts for Morton he has a
book about that Harmon talks about I
think what it was it the British East
India Company that's um that's an
example he takes from Leibniz because it
would argue against Leibniz who says
that that's ridiculous the British East
India Company isn't a thing but what
Harmons getting at is the classics are
the emergentism argument there's
something that emerges from these
relationships which is the thing and you
know you could replace all of the parts
and it could still be the same thing so
that's how we know it's not just the
components right now hyper objects are
really interesting because those are
also something that we have to relate to
but they put a very different sort of
epistemic burden on us
you know there's a lot of conflict about
global warming people somehow think that
it's like not a thing even though we can
like see very clear trends and our
statistical and mathematical analyses
but just because it's a different sort
of thing that we're not really used to
relating to there is it seems a tendency
towards not really fully getting the
fact that this is actually a thing
because we're used to things relative to
human perception you know this computer
this Mouse that I'm looking at things
are usually something that we can grasp
point to but for something like global
warming it's so big and outside of our
comprehension so can I ask a question
here because I've thought about this too
why is it because I think this argument
is on the right track so this is not
meant to derail why is it that people
have difficulty with the hyper object
like global warming but they seem to
have no difficulty with a hyper object
like the Internet hmm so I think that
the Internet is still smaller than hyper
objects and it also is something which
really matches up with the metaphors
that we're using so network theory is
like super big and people love AI and
all of that and we know that brains have
neural networks um so I think it's a
much more intelligible thing for people
mmm global warming it's much more
diffuse and like it's not an object that
we really come into contact with usually
you know I'll even easy so the it's not
just it's not just a hyper object nurse
if I can put it that way I don't want to
say objectivity because I will have the
wrong meaning the hyper object Ness it's
also then a difficulty in framing it
there's right okay so that seems to be
important too so that's where the gods
come in okay please go ahead that's how
we frame it and we look at these things
that are bigger than ourselves as
entities beings that have some kind of
determinate force they have a
personality insofar as they inform our
social institutions and they inform our
individual everyday lives I think that
if we utilize this metaphorical language
of saying oh you know the gods are alive
and here are the behaviors that they're
having but that's a way of rendering
this diffuse and very strange object
very easily intelligible to us and if we
can get past the fact that we are
we benefit from using these terms not
because they're literally true because
that's not how we're using them we're
using them as a metaphor to crack open
something which is otherwise closed from
us I think that's a very fruitful way to
begin grasping things that are
fundamentally beyond us and that's how
people have always been using this I
think if you look at history hyper
objects are actually exactly how
spiritual traditions have been looking
at their spiritual god-like forces I
mean one thing that comes clearly to
mind is Neoplatonism eyewear right so
but that's gonna lead to a question but
first let me you know you have that you
have the relationship between furia and
fear gia in neoplatonism you have
iamblichus say right that you know the
world of the forms is basically like
you're saying it's like a world of hyper
objects and we we have to relate to it
in in in the kind of fashion you're
talking about we have to understand it
in terms of ritual enacted metaphor
ritual interaction with the gods now
there were arguments serious arguments
in the ancient world about that
understanding let's let's pick one God
that understanding of Zeus and what you
might call the traditional understanding
of Zeus what I mean by that is there
seems to be to be a tension within the
proposal I think the proposal is good so
I'm not trying to undermine the proposal
I'm trying to refine it right between a
theistic interpretation of a god and a
non-theistic interpretation of a god hmm
so that seems to be a relevant thing and
then the other thing I would bring up is
well how do we interact if like given
the criteria that you've you've you've
put out here which I think is right my I
want to I want to I want to say like you
know like urban sense of the imaginal
right image in the imaginal sense not is
it just an inner picture right it has
more to what you're talking about it if
my if I have this image of the hyper
object it
should afford a kind of enhanced
interaction with it because that's right
it should afford me being able to get
into the continuity of contact interact
with it in some viable way what would
that look like what would that look like
ya know that is a great question okay so
prophecy I think if we look at the
philosophy of prophecy we have some
answers so Moses Maimonides view of
prophecy is that well he contrasts so
he's got a book called the guide if
they're perplexed which really
systematize is all of his philosophy he
tries to sort of ground a Jewish
theology with a lot of Aristotelian sort
of terms and he contrasts the view of
philosophy or the view of prophecy that
philosophers have to the view of
prophecy that people have within a
Jewish context and so Plato is one of
these people as we mentioned earlier
he's like yeah so altered states of
consciousness where you get these
prophetic visions it's like a divine
kind of madness where you get abstract
information on the gods and anybody
could have that happen it's a gift when
it happens mm-hmm now Maimonides makes
very clear that what prophecy is doing
is it's rendering things beyond our
understanding into our understanding
when there are things that are beyond
our capacity for rational intellectual
understanding there is an overflow of
that which we can't understand into our
imagination and the imagination is all
of this sort of metaphorical cross
networking in order to render
intelligible to us that which was
previously unintelligible so visions are
a function of the imagination which is
picking up on patterns in the world that
are different than the patterns that can
be had via logical literal discourse so
for example if I see a person come to me
you know if I'm Isaiah in the Book of
Isaiah and a bunch of angels come to me
and they give me a mission on behalf of
God well I could have thought all of
those things on my you know but there's
firstly a much more enhanced sense like
an imperative to this vision it wakes up
your emotional energy and also
interacting with the person is very
different from interacting with a
proposition so by rendering something
intelligible via the attributes of the
person you are rendering it with a set
of inferential properties
that differ from those of propositions
so you're creating a enhanced ability to
reason and that reason about things in a
sort of nonlinear fashion hmm now where
my monarchy says his view differs from
the prop are from the philosophers cuz
all the things I just said are also
accepted by the philosophers he's
talking about Millions the playtest
etcetera even the Stoics were down with
this they were like yeah God has to
exist because how could we know things
about the future and dreams like that's
obvious but there's a very important
hyper object in Judaism that hyper
object is Yahweh Yahweh is a particular
hyper object that marries the hyper
object of the Israelite people and pulls
it into itself and when a Jewish prophet
is experiencing prophecy it's the hyper
object of God interfacing with the
imagination of the individual to provide
revelations about what that hyper object
wants it to do right yeah so I think
that we actually can interact with hyper
objects in this sort of way I think that
we can pick up on social patterns on
cosmic patterns and that we can make
sense of them through dreams through
visions you know through these sort of
abstract altered state so you periences
so let's go back to climate change your
example then because there's a concern
so I'll ask a question you're not
proposing that people have visions and
dreams as a way of competing with
climate science for claims about what's
going on no no just for getting insights
about how to act right so well I think
that's important for people to hear
right so you're not in fact your
argument sort of commits you to the idea
that you're not you're not proposing
this as an alternative way of generating
competing theories that compete with our
best sort of scientific practices you're
seeing you're proposing it as a way of I
don't know what the word is here I'm not
happy with this word but I'm going to
use it sort of concretizing
ability to interact with hyper objects
so that people are no longer sort of
a cognitive miasma with respect to it
yes yes yes it helps us to sort of cut
through our bullshit to help us to see
what is the most relevant way to act in
regard to some sort of ambiguous large
phenomena right right that's interesting
that's very interesting so tie this back
because I like it tie this back to
altered states of consciousness because
what I what I could hear you saying I
mean is something like well you know
what altered states of consciousness do
they they open up the implicit learning
machinery they open up the insight
machinery they they bring in all kinds
of of patterns that might be good clues
maybe that's the right word or traces or
signs of how I could viably come into a
relationship with hyper objects is that
the connection is that how I should be
seeing this yes absolutely it's a way of
enhancing our implicit learning
machinery I think that's absolutely
correct and also of revealing that which
is implicit within us the inside aspect
of it yeah yeah and if we don't see that
this is an option for us then we go
blind to it mm-hmm
say more about that that was a really
pregnant pause I wanted I want to unpack
what was in the pregnant pause there
okay okay so that which we see is always
somewhat determined by that which we
think we can act on this is where
companions stuff about the metaphysics
comes in handy because with the
metaphysical system of technic we see
everything as some you know the tree the
forest isn't something that we just can
enjoy it's not a living being on its own
it's a set of resources waiting to be
extracted into some other thing this is
a high to garyun idea yeah so the
Technic drives us to see the world in
terms of things that we can pick apart
and manipulate but that view also
prioritizes literal language and sort of
does away with the sort of like
wishy-washy imagination but if we
recognize that because of our epistemic
limits we have to know things at least
at first in dreamlike phenomena then
that opens us up to the possum
that when we have dreams when we have
visions when we go into a deep
psychological state or a deep
psychedelic state that the psychedelics
aren't only revealing us information
about our personal psyche but that they
are picking up on patterns at large in
our communities that have been ingrained
in our implicit learning machinery then
we can take those visions more seriously
and we can see them for what they are
because the current model of
psychedelics which is using them in
psycho psycho psychedelic psychotherapy
it does sort of overly individualize the
person so I think that it was a number
of things we have to reformulate when
we're thinking about how to effectively
integrate altered states into our
communities and this over mining
undermining problem that I mentioned
isn't happening just for objects it's
also happening for people but we
undermine ourselves by thinking that
were individuals and we over mine
ourselves that's by thinking that we're
only a group but the middle ground
between that is that we understand
ourselves as a member of a community and
as a member of a community each of us
has access to different experiences
different environments where in our
implicit learning has sort of picked up
on the greater whole in which we are
situated and then we can take seriously
people's dreamlike revelations we can
engage in dialogue about them if we
don't fixate on the content too much and
say oh the content is literally real and
if we don't overly individualize the
content by saying oh this is only about
your personal psyche then we can see
that other option for action where these
are revelations about implicit patterns
that we're picking up on so this seems
to me to be deeply convergent and
perhaps it would be strengthened by
connections to like you know again a
core bands idea of the imaginal or what
I've argued for in terms of the
transgender is trying to get us away
from the exhaustive categorization of
things as either subjective which is is
the purely psychological interpretation
of the content of the altered state of
consciousness or purely objective well
it's just literally true and I mean in
that direction lies in both directions
lies a propensity for a kind of madness
the first can lead you down sort of a
narcissistic hole and the other
can lead you into well a kind of
delusional state so we keep wrapping
around that right because every time so
you see what I see happening and then I
do not mean this as a criticism this is
an observation but I see happening is we
we certainly confront a problem and then
we pursue how the things we need to open
things up but then we need to also
always counterbalance it with yes but
how do we constrain it so it doesn't go
in all of these ways we introduced at
the very beginning there right but you
know setting up the right context it
sounds to me like in addition and I know
I believe you've already agree with this
set but I just want to get it out there
so we can talk about it and involve our
viewers in the like in inter
participation all right
in addition to like all of these you
know revising the metaphysics and
getting sort of individual sets of
practices there's a way in which we need
to build a lot of multi scale Euler and
mutually affording mechanisms of self
correction yes yes I think one of those
is by developing communities where we
have very clear roles right not
everybody has to be the prophetic mystic
right that would definitely result in
that this yes and so for example um
Augustine in his confessions he mentions
multiple times that his mother has
dreams which seemed to be in touch with
God they're like hidden insights which
seem to be in touch with a greater good
so I think that you know we can admit
that everybody has these things like you
know your dreams they're probably
picking up on something if you interpret
them you'll get some genuine information
but then there's you know there's that
but the Christians would say that you
know prophecy has basically ended right
which is coming from the Jewish context
after a while they're like okay this
altered state of consciousness thing
it's a bit too much you know we've had
like a lot of prophets we've had a lot
of social change as a result of these
visionary experiences but like no more
that's it so historically
the tendency has been to constraining
the access that people have to prophetic
revelation and to only accepting the
most minimal versions of them but I
think that's there is the opportunity
for a new social role where we do have
people who are sort of mystical prophets
and we trust their judgments more than
others we have an institution that
trains these people which helps them to
constrain their imagination but we have
to look seriously at the imagination and
its abilities for producing effective
information and so I think that's
something that's going to help is that
if we recontextualize what religions
have been trying to do as art I think it
becomes a lot more easy the way that we
understand art now is very different
from how art has been stood of that
understood a thousand years ago right so
people who were going through the
religious revolutions of the axial age
they didn't have the understanding of
art that we do and religion and art was
always very closely interwoven mm-hmm
now that's caused a lot of problems
where you know some people are like well
okay no art at all or if it's art it
should only be in the service of God but
I think that if we look at artistic
expression if we look at the expressive
arts you know performance visual art
music even as a way in which people can
latch on to hyper objects which give us
an impression of our imminent future if
we recontextualize it out of an overly
religious context and into an artistic
context that the problem becomes much
more tractable mmm that's interesting so
what I mean that brings me back to a
point so again where I mentioned how
poetry and philosophy were were in July
together so is that also going to
require a reformulation of our cultural
notion of art because we've tended to
you know we've we tend to have an overly
romantic and I mean that in
philosophical sense interpretation of
art and we sort of divorced art from
philosophy in and the cultivation of
wisdom so the prototypical artist is not
saw is the prototype for an artist is
not someone seeking wisdom in fact the
prototype for artist is often you know
the romantic in early conflicted
individual who is ultimately on a course
of self-destruction but never the
last sacrifices if you know the van Gogh
model uh the artist right I mean there's
also another model of the artist which
is just like oh I'm just like a really
flat II person with a lot of creative
energy and I just create shit I don't
really know what it means and right both
of those those are both both of those
are sort of you know within the pantheon
of the Romantic understanding of the
artist it sounds to me like you are
proposing something other than that
that's it so what is it well I think
that's you know if we understand
ourselves not as individuals but as
members of a community then we can look
in terms of how do we form communities
such that we can make the most of the
potential of the artists I see artists
as people who have a lot of creative
potential but not really a lot of
top-down processing to like constrain
and direct that potential some people
are blessed with that ability but not
everybody and I do think that the
culture we live in does provide it makes
it easier for people to go about the
rapid content generation without
consideration kind of thing and there's
obviously going to be information in
there that's really important and
interesting but that need for artists to
always produce to always get the next
thing out so that they can always be
making sales and sustain their lifestyle
etc I think that that is negative for
artists I think that it creates an
impetus for them which doesn't give them
the time to actually sit down and sort
of take a more slow and mindful approach
now this is actually isn't there also
don't let me just rally you but I mean
we also have a mythology of sort of art
being very individualistic and
subjective and expressive yes yeah we do
and I think that's transforming a little
bit so I put some I gave you some
resources to put in the description of
this video
look art collectives that I think are
good examples of how to go forward so
this is art collective from the UK
called kimitaka and I watched a talk
from the founders the founder gave a
talk at a conference called what was it
breaking convention and her name is
Maria she was talking about how not
everybody is ready to sit down and do
the work of meditation so how do we get
people to engage in the transformative
experiences that will reorient their
perspectives tour
something that's better for us well can
use what we know from ritual and
shamanism to create performance art
pieces that give people these kinds of
transformative insights because not
everyone's willing to sit down and do
the work of transformation a lot of
people are very afraid of changing the
world view the very attached to the way
they see things but everyone loves to be
entertained so it's really easy to like
you know sell tickets get people in an
event for a performance art piece but if
the artists are keeping in mind wisdom
these higher ideals of connecting people
with hyper objects of these you know
cultural entities that we're all
situated within but perhaps can't quite
see that's a great way of
recontextualizing the artistic process I
think see I left a link for Maria's art
collective I think that's a great way to
go
now there's also so this religion that's
not a religion thing all right right now
I think that this is this is a great
thing this is like something that I
really want to work on next year I think
that the the religious revolution that
we need is going to be also an art
revolution and so I think that we need
people who can act as artistic directors
who can create an institution where they
network with artists to create a bunch
of insightful art art that encodes
information that our insights waiting to
happen
because that's exactly what religious
art is even especially when you get into
the more occult domains of things
everything's encoded in these
interesting symbols now I think that we
can do that in an open and ongoing
fashion such that we can maintain
contact between these symbols and the
ever-changing hyper objects of our
cosmos and culture so I think that by
understanding religion as art and by
creating a religion that's not a
religion but through more of an art
collective model networking a bunch of
artists with creative potential with
people who can play the role of artistic
director to constrain and hone the sorts
of things that these artists are
channeling I think that's a great way
forward so that's great thank you for
explaining that I like that connection
and one of course why are you mean also
a lot of performative art - right so
because you know what's also happening
all around the world is people might not
see what they're doing is art I'm
thinking of you know you know the the
live-action role-playing games that
people engage in like the Jeep forming
in Scandinavia or the resurgence of
improv as a way people are trying to
respond to the meeting crisis where
right improv people might see what
they're doing is art but it overlaps a
lot with the Jeep form that people are
performing they and they might not see
it as art but it sounds to me like those
things would clearly fall under what
you're calling art in fact they might be
even more relevant than just sort of
static objects because they tend to be
dynamical systems themselves and
therefore they're best for giving us a
participatory knowledge of complex
dynamical systems both in our culture
and our environment yeah yeah I'm really
glad you brought up the role play
connection because I think that that's
super important and with the LARPing
stuff the live-action roleplay often
people are like going away for a weekend
and they're just trying to escape their
everyday world and they don't bring
anything back yes but you know I think
the notion that you talk about about
serious play of religion as a space for
serious play is something that is going
to be a foundational element of this
religion that's not a religion but is
also an art collective and so what I see
the religion that's not a religion
looking like is something like a
marriage between Disney World and the
University except it cares more about
your well-being than it cares about your
capital that's great that's almost a
poster that's fantastic I like so so
again trying to keep a line of
continuity going through it so
psychedelics would be sort of fitting
into you know they talk about set and
setting but we're talking about I talk
about you know you know in active in
framing and so the idea is this artistic
community and these this new ecology of
artistic practices would be without with
within which we would put right
psychedelics and other altered states of
consciousness as a way of affording a
constrained
and viable serious play did I put it all
together well absolutely I think it's
exactly correct
now that also must be contextualized
with a particular problem so I think
that psychedelics they open us up they
bring us into touch with certain things
in our implicit learning systems that we
haven't been quite aware of and that
they have the capacity to connect us to
various socio-cultural hyper objects
they also can afford you know the
possibility of a dynamic
self-organization that we can't sort of
get to on our own right the idea you
know who you know that they introduce a
kind of noise into the neural net one
allow it to explore a state space that
it normally can't get into yeah yeah and
I think that's how it's sort of
providing revelations about implicit
learning oh I see I see I see okay now I
get it
okay keep going then yes okay so with
the overtly individualized model of
psychedelics like Ana therapy of saying
here let's get you in let's solve your
particular problems and like let's make
it such that you can go back into your
community and nothing about that
community changes there have been some
papers come out which show actually that
if people aren't receptive to the sorts
of insights that people haven't
psychedelic therapy when they go back
home that the efficacy of that treatment
is blunted by the context they're in but
but this is all I mean not to trivialize
but actually just reinforce your point
it has always been the idea right of
therapy that you have the triad
all right you can have you know the
formal logical intervention and you know
the therapeutic intervention but you
also have to have the social
intervention right a person won't
actually you know get the full recovery
that you're after and I think that
accounts for enlightenment and
enlightenment and wisdom as well because
you can only be as enlightened as your
community let's see uh yes which is why
Plato thought you know if we have the
philosopher Kings show up what's gonna
happen he's gonna be crucified he
literally says that which was like very
strange and something that be Christian
theologians later gravitate like that I
mean there's an insight there you know
and no prophet is honored in his own
home to actually speak the words of
Jesus of Nazareth so
there's just one thing that I want to
get out which I've been sort of building
up to okay sorry we'll do that I'll just
mark my question and bring it back later
cool okay so if we don't mindfully
connect the psychedelic experience to
particular hyper objects particular
processes which are in the best interest
of the individual and our communities at
large then the insights in the openness
that we get from these kinds of
experiences will just latch on to
whatever is at hand right now we are
situated within the hyper object of
capitalism and that has very real
effects on us right and so we have to be
very careful because we are beginning to
get into a stage where psychedelics are
being commercialized there are now
psychedelics and investment conferences
opening up there was one in Toronto
recently there was one in New York a few
months ago and especially the people who
have been making money off of cannabis
now that that's legal they're thinking
that the same thing is gonna happen with
psychedelics and so capitalist motives
are going to be parasitizing the
potential of psychedelics so there's a
story which i would recommend everyone
who's concerned about this problem to
read it's called we will call it pala
I give you a link to put in the
description so it'll be there for those
who want to look at it but it describes
the story of a woman who has this
insightful LSD experience she's like oh
I want to bring like love and joy to
everybody so I'm gonna open this you
know therapeutic space where people can
undergo guided psychedelic sessions and
you know for a few years it's kind of
what she wants people are having these
meaningful transformative experiences
but she requires - in order to keep his
business going she has to take on the
typical capitalist business model or she
has to get investors the investors
become part of the board of directors
they make a lot of the decisions and so
this story tells the process of what
happens as the market fragments and as
more competition emerges in the market
surrounding psychedelic therapy and so
we have for example as she becomes less
competitive than these other psychedelic
therapy groups she has two new things
like put capital at the front because
even though the investors are first
motivated because they have people who
could be helped by psychedelics what
they actually care about our returns on
investment
money is put at the center that's what's
valued and so that distorts people's
behavior and so her company becomes
something like a hyper object it becomes
something that has a life of its own and
a personality of its own situated within
the larger hyper object of capitalism
and so she ends up getting fired from
the board of directors and it becomes
something other than her because she
doesn't want to put capital before her
patients and the board of directors is
like well sorry you know that's not real
gonna work for us so now we're gonna
sell this off to a big pharma company
and some of the things that they use are
like it's really well laid out this
story and they use a lot of illustration
which is really good so for example as a
means of increasing their earnings they
provide discounts to people who have
just come out of a psychedelic therapy
session for signing up right away which
is extremely unethical because you're
really really suggesting and open after
that so they can really easily get your
cash they also then begin to instead of
having people to integration sessions
that give you an app that does
integration for you and then the app
collects information about you and then
based on its inferences it gives you
notifications at certain important times
such as six months ago you said that
this experience changed your life
imagine what another one could do I see
there's this very real danger that these
capitalist motives which are very deeply
ingrained into our social structures
will parasitize and take over the
potential that psychedelics have to
offer us and so we might end up in a
world where it's like brave new world
right where people when they're feeling
too satisfied take a psychedelic drug
just so that they can go back to
business as usual tomorrow psychedelics
on their own aren't inherently a
guarantor of goodness even though they
make the individual feel good because of
the goodness of the individual is
situated within a context that overall
does not have let's just call them
motivations for now that are good for
everybody then yeah I mean there's a lot
of danger that can come from that you
know right
so I mean the circles back again to the
beginning where we keep coming back to
also the the three problems associated
with the with altered states of
consciousness yes yes right exactly so
another thing that I've been constantly
referring to is the classic worry of the
devil because the devil he's not like a
scary demonic dude right he is an angel
of light who comes and seduces you with
everything you've ever wanted and so I
think that we should be very careful
that psychedelics might actually be a
gateway for the devil I mean I think
that I think that very seriously I mean
obviously there's issues here you know
Fromm's critique of the possibilities of
deep modal confusion hmm about having it
I mean there's it's not only our culture
is the problems around capitalism
there's problems around narcissism
people would go from understanding
psychedelics as a way of becoming and
instead what they're trying to do is
have as many experiences that provide
autobiographical evidence of their
uniqueness right now your importance and
why they're special and things like that
and and there's you know and those two
things those two those two forces are at
work they you know it's precisely
because we are in a large complex market
that we tend to feel that we need to
emphasize our uniqueness but but at the
same time we want if we're conflicted
about that because we also need to
follow whatever trends are going because
we want to belong and so there what I'm
saying is it's a very complex set of
forces that are going to be at work so I
think you know there's there seems to be
to me that we also need something like I
want to be really careful because I do
not think that getting into a particular
ideological stance is helpful here but
we do need to see something like well
something like what I see going on with
my discussions with Jordan Hall sort of
a level of social cultural critique that
is not primarily politically motivated
at least in the standard sense of
politics but is motivated by and like so
for example when I'm making a criticism
of capitalism Wow but you know it's the
best system and and then you know you're
being a more
like no that that's not what's going on
here what we're trying to understand is
Thomas Bjorkman makes this very clear in
his most recent book you know he said
you know as as religion left the field
you know sort of the Enlightenment as
being the overarching authority and then
now science is leaving the field under
sort of postmodern pluralism he said by
default all that's left is the market so
people are now accrediting to the market
the same kind of divinity and the same
kind of absoluteness and certainty the
market is as it is as fallible as any
other system or institution we've
created does it do a lot of great things
of course it of course it does but but -
but there then conclude that it is
perfect and complete and we have come to
sort of the the final stage of
socio-economic evolution where at the
end of history I think that's just an
absurd and indefensible playing so what
I'm trying to say is we need a kind of
cultural critique that isn't truly
ideologically motivated it's trying to
get us out of what try to treat the year
I'll use the language we've sort of
crafted together
there's trying to treat capitalism as an
object not undermine it or Overmind it
but trying to understand it as it is so
that we can more appropriately relate to
it that's the kind of critique I think
you and I are talking about yeah yeah
yeah I think that you've always been
clear about that kind of critique of you
know we can talk about these things
objectively and not be like
ideologically motivated and perhaps
actually the answer to these things
isn't at the level of the political
problem
right which is the criticism you've
lodged against Peterson yeah he wants to
overly politicized things and that's
just a that's an effect it's not it's
not really a cause
right it's causing other problems but
it's not like because yes and so that's
why I really enjoy the book Technic and
magic because you know he also was
trying to address these sort of more
political and social problems but he's
saying look we actually have to change
the reality systems that were existing
within such that we can see other
possibilities for action as available
yeah and if we take care of the small
things and the big things will take care
of themselves
you know self-organization is a powerful
force we're not gonna get outside of the
fact that large systems of organization
are going to happen so the take that
I've always taken to politics is that I
think that every individual should take
on the ethic of the anarchist I don't
think we should try to be like an
anarchist state could all take on the
basic principles of voluntary
cooperation mutual aid and direct action
we should all help each other and we
should all act on the problems that we
see relevant around us and not wait for
some other higher power to do that for
us I think that that's a really good
thing to internalize on an individual
level if we all try to engage through
open honest mutual cooperation I think
that's like a really good way to like
solve the larger problems take care of
the small things the big things will
take care of themselves and then the
larger problems which might be addressed
by metaphysics come from you know having
discussions like the ones that you're
having through the series and through
having something like the art collective
religion that's not a religion yes
that's a space where we can go and
practice and rehearse and get in touch
with a participatory sense of these
alternative worlds ultimately I think
the framing for that religion that's not
a religion should be that oh this is
like an alien thing which is landed on
earth it's getting you in touch with
some other universe some other dimension
you go and you participate in the system
of that dimension and then when you
leave you take little bits of that
dimension out into the world beyond you
know it's so it's a recovery theory tall
can actually propose that and that
anthropological model for fantasy
literature
the idea is you go into the alternative
world you get sort of identified with it
it's like an anthropologist going to
another culture and the point is when
you go to that other world you can then
you sort of take off your cultural
glasses and then when you return back to
this world you see it anew and I've been
trying I've been trying to get to the
idea of seeing religions that way that
right that what you're doing but right
is that the point of it is there there
are these imaginal places where you go
and then the point is not to stay there
not to take them literally the point is
to come back and see this world in in a
different way it's oh it's the irony so
it's I recover this world as opposed to
my
moving to the other world I'm exploring
this as a way of trying to get outside
of the two worlds
you know the idea is to get to the other
world the truth ology right to me to
reconfigure so I mean this idea of like
the trans world it's not an other world
it's you go up you go into this imaginal
things so that you come back into this
one and recover it in a powerful way
mm-hmm that's cool I didn't know that
I'm a token actually no I appreciate
that and I can definitely see that in
Lord of the Rings because it is very
much a critique of like the
industrialization of the time he's
living in yeah hmm so actually one thing
that I was just thinking today as I was
sort of brainstorming for this which got
brought to mind again as you were
talking about the to world thing so I
think that we are situated within a
Platonic view of the two worlds mmm so
the one core distinction that I see
between Aristotle and Plato is that you
know Aristotle recognizes that
potentiality is really important but
then Plato says potentiality is actually
more real than like the actual world
itself so Plato doesn't distinguish he
says that the potential world is more
pure because it's like not corrupted by
the process of becoming and it has not
only the same but more of an ontological
status than the world of everyday
appearances but I think that that is not
correct I think that we can sort of put
that to the side we can see that
potentiality is a thing that genuinely
is real um but it's fundamentally
different from that which is actual yes
so when we go though into this
institution this you know whether it be
a religion of times past let's say
Christianity for example we can go to
Christianity and by participating within
that community we discover the
possibility of God and we actualize that
potential by bringing to light that
potential through the community and how
the community interacts so it's like we
realize and bring to life God we
discover and life to the potential of
God which is a transductive way it's
yeah again it's not that gods in the
other world it's is that God is a way
like I say if God is this way of going
out and coming back and recovering our
world that's what you've just described
in a way so I was reading being called
which is an anthology oh yeah yeah this
book I've got the same
don't say too much cuz I don't want you
to spoil for me go ahead I will spoil
the intro okay okay Martin Seligman he's
the founder of positive psychology one
of them yeah yeah yeah so he goes off on
this really weird tangent I love it so
much like life is becoming so weird and
like we just gotta like buckle down and
accept it okay then this guy who's like
well respected psychologist you know
really well-known published so many
articles classes are taught throughout
the world based on his teachings and
he's like yeah you know I think that
science fiction is like a really useful
place to get some insights about how the
experience of being called by some
higher power actually works and so he
refers to a story by him I think to this
story you know it's blending in my brain
right now I have to follow up on it but
he talks about Isaac Asimov and about
arthur c clarke and one of these authors
has a story where there's this
supercomputer on a spaceship and the
universe is cooling down and so the
people are like okay so how do we
reverse entropy how do we reverse this
process so that we can like live
indefinitely and the computer says well
you know there's not enough information
for a meaningful answer and then so this
goes on through a series of stages the
computer gets more complicated and it
gets more information the people keep
asking it okay so how do we reverse this
they're like you can't make a meaningful
answer and then when all the people have
died and we're almost at like the heat
death of the universe the computer says
let there be light and so the insight is
that you know God isn't the Creator but
God actually comes at the end yeah this
is a whitehead sort of had this idea in
some ways too well yeah I think that's
like an interesting way of looking at
things is we can identify a particular
kind of potential and we can realize it
and this is a technique that's used a
narrative and in storytelling a lot a
core difference that emerges at the end
of a book can recontextualize the entire
thing such that it's brought into a new
light
I was just gonna say Corona makes great
use of that about how narrative actually
gets our cognition not just the content
that gets our cognition into the right
form for interacting complex dynamical
systems in the world precisely because
of that huge temporal scope and the
ability to reorganize at a multi scale
Euler level nice I feel like she'd be on
board with the art collectibility
Yeah right right that's unschool okay
well I think I got a go soon so I think
we should this sounds like a good place
to sort of wrap it up is there any final
thoughts you want to express anything
why you feel any threads that need to be
sort of quickly gathered together um
yeah I just wanted to highlight a few
other directions that I think
psychedelics can help us with so I think
that everyone should have access to
rites of passage so transition to
adulthood something perhaps in middle
age maybe marriage and death I think
that that's going to be necessary and
then I think that other people you know
can do the more or less I don't think
that most people will value from having
frequent psychedelic experiences too
often but rites of passage is super
important and I also wanted to highlight
some places that I think are fruitful to
explore so bodywork and psychedelics
hasn't really been explored yet but I
was at a conference in Prague which was
called beyond psychedelics and I was
talking to a juggler there and he said
that jugglers love LSD and every time
he's learned a new really complicated
trick he's learned it well he's on acid
and so it actually enhances your body
awareness it opens you up to more clear
updates from your embodied signals so I
think bodywork is something that we
should be integrating into psychedelic
research Tai Chi acrobatics yoga that
kind of stuff and then also expressive
arts like theater art things that
involve perspective-taking
yeah for sure for sure yeah those are
the only things I didn't get across that
I wanted to get across otherwise yeah
this is a great place to end that was a
lot of fun and it helped me to put
things in a little bit more clear
language than I had before well thank
you and I want to remind see see you've
all watched you see what kind of work
Daniel is capable of generating so
please we're definitely putting this
link in consider the IndieGoGo campaign
consider supporting the work this is the
kind of work that's going in to the
cognitive continuum oh I also want to
mention that you know I'm integrating
this idea of utilizing artistic
metaphorical expression with the book
that's why I'm hiring artists to provide
somebody I really thank you for pointing
that out Daniel thank you for pointing
that out yeah so we're adding the
insights and it was yes we are
exemplifying and enacting them we are
not merely referring to them we're
trying to work out what
would actually instantiate like how
would you actually put this into
practice not just talk about it but
trying to work it out in the the
creation of the book itself so I'm gonna
end on that note and like I said I'm
very happy with how the discussion went
and thank you very much Daniel yeah
there's a lot of fun thank you