[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
hey folks welcome back to the Dark Horse
podcast livestream our 23rd Q & A where
I have just been alerted that revenge is
a dish best served live so anyway that's
coming up I don't know when but what
happened okay maybe I misinterpreted it
but that's how it sounded and it came
with that certain glint in the eye so
I'm going to be on my guard yeah hide
your toes right yes exactly
toes all right once again thank you
everyone for supporting us for the super
check questions we have more questions
that we will get through and we'll get
through as many as possible knowing full
well that there are many good ones that
we don't we appreciate all of the
comments of support as well and so as
usual we start by doing about a half an
hour or so of super check questions from
the first live stream in which we've
prioritized them based on the amount
only and then we will go to super check
questions from this current live stream
and and read them in the order in which
they come in but feeling free to skip
any that seemed inappropriate or rude or
just outward their time for whatever
reason although it's very rare that that
last thing happens here yep okay first
question I am building a Twitter
alternative focused on serving media and
user comments that challenged
individuals existing biases and allow
discrete voting on content what changes
to Twitter's design would most improve
online discourse and understanding hmm
well I see two things okay and maybe
they're one thing just two forms but the
thing that's killing us is the
combination of the algorithm that you
are steered by and the inability to
check what it is I mean even the fact
that it's in motion and I am I have been
so struck by the fact that there is not
maybe the most important thing we could
be doing is have a field of people who
reverse engineering the algorithm by hat
setting up accounts and figuring out
what its fee
so that we could perhaps keep our heads
above water but I never see this so my
point to you would be if you're creating
a Twitter alternative you got your work
cut out for you but to the extent that
there is some algorithm that decides
what you see and don't see a it has to
be transparent and really at some level
I think we are going to have to require
that these algorithms become transparent
otherwise the derangement of
civilization will be so dangerous to us
so I don't know how we do that
there's obviously legal and ethical
questions about forcing private
companies to reveal their algorithms but
civilization appears to depend on the
fact that we know what the algorithms
are but if you're building an
alternative today and you want to
attract attention of people like us I
would say if there's an algorithm it
should be based on a transparent method
and that there should be sliders one of
the things I would constantly be doing
if I had access to it is tuning into
what my antithesis sees on Twitter
tuning in to what somebody who's in the
middle see is on Twitter if I could draw
version we have is so so blunt only oh
I'm going to go to that person's feed
that's it that is as far as I know the
only version of such a slider that we
have right yeah and it's not even really
a slider what I want to know is what
they're seeing that causes them to
produce that feed by saying these things
and retweeting those things I want to
see you want to be able to see the feeds
of people whose feeds you can see I also
look I want to look through their eyes
yeah right and frankly I mean this is
something I think I don't think I want
that yeah I mean we're not to use it
though no my point is I don't want
people being able to see everything that
I'm choosing to look at oh that's not
what I'm asking
what I'm saying is I want you to be able
to choose the sliders to the extent that
the thing is feeding you stuff I want to
be able to say well okay if you know if
I want to see what the liberal
perspective is my sliders over here if I
want to shunt it over to the
conservative what would I be seeing if
it thought I was a conservative what
would I be seeing in the middle that
kind of thing so it's a generic thing
it's not looking at what it's not
interesting yeah
no I don't I don't want that at all yeah
I mean I think you know that creates a
new problem which is you know how is it
deciding what liberal is what
conservative is you know how is you know
there's still something built-in as to
what it is you know what what those
labels mean but I think what seems to be
true and I haven't thought about this
enough recently to remember what the
terms are but Twitter has these two
distinct settings where you can let it
curate for you or you can say just show
me everything give me a chronological
feed based on you know if I follow them
and they've tweeted let me see it and
you know I certainly have it on that
second setting they give me a
chronological feed do not do editing on
my behalf Twitter and yet it is clear
that it is editing on my behalf as per
our conversation in the last hour so
what what is it it clearly is not what
it is named and it's not what it appears
like so much in the world right now so
um I would just say to encapsulate we
have a problem where AI and the steering
problem that is to say the potential
that AI will run away and become an
existential threat is already alive and
well as happening we expected robots
it wasn't robots so we don't know it's
happening it's algorithms they're doing
it to us we're destroying ourselves on
the basis that it is driving us insane
the key thing is to be able to figure
out where other people are getting their
information in their perspective in
order that we can have those
conversations in the middle that have
become impossible and I would just point
out if you think back you'll remember
there used to be a Google search right
then there was Google search that was
personal which you could turn off which
still didn't tell you anything because
since almost everybody had it on it
wasn't clear what you were looking at
having it turned off but at least it
wasn't personal and then we lost the
ability altogether right you have to you
have to unlock yourself in in every way
that can possibly be done and even so
it's not clear to me that if you're on a
computer that already knows who you are
that you're actually turning off the
ability of Google to know who you are
right and even if you do what is it that
you're seeing if nobody else is tuned
into a depersonalized feed what are you
even what is that you
yeah it's an it's an empty experience so
anyway yeah transparency and the ability
to play around so that you can tune into
the mind of somebody else by switching
the sliders to what you expect that they
would have be very useful next question
comment I disapprove of what you don't
say but I will defend to the death your
right not to say it thank you both for
defending free speech and promoting
nuanced thoughts thought pretty cool I
like the formulation yeah I do too I
question three
I have interested with many people who
have experienced incarceration I have a
critical and skeptical mind the police
routinely abused their power how would
you suggest fixing the systemic issue
hmm great question great question that's
going to deserve a podcast of its own at
some point but what I would say is
consider the following proposition the
policing we have the policing we have
which is routinely abused that is a
feature not a bug is a symptom of
something else if you don't want to
share if you don't want to share
opportunity and you concentrate that
opportunity then you end up with the
need to control people so they don't
rebel against an unfair distribution of
of access so the place to cure this is
not at the police level right you're
just going to end up with kludgy
attempted fixes that don't work and have
unintended consequences what you need to
do is fix the underlying problem which
of course has a small number of very
very powerful antagonists the idea that
you would solve the opportunity problem
is going to be opposed by those who have
hoarded opportunity so that's really the
question we need to solve and until you
do that I don't think the police issue
is addressable in isolation yeah that's
probably right I wish I had access to
what I saw some time in the last week
some analysis has suggested that
actually body cams are not demonstrably
effective in reducing police brutality
so given that I don't know if
having cameras in precincts having you
know everything that happens in the
places where would-be perpetrators are
being brought in and and and treated and
put in jail and such might help I don't
I cannot quite make sense of the idea of
the conclusion that body cams don't
reduce police brutality but this is
apparently a robust conclusion yeah it
seems they would and it seems that they
are an extension of the same phenomenon
if everybody's got a camera and what
we're seeing is outrage that is
obviously going to have impacts body
cams which seemed to point the same
direction but yeah and you know I had
the same eye this isn't the same but I
had a related question watching that
first video that we showed in the last
hour you know the two minutes of you
know peaceable assembly of protesters
with a black man speaking honestly and
and truthfully to the police and having
them come in and take him away like the
police knew that was being recorded yeah
like even more so what the hell were
they doing 9 suppose going on I have the
same er what could possibly have gone
through their minds yeah yeah okay
you guys have been a lifeline of
rationality many thanks from an American
expat in the UK thank you about your
answer to the question in the last
podcast do you believe that Marxist
philosophy is driving any of this so
that was asked in the last podcast last
Q&A and we answered it wouldn't it be a
better answer that mark you seein as an
aberrant mark use philosophy is driving
this I do think I couldn't tell you the
names of any of Mark uses works but he
is one of the people sort of early on in
what becomes post-modernism along with
Foucault and Derrida and such whoo-hoo
yes I actually do tend to point more to
the postmoderns and particular the
French postmoderns than to Marx it all
gets cloaked in this Marxist philosophy
and as you talked about in your answer
last time you know Marxism doesn't work
but it's a coherent it's a coherent
philosophy and there's much to be
learned
knowing what it says yes I would say
it's a coherent critique not a cohan
okay good it's a coherent critique and
it is being trotted out by people who
know the name Marx who have pictures of
Marx it's lots of marks on their
t-shirts and all and so they think that
they're Marxists and being accused of
being for kody ins or Marcuse ian's
their post modernists sounds less like
something they would recognize and they
take umbrage in a way they don't take
Enbridge at being called Marxists but I
agree I don't think this isn't actually
Marxist it's much more of a postmodern
set of ideologies mmm I'm gonna I'm
gonna push back slightly I'm gonna say
it certainly has elements of
post-modernism it it is uh what is the
the Sokol squared term for it it's
functionally postmodern maybe that's not
the term but it's a grievance studies
guys yeah it's functionally postmodern
most these people don't know the the
post-modernism that they are enacting or
enacting it anyway we probably haven't
read the communist manifesto either all
right and that was that was gonna be my
point is that I think we could tie
ourselves in knots trying to be precise
about what this movement is and what we
will find out is you know is it Marx as
well its Maoist Marxist
it's postmodern its new hip happening
it's all sorts of stuff so it's hip
happening Marxist and I think it is
important not to get bogged down in it
it's got enough Marxism in it that that
deserves to be in the discussion okay
it's got enough post-modernism that that
deserves to be in the discussion it is
novel enough that it deserves not to be
portrayed as exactly one or the other
but I feel like post modernist thought
renewed the ability for Marxist thought
to get a foothold in the universities
where these ideas are emerging from that
Marxism especially in the wake of the
Cultural Revolution in the 70s and China
was most was really a backroom niche
belief that was easy to get rid of just
like actual racism you know white now
it's easy to scoff at now we are
encouraged to do so and for good reason
and I think that you know a little bit
of a little bit of information in the
hands of some people who don't actually
know what they're wielding cuz I mean
there there are important truths there
kernels of things that are valuable
within postmodern thought and yet you
combine an unknown Stan ie view of what
post-modernism is proclaiming there is
no objective reality and your truth is
your truth and my truth is mine and it
doesn't matter if they ever meet but
it's you know my truth is my truth you
combine that with a you know with a I
don't even know if it's a naive
understanding of Marxism but you know
some kind of version of Marxism and
you're allowed to forget history you're
allowed to forget that never once has
Marxist revolution gone anywhere good
well you're allowed to overwrite reality
with stuff that is useful basically the
point is it's license to pen useful
myths but the problem is you're not
license to pen miss on all of our behalf
and so people are pen and myths on
behalf of this group or that group were
self or whatever and it's it's an
extremely dangerous process which has a
lot to do with why this looks like a
religious awakening which is actually
really it's the opposite of an awakening
it's an asleep inning somehow but
nonetheless those who are true believers
feel that they have just experienced
enlightenment even as they have become
unmoored from reality yes next question
hypothesis
humans have primate brains designed for
social systems rather than logic or
reason when stressed we abandon
higher-order thinking in favor of
implicit models which ask who is at the
bottom these folks will receive the
worst of any quota based policing I
think I think this is likely the only
thing that I will take issue with here
is that I primate you know it says
humans of primate brains designed for
social systems rather than logic or
reason and all the other primates or you
know
more closely primates are related to us
that are extent the more likely they are
to also show logic and reason and
compassion and emotional regulation and
what we are seeing for sure is a
breakdown of logic and reason and
dehumanization and a lack of compassion
and empathy for other people but we also
see that in in the great apes and many
of the old world monkeys in particular
like baboons and in large social groups
that they have they are collaborative
and they are competitive as are we I
would add that there's a relationship
between what is true and social reality
and very frequently human beings do one
more from a strict adherence to factual
reality in order to accomplish something
that we don't have the tools for
presently or that requires mythologizing
things and the thing here is we can
project forward we know what the
consequence of the myths that we're
being fed in this case are right this is
going to advance certain people as it
hobbles other people and then collapse
that's what's coming so to the extent
that you want to see some groups rise at
the expense of other groups and you're
willing to pay the price of collapse
this seems like a good deal to any of us
who feel like we've made progress
there's a lot yet to go but it sure
would be a shame to go backwards the
idea that you would invite collapse is
ludicrous now I would point out you're
gonna hear a lot about people like me
are gonna say this is an anarchist
revolution others are gonna say yeah but
you don't know what anarchism means
you're using it as if you mean chaos and
no I don't
I mean anarchism this is anarchism
they're on inventing government they are
wrong about the consecrate to the extent
that they are honest about what they
think will happen next they are dead
wrong and we cannot we cannot afford to
demonstrate that to them by allowing
them to run their experiment it's not
their world
next question the current outrage comes
from about a dozen videos of police
violence that we've seen over the past
years if we saw a video of the 12 worst
moments of your life oh we think of you
it's an excellent question and I would
say yeah this isn't exactly the same
thing but I used to make the same point
to my hand we'll behavior students you
know many students would show up to
animal behavior program really excited
about the romance of it all having you
know I haven't been grazed on amazing
David Attenborough videos and less
amazing and less well done Natural
History videos of all sorts and part of
what part of what I felt my job was was
to at the same time that was trying to
teach and excite students about what it
was that how it is that you would
actually know what animals do and then
why they're doing it
also d romanticize it for them and so
they spent a lot of time many many tens
of hours out in the field watching
animals simply doing careful behavioral
observations and they were inevitably
bored because most animals spend most of
the time sitting around looking blankly
at something and or sleeping and those
rare moments of you know predator-prey
interactions or sex or you know whatever
it is it's actually exciting to watch
which is what Natural History videos are
filled with are in fact a tiny tiny
proportion I would say what about if
someone put a video on you your lives
even you know you young college students
who are presumably living more exciting
lives than many people you know what
percentage of the time is anything
actually interesting happening
especially if people don't speak your
language right as you don't speak the
language of the ducks or the Beatles or
whatever it is that you're watching so
this is this is exactly right and this
brings us back to this point that we are
the visceral anecdote is always going to
attract our attention and that doesn't
mean there's not something real to be
learned from it because sometimes it is
exactly the rare events that are the
forces of selection that cause the rest
of the culture or the social system to
be what they are but the idea that they
are the thing that is true of an
individual or of a population is not
correct yeah and in fact I mean as we
described before there's a tool for this
right it's a statistical analysis that's
right and it you know if it's done
properly it will tell you whether or not
your sense that this thing illustrates a
bias that I know exists in that other
thing you can test that question
so anyway it's it's a shame and we have
done ourselves no service by failing to
educate we I mean think about what we've
done in the Universities we've allowed
people to get degrees in the opposite of
clear-headedness right why did we do
that and then now that we've got shield
I mean ridiculousness we've credentialed
them in ridiculousness and now
ridiculousness
is staging a coup against reason and we
are forced to take it seriously because
that's what reasonable reasonable people
do is they listen to other perspectives
and a few critiques some of them they
are outraged they are not really
offended yeah
given the socio-cultural significance of
the algorithms selectively feeding us
information do you imagine that Dorsey
and Zuckerberg bond under the IDW and
can anything be done to combat these
impersonal mechanical processes do they
monitor the IDW I mean not them but you
know is there any is there any
monitoring in particular of our voices
or other voices that are trying that are
going against ideology yeah that aren't
strictly along a set of received ways of
thinking I think lots of things are
monitoring trends and to the extent that
anything shows the ability to shift
things it would be strange if it didn't
monitor and did not intervene and you
know I we have the experience all the
time of being approached on Twitter for
example by accounts that do not appear
to be reasonable in other words if you
look at the the profile and how old the
account is and how many followers it has
and you look at the pattern the things
do not look normal
and so what is it that has decided to
reach out and inflame us or whatever I
mean usually I noticed these things when
somebody says something completely off
and I think how could anybody think that
and then I go looking and I'm like oh
it's not a it's not on anybody it's not
an organic thought some thing decided to
to trigger an alarm sense by saying
something that I would then think maybe
is you know an idea in the world
so but I mean that's that's necessary
that you come to that conclusion but not
only did it take your time it took you
know you did spike
like it's impossible not to have some
sort of an emotional spike when you see
so yeah that's totally unreasonable it's
making a claim against you which you
know a hundred percent to be false but
it shows up in what was supposed to be
some sort of a good-faith engagement in
which people disagree and people agree
and they do so honorably and then this
thing comes in and it's a success you
know it is being successful even even if
you can figure out what that it isn't
organic that it isn't actually a real
human being so the question specifically
can anything be done
to combat these impersonal mechanical
processes yes and I've advocated for
something that then set a lot of people
a lot of accounts that I like on edge
where I've basically said that in this
environment anonymity is much more
dangerous than it is valuable and people
have pointed out correctly that there
are some very important events
historically speaking in which the ball
was advanced by something anonymous and
so who am I to go up against anonymity
but my point would be that a lot of
people right now cannot speak I cannot
speak what they know to be true because
they're watching the world collapse and
incoherence right we may lose their jobs
but you could have a pseudonym Sudan
Sudan on a system pseudonymous one of
those two you could have such a system
in which the platform basically had had
established who you were but that you
were anonymous with respect to your the
front-facing part of your account yes
but I would want to see it with some
sort of there has to be accountability
you know in other words somebody who can
put together a dozen accounts that are
throwaway accounts wreak a certain kind
of havoc advance a certain kind of
opinion as if it was widely held that's
very dangerous to our ability to think
collectively so there has to be some
sort of restriction of accounts so that
they begin to function like the people
behind them right your reputation if you
say something completely asinine and you
can throw away the account and then you
go to a new account that isn't burdened
by that cost to its reputation that's a
problem
so in some sense there has to be a
limitation on number so the anonymous
accounts don't proliferate there has to
be some ability for the asinine things
that are said to actually follow the
person who said them for something
that's insightful that said to you know
create some kind of credibility for the
account it has to be it begin to behave
like a person because frankly and this
is the part I think people don't get
very easily the ability to be anonymous
is new okay that did not exist in our
ancestral environments until very
recently so we are now dealing with the
consequences of this novel fact and the
consequences in the Internet age are
very dangerous so some sort of
corrective you know I mean I'm not
saying you can't have an anonymous
account on some platform but I am saying
that maybe those of us who are trying to
think carefully would move to a platform
in which that force was removed because
it's having a tremendous impact grateful
comment from plant man Dan always enjoy
hearing your important discussions keep
it up thank you next question Thomas
Sowell so I always think is it sold yeah
insist that disparities do not always
equal discrimination soul believes
economic policies of the sixties like
the welfare state is being responsible
for many of the issues plaguing black
communities thoughts so soul was one of
the two professors not at Berkeley whom
that anonymous Berkeley professor sent
his letter to as he always basically
outside evidence that he'd sent it and
that this was this was real and I think
he soul and like the anonymous author
and like oh god is it Wilfred Reilly I
may be butchering that there's a other
professor who was sent to it all have
similar thoughts here and they they have
a remarkable amount of truth I'm sorry I
interrupted you well I was just going to
say clearly I mean this is this is my
primary point about you
it's very easy to see what happens when
when those when conservatives are overly
empowered right conservatives tend not
to do enough to fix problems that are
fixable liberals tend to do too much and
they do not appreciate the unintended
consequences that accompany solution
making and we've seen this time and time
again so you know were there negative
impacts of affirmative action oh you bet
there were and the harm that was done to
people who would have thrived you know
under any rubric was massive so we
always have to be asking ourselves what
is even if we are well intentioned when
we build one of these policies what kind
of harm is going to come from it that we
could foresee and is there something we
can do to minimize it or does it
actually mean that the policy will be a
failure in the end and that we have to
do something else you can see this
coming down the pike with reparations
right reparations are an absolute
disaster waiting to happen they will not
work and on the in the aftermath of
having delivered reparations what will
society think of claims of there being
some sort of structural problem so yeah
so I mean there's this really does
require a long conversation I don't I am
not well enough first nor have I thought
sufficiently about this to know exactly
what I think the answers are and you
know I think it's there's no accident
that it's it's easier to critique than
to propose exactly what would be right
you know I don't I don't think that a
world without any welfare makes sense I
think a social safety net is absolutely
necessary in part to deal with the
effects of historic racism however what
we have what we what we had growing in
the 60s seems clearly to have been an
overreach unintentional though it
presumably was that probably caused some
of the problems that we see today
so next question I'm just read this
because I'm we can't see what you're
referring to so you have to figure out
another way to allow us to see this 6c
chap for previous if you reorganize the
main chart from least to greatest risk
of police death you have an index of
disposability it runs primarily along
gender than race so I can infer a little
bit about what this might mean but we
can't see the rest of it so I don't know
how to address it yeah I mean well I can
say to the extent that we understand it
it is I don't know whether this person
is reporting or predicting mmm sounds
like they're reporting but if it's not
if it's reporting then there's a
question of where the methods right and
therefore the the pattern is meaningful
in the way the person is suggesting and
if it's a prediction then the question
is okay how would you have to do to look
at data in order to know whether that
pattern was accurate and I mean it's the
one thing that I can I can infer clearly
here is that the nope no one argues that
the fact that men are by far more likely
to be arrested and incarcerated than
women is due to misandry on the part of
the police that it is understood despite
all of the crazy relativism that is
taking hold in people's minds right now
that men on average are actually more
likely to engage in violent crime than
women are
yeah that said I think there is a there
is a pattern of thought that dogs us in
this realm consistently and it has to do
with the fact that there is something to
be said there's something to be borrowed
from the analogy of the differences
between males and females that can be
imported into the racial realm right and
that there's something to be borrowed
from morphology to be understood about
psychology and my concern is that
they're actually very important
biological reasons that these examples
are quite limited in their utility and
that the comparison between the two
types of examples I mean in both cases
that there are some things in which you
can say well let's look at the
difference between the sexes and see
what it says about biases and policing
and maybe
misunderstanding what's going on because
there's a bias in confrontations between
males and police more so than females
but the problem is I hear a lot of
people who are at an intermediate level
of sophistication in this argument and
they're sort of senses look we've all
watched the NBA right nobody thinks that
the NBA is somehow misunderstanding that
there are a lot of white players who
could be competing on this field
therefore why don't we think that you
know the cognitive realm is like sports
where different populations have
different strengths and that's just the
way it is and there's a very good reason
to think that it's not that way and I
don't see people understanding that the
physical realm is actually abiding by
very different rules and what I want is
a discussion in which we get to that and
we acknowledge why it is that different
sports play to different populations and
we understand what that does and does
not say about the cognitive realm that I
think is sort of the the conversation we
need to work towards so you know one
easy rejoinder I would think to what you
just said is but aren't the environments
in which different populations exist
different and you can imagine arguing
well aren't the Inuit more like you know
less likely to be good at gardening then
through then the Cuong and the Kong less
likely to be good at seal hunting than
the Inuit yeah however so that's very
particular skills based on very
different different environments but
what what you didn't say but what I know
you were thinking because we've been
talking about this for decades is that
in both environments the environment of
the Inuit and the environment the koi
environment of every single human being
has ever lived with the possible weird
exception of this moment right now
effectively problem-solving logical
ability to pose alternative ID
explanations for what you observe and
distinguish between them creativity have
all been absolutely necessary if
populations are to survive and it's not
that everyone in a population has those
skills equally of course they don't they
never will but every population that is
survived to the current day will have
had an abundance in some form or another
of logic and analysis and creativity
yeah but I think we can go even further
this has to do with how these things are
inherited and so and you know there's
also a historical or a paleo historical
discussion to be had which we're not
going to have now but let's just say the
intermediate level of sophistication on
these points is very dangerous and it's
not rep you need to go past the
intermediate level where you start
projecting what you know to be true
coming across your screen about the NBA
and the NFL and you know Wimbledon or
whatever and you start projecting that
into this other realm where you've got a
whole different type of inheritance and
evolution and so anyway for a future
date good my fiance and I plan to read
white fragility to understand what
people unaware if it's flawed view may
learn after reading themselves any
advice regarding a specific method of
approach you read with other work week
before or after etc the first thing that
comes to mind is that that you look at
what James Lindsey has done on on this
and I don't think it's out yet but Helen
pluck rose and his book which will be
out soon I believe which I think it's
called critical theories something like
that I have not seen it but I know them
both pretty well at this point and I
know that their thinking is careful and
detailed on this subject yeah anything
yeah I'm gonna suggest a different
method okay okay yeah your answer is
never gonna be about reading is it no it
is okay yeah it's gonna be about reading
yeah I think you should read it before
you read I'm Lindsey and pluck rose and
then I think you should figure I should
figure out what you spot about D'Angelo
and then see how it mirrors what they
come up with because they're who were to
be very deep into this analysis and I
trust both of them to do it very well
and to see all kinds of things and so
anyway greatest training exercise you
could have is figure I mean frankly
maybe you'll find something I'm pretty
sure there is some white fragility but I
think D'Angelo is a dishonest actor
who's using this as a weapon
so you know are there people protecting
their privilege by pretending this that
or the other way of course but um
does that mean that anytime you hear
somebody with light skin objecting to an
accusation you're hurling at them that
they are actually demonstrating the
accusation itself of course not so so
this is critical though I mean what you
said is read it on its own first and
come to your own conclusions and
actually make sure even before you
discuss it with your fiance like
consider writing down what you think you
know in advance of discussing it and
advance of receiving any other wisdom
from any other people no matter how good
you think their thinking is yeah and in
fact this is a tremendous level up
opportunity because let's call this to
Candace Owens effect okay Candace sorts
of people did yeah Candace Owens is in
my opinion a cynical person who is
advancing her own cause at expense to
the world however she's very frequently
right okay I don't trust why she says
what she says because I think I can show
you the formula that will generate
exactly what she's gonna think about
anything and I don't you know I don't
know an honest broker for whom that's
true right an honest broker will have
some surprising opinions they'll arrive
just some conclude conclusions you
wouldn't expect
Candace never does so that suggests to
me that Candace isn't for real but if
you think well Candace isn't for real
therefore what she says is wrong you'll
be wrong more than half the time she has
a lot of very awkward things to say that
actually turn out to be true
she just has tapped into that script
yeah she's on script so anyway you have
to be able to recognize the Candace's
right when she's right even if you don't
like why she's saying it and the same
presumably is true for D'Angelo or
anybody else I mean D'Angelo is bound to
be somewhat smart look how well she's
doing yeah oh dear okay we're gonna try
to get through a few more of these
before switching Zack Father's Day is
coming up have you considered buying
your dad a bolo tie that tired bandanna
has got to go there's some great
affordable options that calves endures
calm I feel like a bolo tie would be
less effective against the plague
alright I agree its ability to
protect you from water bound particles
pretty low so yeah not not a huge fan of
that as a personal protective device but
we'll take it under consideration
if a narco communists truly seek to
dismantle hierarchies then how do they
propose to prevent their reconstitution
without resorting to authoritarianism
are they really anarchists as such or is
that just a means to an end mm you got a
mixture you got some some genuine
numbskull so you really believe this
stuff and then you've got some people
who cynically use it to advance their
own cause and very hard to tell them
apart I think the nice thing is we don't
really have to the plan is so bad and so
dangerous tat the point is well anybody
who's espousing that just simply needs
to be kept away from the levers of power
you cannot allow these people near the
levers of power they're too dangerous
right so anyway yeah they're both it's
both true I've met some real real
dyed-in-the-wool anarchists who actually
believe the stuff and then I've met a
lot of people who are using it as an
excuse and that's that's probably fought
her for a dissertation somewhere but at
the moment we just have to keep him away
from stuff that matters yep critical
theory has invaded the partner dance
world including evergreen students
intriguing I don't know who this is but
if you know evergreen students I have
many questions but most pressing is what
arguments can we formulate to try to
reach people whose beliefs reject
objective reality hmm
I don't I don't think there's going to
be a boilerplate answer that works and
to for some people that won't work I
mean we were having this we sort of
continued our disagreement from the end
of the last Q&A at dinner that night I
believe in which I was I was pressing
you for you know there are reachable
people you know there are reachable
people who are not yet reached how is it
that we can you know what can we say
right yep so this is this is I'm glad
you bring that up in response to this
question because I do think it actually
requires some follow-up so I've thought
a lot about why it was that I sound
different with respect to this problem
than I did with respect to students
where I saw almost nobody is
unrecoverable and I think it's it's very
simple I think we're in a much more dire
circumstance and that it effectively you
know it's like the difference between a
doctor who thinks you know there's a
chance I can save that person and a
doctor in wartime where there's a
question of like look this is a matter
of triage I might be able to save that
person on a good day but I can't save
them now because it will cost three
other people's lives to do it right and
so I think when it comes to figuring out
how to talk to people who are beginning
to sound this way you have to ask
yourself a question which is is that
person actually rescue Abul right is
that person actually rescue ballif I
look at all of the people that I would
like to pry away from this mode of
thinking before it's too late how many
of them can I actually reach and who is
the best shot and I just think it's more
dire then then we necessarily imagine
some of the arguments are so
preposterous that it seems all very
cartoonish but this is this is a
live-fire exercise and I would also if I
just say one more thing I said something
about forming the first against the wall
club yeah and I actually believe this
it's not that I want to be first against
the wall but I do think that there's
something to the recognition that
there's no place in the middle to stand
right if you
hedge if you try to stand in the middle
and you try to hold on to what you
actually believe but signal just enough
to the other side that you're sort of
sympathetic to them it's gonna come for
you and so my basic point is look I am
aware that what I am saying will cause
the mob to see me as the enemy and that
they will put me against the wall first
that will be their choice that's what I
mean by it and I don't want it and I
won't let it happen to the extent I can
avoid it
but I know from experience that trying
not to be first against the wall means
that you're not gonna have anywhere to
stand right you're not gonna curry favor
with the mob that way and they're not
gonna spare you in the end so you might
as well make your peace with that fact
actually they're gonna hate me there's
nothing I can do about it so I guess
this this again could be a conversation
you know that we've had for hours then
that we could have publicly but my my
one piece of pushback against that which
you know when you said first against the
wall club in the last live stream
whenever I guess it was 22 and I kind of
I had this immediate sort of recoil I
think and I and I shared this with you
later I think part of that was it's not
that I don't share your values and your
vision but especially if it's you saying
this part of my job as your partner in
life and the mother of your children is
to make sure that we aren't both first
against the wall yeah and so there are
actually different different strategies
that you need to use and that you are
likely to use actually based on what sex
you are in part if you see your partner
doing something that is honorable and
you know that if you were to follow suit
you would create a much greater tragedy
within your own family you know we
aren't talking
I hope about actually being against a
wall but but I mean I remember this when
we were in occupy that you were very
active and I was somewhat active and
there was a moment when we were up there
on the Capitol campus and we had our
kids with us and the police showed up
and I put them behind me and I left
because it was very important that that
I
not be part of something and leave them
with both of their parents somehow
involved in in something that left both
of us unavailable to them yep for kovat
19 to become more adapted to the
outdoors to UV to the vitamin D
environment would it likely give up
quality in other areas of its skill set
how interesting
becoming more of a generalist than its
current form so if so would this be
desirable desirable for us or desirable
for it boy we just don't know enough
about what it is and what it can do to
know but it's certainly possible there's
that there are trade-offs it's an
inherent that I mean well did their
particular trade-offs here that it is
already slid so far over they would have
to give up some of its capacity so the
problem is you will for reasons that
have everything to do with the way we
discussed this thing the way we named it
the way we diagram it you will think
that kovat 19 and SARS co2 are a thing
they're not a thing right there yeah
innumerable things and the problem is if
one part of that thing one strain
figures out a trick that makes it more
generalist it doesn't suddenly force the
rest of them to pay the same price so
there's no value here in it moving in
one direction or another because unless
you shut down the part that didn't move
now you've just got both phenomena so
really this is why some of us are very
adamant about aggressive measures to
limit the spread and frankly I think we
hit the middle ground which isn't that
valuable which is we weren't aggressive
enough we were you know we were
aggressive enough to really screw up the
economy without being aggressive enough
to shut down the virus and I would point
out New Zealand no more cases they seem
to have done it they seem to have done
it now they they're an island there to
island to island yep that's an advantage
um but I think we blew it and one of the
lessons is early decisive action you
know we could have done it in a matter
of weeks if we had been willing to go
far enough and it's
that we may be stuck with this thing
indefinitely yeah okay I just want to
get least through these last so called
orange questions there's just two more
here before we skip switch to the next
ones Brett and Heather thank you both
for continuing to provide such wonderful
content considers considering SpaceX's
ambitious plan for Martian colonization
do you think that careers in
astrobiology will become increasingly
valuable I don't think we're getting
there anytime soon well it doesn't mean
the careers won't be valued if there's
interest in going to Mars even if Mars
is not that happening a place the fact
that there's work on getting to Mars I
think is cool it's a you know it's a
stem job you can be excited about so I
don't know um it's possible I happen to
think Erik shutting down Mars are we
that's a good question shut down Mars
I don't think Mars would put up with it
probably not of all the planets I think
it would be least likely to go along
with that proposal but yeah but in any
case I don't know it's a good question I
hope we need to get past the next six
months before we can really say anything
about how you should plan for the future
because if the future has been canceled
then you don't need to plan for it yeah
okay next question which I'm just gonna
read and say I absolutely
hundred-percent want to come back to
this and in fact it's one it's one thing
in enlarge that you and I and we maybe
have talked about actually writing a
whole book on the question being Tom
finishes by saying thanks for a career
trajectory and much more can you
elaborate on reinventing the wheel
suggests observational techniques
environments which yield phenomena
influenced by evolution sources for
hypothesis falsification etc I mean this
is thank you for the question the this
these things are exactly what how we
taught and why we both ended up becoming
so fond of education and had education
so central to what we did for so many
years despite the fact that neither of
us imagined that that would be what we
did but everything you say here
reinventing the wheel observational
techniques environments which yield
phenomena influenced by evolution
sources for hypotheses falsification we
came at it from so many different angles
you know we did physical computing and a
program on the evolution of humans we do
you know we just did a tremendous number
of things and I want to come back to
this and probably make it at least a
full episode but probably more yeah I
would say more important than sources
realms all of that is just a habit of
mind and the habit of mind of in our
teaching life we we labeled it don't
look it up and the point was we have
this instinct we have such we have
access to such an amazing repository of
information in Wikipedia and elsewhere
where all sorts of things that you want
to know about you can just look them up
and we get so used to the little burst
of dopamine that we get for suddenly
being knowledgeable about something that
a minute ago we wanted to know the
answer to that we don't realize that the
great reward comes from doing the work
before you look it up and then you look
it up right so we used to have run a
field trip into Eastern Washington into
a place called the scablands that has an
amazing origin story which geologists
got wrong for most of the 20th century
and it's very easy to look it up but we
told our students we're gonna take you
there don't look it up and then we're
gonna show you the evidence and we're
gonna see if you can piece together what
happened here and man is it a great
exercise so amazing and we actually we
we give a talk about this at Colorado
College number of years back and wrote a
short essay which is available actually
so we'll link it maybe here it's I think
it's on my academia page yeah don't look
it up don't look it up I would also if I
can just throw one more thing in here we
were in Ecuador we had an assignment for
students there's a pattern of leaf
damage that happens if you walk through
a tropical forest you'll see these lines
of holes in leaves why it's not not
irregular or not snow just it's all in
line of holes and the holes clearly have
some relationship to each other and so
we set students about the question of
what what explains that and they walked
around for weeks and they're driving
different different ecosystems lowland
rain forests jungles cloud forests lots
of places that's a great it's a great
exercise how can I tell you yeah
that one's not so easy to look up I
don't I don't know what it's described
anywhere but anyway do your own work to
stuff even if somebody knows the fact
that you have it they're available to
teach yourself how to think about stuff
is it's worth its weight in gold Hale
professors if we were to steal man the
people of chad's
than is the capitol hill autonomous zone
in Seattle what would the argument be
what would be necessary for a lasting
beneficial movement for the Republic
good question well you have to
understand that steel Manning actually
has an assumption built into it which is
that the people that you are steel
Manning are actually of good faith and
while I do think that there are some
people involved in Chad's who are
probably earnestly of the belief that
anarchy will result in something
glorious many of the people involved are
not and so you can't really steal man
Chazz you could steal man an
individual's perspective on it and I
would say it's you know it's pretty
straightforward the idea that
centralized Authority is bad and that
there by tearing it down will allow the
organic emergence of something better on
the other hand guess what the United
States is the organic emergence of
something better
it is centralized to an extent necessary
but it is also based on the consent of
the governed so the question is what are
you gonna replace with what now all
right I mean we have a system it's
deeply flawed but it's not unrecoverable
and nobody seems to have understood that
if you tear it down you're going to get
warlordism replacing it you're not going
to get some improved version of
civilization or if you did it would be
unnecessary to go through the you know
the bloodshed in in between so what do
you have to so anyway it's hard to steal
man the whole thing but individuals may
be of a utopian perspective in which
case they need to be able to look at the
world around them with clearer eyes
do you differentiate between organic
struggle sessions as in the u.s. right
now and state instituted struggle
sessions as with maoism or are both
leading to the same outcome these these
do look like struggle sessions these do
look so Maoist yeah this this moment
looks evermore you know it's not it's
not students exactly so it's not red
guard exactly but it looks very much
like what was going on in China in the
late sixties to the late 70s yeah I mean
there's a reason to distinguish but I
think the point is okay well that's
interesting there's a twist yeah echo
asks performative solution proposal to
current dead end
giant fake extraterrestrial invasion
with real things to shoot at in the sky
it will create sense of common interest
and growth give tokens when alien ships
down better than above-ground nuclear
testing yes yes better yes for sure
better than above-ground nuclear testing
and yeah having an actual common enemy
yeah would unite us until the common
enemy was gone again all right point
we're back you know just just like the
pandemic shut down a bunch of this
critical theory nonsense for a little
while it was down at a low simmer until
people were fed up and it wasn't clear
that the lockdowns were doing what they
had to do etc etc so the problem is it's
so hard to fake an alien invasion that
at some level is just simpler to get
real aliens sure I mean do a cataloger
I mean if they're monitoring us surely
we can just you know send up a flare
yeah okay Brett I saw your interview on
the origins of game beam a movement that
is now growing are you planning on
staying involved in it or in similar
projects
yeah there's stuff um bubbling that's
looking positive so anyway we'll see
where it goes
but the renewed interesting game be it's
not a moment too soon and as a matter of
fact I argued to them that we were many
moments too late but until we know that
it's not possible we might as well keep
going in that direction you ordered that
to them this week yeah yeah not years
ago when the first meetings were
happening no although I thought it I may
have said them too yeah but you know
we're 30 years too late at
project but it's still possible but you
know things are moving fast so it's
getting too late it is getting more too
late at a very rapid pace calculus
building on what you said about young
adult books these days I mentioned that
in our last and 22 I believe
let's petition to JK Rowling to write
some thank you for the podcast love from
Poland yeah
she's great and you know she's got our
hands full at the moment with Yahoo's
you're coming for her
but yeah she'd be she'd definitely be
one of the ones who I'd look at I've got
I've heard from a few people also
recommending books that aren't quite
haven't quite been translated into
English but are about to be suggesting
that some of the non English why a
literature maybe at least behind English
in terms of its indoctrination with folk
stuff so I would say about Rowling that
I think she is becoming anti fragile I
think yes we've paid the price but she
didn't start out there right there was a
long period of time where I really
thought she was actually a threat to the
value in the Harry Potter series because
she kept saying all this crazy stuff and
so anyway I think there's a model in
there a the amount of money that one has
to have in order to feel safe enough to
just finally speak the truth is more
than it should be
Rowling you know is quite wealthy and
powerful and she can afford to make
enemies and anyway she's leading the way
and the the game plan ought to be that
those of us who for whatever reason are
in a position to face the mob and stare
them down those people create safety for
the people who are slightly less better
positioned from them and if that can be
made to SAS Cade there is hope yes we
need more transparency in general
algorithms and social media governments
etc I also think Brett looks like such a
huggable papa bear so if we ever meet
you do love bears hmm
would you ever consider creating an
evolutionary biology lecture series
maybe yep what do you think about moving
towards a single-payer health care
system we spend the most per capita on
health care yet have 80 million who are
under or uninsured yeah at first pass
again without being at all well enough
expert in this it looks like a far
better system than what we've got yeah I
mean I I would like to improve on what
the rest of the world has discovered but
I do feel like we were paying an
unnecessary price in order not to step
on the financial toes of the extractive
forces that have have there I don't know
their foot on our throat whatever it
wouldn't be yeah exactly and with regard
to the you know I don't know I didn't
know this number I don't know if it's
accurate but the person who asked the
question says there's 80 million people
who are under or uninsured and you know
one of the things that has become
completely apparent to us in the wake of
Evergreen is if you're salaried and your
salary for a big enough company that you
have good health insurance you don't
fully know what all the situation is out
there and so at the moment for instance
we're not underinsured but we are paying
an insane amount of money to be not
underinsured so you know you get you get
ignorant of this from being salaried and
if you've been salaried throughout the
decay of the American healthcare system
you may not have any idea how bad it is
yeah it's a massive failure of empathy
where the people who are most likely to
have the power to fix the system are
least likely to understand how dangerous
the circumstance has become to average
people yeah have you looked at I've no
idea to pronounce this cirques icsea rx
or other personal search engines I've
never heard of it
so no but the idea sounds intriguing
from what I could tell from the question
yeah yeah it's like something beyond
that I do too so that if I don't know if
you guys can hear Zack but Zack just
said I think you may be talking about
DuckDuckGo I have DuckDuckGo set as my
as my default but I don't I I think this
is a little different maybe maybe aren't
we just seeing the nonsensical culture
disputes that accompany demographic
change and transfer of power well you're
looking at a power grab and the problem
is power is very badly distributed so
the desire to see something else gain
power is understandable in fact I think
this is part of what put Trump in office
was just that we were sick and tired of
the same corrupt forces ruling us you
know election after election so anyway
this is another corrupt force but this
corrupt force has co-opted the energy
that might direct us to an improvement
that is to say the amount of energy
being dedicated to a mythological
portrayal of what is wrong and totally
nonsensical solutions that will only put
us in greater danger that energy could
also be directed at something that had
value and what a shame that it isn't
good the next sort of seems like word
salad to me space explore it mistakes
Marvel's absolute Universal I don't know
what that means I agree with it well
widely available psychedelic assisted
psychotherapy help humanity out of our
current situations
well that presumes that psychedelic
assisted psychotherapy will become
widely available but could a widely
available psychedelic assisted
psychotherapy help humanity out of our
current situation I think it's good yeah
but it's not the only thing we need and
it's not for everyone but I think it
could here's the problem
the the truth isn't in the molecules
sure right and so could could this kind
of psychotherapy help people to see more
clearly of course but it has to come
with the material that would allow an
upgrade to your software so somewhere
you have to get the insight that then
gets incorporated into your mind and
actually
what you see so in some sense I don't
trust the mechanism that would you know
in a sea of noisy data I'm not sure that
an amplifier is going to be helpful
right I'm not sure something that breaks
down boundaries and allows you to rewire
around nonsense is going to be helpful
so I'm concerned that those molecules
may be useful in a process but that that
process has other prerequisites in order
to be helpful and the other
prerequisites look pretty rare to me
Latin X in quotes opinions mhm yeah you
may have noticed that the the Boston
mayor's executive order used the term I
think it used the term Latin X and then
when I was speaking about Latino people
afterwards I did not Latino being until
yesterday both the male and the
gender-neutral form of of the of the
more polysyllabic group Latinos and
Latinas I think it's ridiculous
and from what I've from what I
understand from some attempts to look at
this carefully and from my own anecdotal
experiences talking with actual Latinos
most Latinos do too this is this is not
this is not organically coming from a
Latino community community yeah and to
the extent that it is in the Latino
community it's not coming from the
Latino community abroad now he's
beginning to work its way there but what
I would say is first of all there's a
fundamental misunderstanding about what
gendered language is right gendered
language is part of an error correction
program so that one knows what refers to
what dejenne during it creates an
increase in the likelihood of error and
so I would say you could argue that the
terminology of male plugs and female
plugs that we use to describe electronic
components that that is oppressive it is
not oppressive it is a matter of
communicative anatomy it is descriptive
of something and it allows the instant
communication of something that would
otherwise leave us fumbling for words
which thing you were looking for so
that's all true but you know to steal
man Latin X I just I don't think it was
a good faith move to begin with and I've
I've not seen anyone whose intentions I
end up trusting wielding it widely but
to steal man the idea why is it that the
that across all those languages that
have gendered you know such such
gendered terms do is it is it inherently
that the male form is also the
gender-neutral form yeah it would you
know it would appear to disappear women
more than it disappeared as men and you
know this is I I hear this and you know
for for exactly for very closely related
reasons I always was and continue to be
a fan of bringing ms/ms period into the
language because until then whereas you
had mister which doesn't specify
anything about your marital status you
only had miss and missus and why is it
that in order to address me you need to
know whether I'm married because for
almost almost any interaction it's not
relevant so you know Latino as the
gender-neutral term which also would
refer to a man does have a history of I
don't use the word patriarchy because I
really like the word but does have that
history built into it that said I like
the term Latino it works it is you know
imposing linguistic change top-down can
work as it did with MS but in this case
it feels like it's coercive and
wrongheaded alright so I hear what
you're saying and I am a big fan of MS
also but there's a very good reason that
you want to make that change which is
that the value of women was understood
to be reproductive woman's role changed
positively in the sense that they were
integrated into the economy at almost
every level and that therefore a
throwback to a time when women's value
was in conjunction with a man was
hazardous was harmful led to the
impression in every interaction where
those things were invoked that that was
in fact what the person's primary role
was in that interaction so
that needed to be upgraded and in the
case of the gender-neutral issue it
seems to me you can wreck the language
you can destroy the error correction
capacity or you can do what we do in
English right we say guys all right now
I also have been using the
gender-neutral term dude for as long as
I can remember well you know this the
slider for all of us will be somewhere
different you know I personally mankind
doesn't sit right with me even though it
sounds a lot better than humankind but I
use humankind okay
because for me mankind really does feel
like it's very explicitly not like
Latino but much more about referring to
an era in which the people who were
studying humans were actually coming not
just through a male lens themselves but
actually applying that bias to how they
understood the world whereas Latino
doesn't have any such history as I
understand it right and so hey I agree
with you I I don't know whether I say
mankind I certainly wouldn't object to
saying mankind I tend to say humanity
but I don't think it's not conscious
yeah but what I would say is the ability
to broaden the term guys right so that
it doesn't have a gendered component
yeah or dude is actually I mean I must
tell you dude I now have a problem with
it again even though for decades I did
not why because if I run into a trans
woman and I say dude what am I saying
yeah so even though I said we got you
know if unless it's someone that you
know who you know well even if this if
this is if this is one of the very few
interactions you will have with them and
they you know they are not around you
enough to see you call me dude right and
you know other women dude then you maybe
intentionally or unintentionally
misgendering them right in fact you're
using as a gender-neutral term which has
its origin in gender right exactly it is
it is a very confusing and incoherent
moment but in general what I would say
is the good intentions of the people you
are talking to matter a great deal more
then the little nuances of how we put
the words together and disrupting our
ability to communicate effectively in
order to solve a problem that if it
exists is minor is a mistake the most
important thing is that we are able to
talk to each other and know what is
being said and to do so clearly and
frankly if this is a problem that needs
to be solved it needs to be put at the
end of the list we have so many more
dire problems than the problem with the
term Latino that it can afford to wait
until civilization has been saved and
the Republic is once again secured and
all of these things yeah okay
well let me just quickly scroll through
and see if there's anything else that
jumps out at me is something we 100%
want to get to here there's a question
about the Dark Knight trilogy which we
just don't know enough about probably to
answer someone still thinks we still
know what anarchism is if you want to
riff on that while I just check there's
anything else here all I would say is
I've spent so much time arguing with
anarchists that if I don't get it
there's just something immeasurably
wrong with me but my basic sense is look
when I'm in chaos I say chaos when I
mean Anarchy I say I narky the fact that
what I am saying and what I am calling
Anarchy many of the people I'm
describing would also call Anarchy tells
me that the problem isn't with me right
if you think that there is a problem
with what I'm describing is Anarchy then
you need to get the people who are also
describing it as Anarchy who are part of
it to stop describing it that way okay
there are a number of good things here
so I think we're just going to end on
this comment I was when you were talking
about anonymity being very recent I was
trying to think about that there must be
examples from history in which anonymity
was possible and so this person has said
anonymity has not recent ancient Greece
and Rome with the butcher the
pronunciation ledges to belly area use
secret ballot pseudonyms are also a form
of anonymity as in the Federalist Papers
now wait a second
when I say recent I speak as an
evolutionary biologist anything's yes I
was where you really I thought you were
speaking about 20th bench
of written language is Rison okay and
does provide the opportunity for
anonymity so I'm well aware of these
examples but my point is look some part
of us was built in an ancestral past it
goes way earlier than this that didn't
there was no possibility of anonymity
because the person was either there or
not there
right they were either having their
statement reported to you by somebody
who is there and could be asked who said
that to you or not and so the idea that
writing is recent doesn't jibe well with
what most people have learned because
what most people have learned is so
heavily biased into what we call history
but history itself is that which took
place after a written record was
possible right so prehistory is much
longer than history and it has a lot to
do with how we view the world
so anyway forgive me for not being clear
about that but yeah the Greeks pretty
recent all right I think that's it all
right
well this has been interesting I would
ask actually please would you tell us if
there are clips in this or in the main
live stream that you think we ought to
separate out how do you okay maybe you
could email the darkhorse moderator is
our curse moderator mm-hmm you could
also attempt to put them in the chat but
probably better to email the darkhorse
moderator all right please like
subscribe comment shake your fists share
this thing around whatever you need to
do timestamps would apparently be great
if you suggest clips that would make it
much easier for us to find them okay
thanks B well everybody and we'll see
you soon
you