all righty everybody so thank you again
for coming out I know you've got plenty
of stuff to do on a Thursday evening in
San Diego so what we're gonna do is
we're going to just talk a little bit
about nootropics optimization but I want
to make sure that this is a
collaborative process so if you have
questions in the middle feel free raise
your hand just don't feel bashful and
any sense so to start off with I'm going
to let my fellow panelists introduce
themselves
he'll tell me a little bit tell us a
little bit about themselves and what
they're working on so Mike right on um
my name's Mike Bledsoe I'm the host of a
show called barbells Shrugged and we've
been in the game for about six years
health and fitness and my job is super
cool and the things I'm up to are great
because I get to mix it up with the best
in the world so I get exposed to the
best coaches the best athletes the best
people that are seeking performance in a
lot of different areas so it's it's it's
really what it's really fun exciting
that's what I get to do and I'm always
inspired to do better because if you all
I'm surrounded by so of course and I
have to like up it up somehow yeah so
that's pretty loud okay
just to add Mike is actually being a
little bit modest his his podcast as the
number one Fitness related podcast in
iTunes and that's why he could sort with
the best people in the world it's epic
worth listening to and it was my first
time to see this today I don't know if
it was your first time it was fun
getting to watch with everybody so I run
research and development at neuro hacker
collective and we're working on the
tropics is just one category the tropics
means come
cognitive enhancement but all things
mind brain optimization and health and
moments related and then not just mind
brain but kind of future of medicine is
within the scope of things that we're
working on so it's a great segue so
speaking of future of Medicine one of
the topics that I brought up was this
idea that nootropics in some way could
lead to Humanity solving greater
challenges how could we make that a
reality how is that possible yeah it was
a fun way to end the movie this is hi
reverb for me is it alright if I just
share that with you yeah that is better
so the question is can no Tropics really
play a significant role in solving world
challenges yeah it's not a yes-or-no
question too nuanced one so hang in with
me a little bit most of the problems
that we face globally or have as a
common denominator that they're caused
by human action whether we're looking at
climate change or species extinction or
war or slavery like these are human
action induced issues and even the
things like natural disasters that
aren't human action induced still have
to be human action modulated right like
we knew that the tsunami was going to
hit Japan five years before Fukushima
happen we just didn't preemptively
respond appropriately that happens all
the time and so pretty much all of the
major issues in the world are going to
be addressed by humans they're not going
to be addressed that we made worse
better etc and so human physiology is
one of the things that predisposes
patterns of human behavior human
psychology in terms of their education
their media their culture their trauma
is all part of it what macroeconomics
incentivizes and what the social systems
incentivize as a part of it so there's a
lot of things that influence human
behavior the physiology is one of them
and typically when we think of
physiology and human behavior we're used
to thinking of it as a Analia Bowl
genetic thing you have people who are
genetically
prone towards psychopathy or
Compassion's is mostly nonsense there
are genetic predispositions but they
still are going to those genes are going
to express or not based on things that
are modulated well and things like
hormones and neural chemistry and gut
brain access affect people's mood and
their quality of life but also their
behavior pretty radically and those are
inducible things and so like that's the
pose a whole driving motive for neural
hackers that when we can help people
optimize their chemistry and their
physiology that doesn't just increase
quality of life subjectively it also
increases their capacity and that can be
capacity and disposition right so like
not just general capacity but capacity
and orientation towards some things
versus others like as as soon as you get
that empathy runs on certain neural
networks and is mediated by certain
kinds of chemistry you can either up or
down regulate it and there are like many
of the smart drugs that increase focus
our attention also decrease empathy that
would increase the capacity to do the
wrong things right so that would be
exactly the wrong direction so looking
at human physiology comprehensively and
saying can we increase our ability for
complex problem-solving right if you
think about how do you solve the
increasing radicalization between the
left and the right you have to be able
to hold multiple different perspectives
that are very different simultaneously
to find solutions if you don't have
enough working memory you just can't
actually do that if you don't have the
hardware substrate for complex thinking
you can't do that we also have to have
the emotional disposition to feel like
you can address very hard things so
emotional resilience and drive and
motivation and empathy and those are not
caused by chemistry they're influenced
by it in a complex system like human
physiology the concept of cause actually
doesn't make sense there are too many
causal vectors interacting so we think
about disposition and chemists neural
chemistry creates different kinds of
human dispositions so the whole reason
that we created it was can we decrease
individual human suffering and increase
their subjective quality of life and
increase their likelihood to behave in
ways that decrease suffering and
increase the quality of life for
everything else at the effect so it
sounds like in your judgment at the
neuro a core collective
changing the the physiology is one of
the most important first steps for
solving the global challenges it is a
necessary step yeah and one of the
things you mentioned empathy has been
you know one of the one the most
important learning experiences for me
has come from psychedelic compounds and
somebody who I know has a lot of
experience thorough experience with
psychedelics is Mike can you tell me
about some of the tell me about the the
most profound experience that you've had
with the psychedelics and specifically
the empathy component because I I think
that speaks to the the solving of global
challenges yeah the the most profound
that one's a hard one to put a finger on
but I would say my first major
psychedelic experience you know was was
probably the most major paradigm shift
that I that I had and empathy played a
really big part or was a was a huge
result of that first psychedelic journey
and I I actually was the week prior had
been attending a marketing conference so
I think about psychedelics that I found
is you have a seed what you want to get
out of the experience beforehand and you
can do that intentionally or it might
get snuck in on you and so for me I was
attending a marketing conference and we
were I'm good at business until I'm
doing this empathy exercise and then I
couldn't do it for some reason I had
this hit that I should eat mushrooms and
I get home and I had never eaten
mushrooms before but I knew that my
little brother grew them and I always
always thought you know
oh my little brother he he's a hippie I
used to make fun of him for doing it and
then next thing I know I'm asking him
for some and I got lucky I I did it
right most people don't do it well the
first time so I got lucky in a lot of
way
you know and I had good intentions going
in and I went to a dog park don't don't
go to a dog park for your first time on
mushrooms but I go to a dog park and I
I eat probably you know two and a half
three grams of mushrooms and I'm having
an incredible experience and I'm
listening some music and I'm looking at
the sky the entire sky goes fractal and
then it falls inside of my head and I
realized that everything that I'm seeing
in the world is just simply my own
personal view of the world and that was
like mind blowing and then people start
getting off work and it's great thing
about being an entrepreneur is I'm
meeting mushrooms on a Tuesday afternoon
you know 3 o'clock but other people are
getting off work and they're bringing
their dogs to the dog park and I see
that they're not giving me their dogs
the full attention they're on the phone
and they're or they're texting and
they're kind of giving their dog just
like some attention but I can tell the
dog didn't pin up all day not getting
any attention it's freaking out I'm
going hey pay attention your dogs people
but it was then that I realized that I
did the same thing to my dog when I
bring my dog doc Park and then I do the
same thing to my wife and I do the same
thing to my mom and my clients I realize
I don't actually listen to anybody
I'm always just waiting to like impose
myself on what's happening and that day
was the first day I actually stopped and
listened to people and I got home and I
talked to my wife and she cried within
five minutes of seeing me because for
the first time I was listening to her
and we'd been married for like four
years at that point and it was just
really incredible and I remember going
to bed that night worried that it was
going to wear off that I was gonna wake
up the next day and I wasn't gonna have
the awareness I wasn't going to have the
ability to to engage and listen and
really connect
with other people I woke up the next day
and I was fine I I it really stuck and
yeah that was you know that was the
start you know and I say I'm lucky
because my first experience was so
positive and I did it I did it well and
I for whatever reason did a good job of
integrating the experience into my daily
life afterwards and after that I said to
myself man there's something really to
this and began experimenting and trying
to recreate that situation in a lot
different ways for myself and for
friends and I would say for for me and
the people who I've done things with
it's been a real positive experience so
with the with such a profound experience
I think there's still plenty of
misconceptions around psychedelics
Daniel how do
- not only dispel the misconceptions
about psychedelics but even just
nootropics even using nootropics
as kind of the stepping stone to
improving people's feelings of safety
with these kind of substances um one
small distinction that's worth making is
psychedelics and in pathogens have an
overlap but they're not the same thing
and so there are psychedelics that
commonly improve people's empathy some
people can actually have a collapse of
empathy on psychedelics because they d
personalize and then they can't they
don't even take themselves as real and
then nobody else is real and then
everything's a video game right so they
actually have to know how to integrate
that and personalize it and then there
are empathic genic chemicals that are
very oriented towards increasing
endogenous empathy process like oxytocin
and vasopressin and then some of the
phenyl acyl amines so MDMA classically
and that sub psychedelic doses that
really increase people's sense of
feeling and are connected with and
vicarious experience of other people so
if people are wanting to explore empathy
it is a specific set of ways to go about
doing it and then with any state
altering thing the cognitive models
through which you interpret the
experience and ZUP being the big thing
right because if you have an experience
where you kind of melt into everything
right and then you come back and the
interpretation is this is a video game
projected by my mind we can actually
damage empathy because nobody else is
real they're projections of your mind or
if you say oh there's a field of energy
that we're all interconnected
expressions of you can have increased
sense of empathy so working with making
sure you get the cognitive
interpretation of the experience right
it's key that actually relates to the
safety topic the safety is not just the
safety of the chemical it's the chemical
and the dose it's done in and the purity
of it and the set and setting and the
model through which it's interpreted
right it's like all of those things
that's true for anything right like I
said a minute
small amounts when you have a fever can
be useful and in large amounts can cause
liver damage so that's that's kind of
true across the board in terms of
people's sense of safety I think like
what maps is doing with actual clinical
trials is super valuable we need a lot
more clinical trials showing that Maps
is the multidisciplinary Association for
psychedelic science and they're the ones
that are doing mdma-assisted
psychotherapy right now and curing PTSD
and anxiety disorders
so when psychedelic science first
started in the 40s 50s and 60s it was a
different time in the pharma company
history and there was a pretty strong
suppression of psychedelics being able
to be utilized as pharmaceutical
medicines
so like when Stan Grof was showing that
they could cure depression and radically
faster with LSD psychedelic assisted
psychotherapy in University of Budapest
in the 40s just got completely shut down
here and the research didn't get it
happen and there there are different
reasons but one of the big reasons is
patentability so I think doing proper
trials and is good but that's just going
to be able to bring them into drugs for
psychiatric purposes that's very
different than people's experimentation
as far as just jurisprudence goes they
should all be legal and all drugs even
the really shitty ones should be legal
and then effective methods of
encouraging healthy choice should happen
at the societal level right because
making something illegal from what we
have found and pretty much all the
social science across all the countries
doesn't decrease use it just increases
risky black market Association impure
stuff and for teenagers and people in
rebellion that she increases the lure of
the forbidden and so when you
decriminalize like happen in Portugal in
different places you actually get less
death less addiction even for the drugs
that we really don't want people using
because they say before you like heroin
I know in criminalize across the border
and then increase education and
and psychotherapy supported all things I
think there's another another key thing
is like most people weren't most people
don't trip out of a Tylenol even though
we have 18,000 deaths associated per
year with Tylenol that's right
and the same is true with sugar even
though sugar absolutely increases cancer
Alzheimer's like many serious
life-threatening diseases so there's
just like and then you look at TSA and
all that goes into TSA for healthy
people have ever died associated with
plane crashes from terrorism and then
you look at how many people die peanut
allergies per year right which it's in
the tens of thousands and we just have a
wrong way of way risk-benefit ratio and
so part of Empowered responsibilities
that people just study on their own they
don't just defer to an authority like a
doctor they actually and they don't do
shitty study like they study well enough
to actually understand cause and effect
and consequence and then be able to make
their own in our choices so I'm gonna
play devil's advocate here we want to
improve our cognitive performance
whether it be through just nootropics
or pathogens like a telex so if we would
benefit from being enhanced cognitively
why haven't we evolved to be that way as
of now one of the biggest questions in
evolutionary biology is why we have
these huge cortices mm-hmm like
we have that's kind of the point is if
you if you like think about LA when
you're flying into LA and think about
the what you see right the sprawl and so
many miles as far as you can see if just
orthogonal grid the humans have made and
then realize that next to us the most
environment modifying creatures of
beaver and think about what our cortex
capacity for abstraction and tool
creation has done in terms of being able
to have a geologic age right now the
Anthropocene that where the biggest
force created affecting the geology of
our whole planet has human activity like
this so we
we did our our selectively adaptation
was intelligence and specific kinds of
intelligence specifically abstraction
abstraction you know you can look at
pain pleasure responses mediated by the
dopamine opioid access in the reptilian
of the system and then which are kind of
go towards and go away from I'm gonna
oversimplify but generally and then
emotional responses that mediate more
complex social behavior in the mammalian
or the system and then cognitive
processing is in the primate and a whale
in a dolphin porpoise kind of nervous
system the neocortex and then prefrontal
cortices in kind of unique human
structures and the prefrontal give
abstraction not just thought but thought
reflecting on thought so I don't just
have an experience of self but I can
have a concept of self other than the
experience himself in the moment I can
have a concept of time my ability have a
concept of time allows me to measure
 in the past and over time and
abstract mathematical laws and get
science right so a gorilla or a chimp
will notice what which rock is sharpest
if it's trying to cut something and
it'll use the sharpest one and if you
give it a knife it'll use that because
experientially it's sharper but it
doesn't design knives because sharpness
is an abstract principle the concept of
sharpen it's independent of this sharp
thing with this sharp thing we can
understand that in in design a sharper
knife for designing right whatever
including that same capacities that
capacities allowed us to understand our
brain chemistry see how it's been
evolving through the early hominins
seeing what chemicals are associated
with which kinds of processes look at
the regulatory dynamics that are
involved in that and look at how do we
support and aid those so one of the
interesting things is we are the first
creature that can actually understand
consciously all those dynamics and then
consciously participate with them and
that doesn't mean hacking nature or
being above nature it means that nature
evolved increasing orderly complexity
until it has a creature that can
understand and consciously participate
with it what I initially was alluding to
was maybe you're familiar with the paper
by Nick Bostrom where he essentially
questions
you know if we have all these optimizers
perhaps we shouldn't be that are
optimized and from what I'm hearing it
sounds like there's we still have you
know plenty of opportunity especially in
the realm of empathy well Nick's
statement is true and it's important and
it's related to Tim's statement of no
biologic free lunch and it's actually
related the concept of optimization so
if if I take adderall which is going to
increase dopamine it is a presynaptic
dopamine agonist that's going to
increase focus and attention right focus
and concentration in particular and
motivation now I am increasing my
neurologic orientation towards focus and
concentration but I'm actually
decreasing my body's ability to produce
its own dopamine if I do that ongoingly
I'm decreasing the sensitivity of the
dopamine receptors and since I'm
flooding so much dopamine into those
receptors I'm also decreasing activity
in the synapse of a whole bunch of other
chemicals including things like
acetylcholine that are mediating memory
right so I'm optimizing for one thing at
the expense of another in a zero-sum
fashion but notice that dopamine is a
single molecule focused on egg
externally exogenously overriding a
single pathway as opposed to how do we
actually increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of the entire system so
that it's more adaptive across the scope
of everything that it does and so if you
think about someone who is very out of
shape and then they start exercising and
they do CrossFit they lose weight they
get fit they can actually have their
just a more adaptive being across the
scope of everything right now if they
start going too heavily into heavy
weights and they lose flexibility now
they're optimizing one thing at the
expense of another
that's why cross-leg kind of got popular
and the idea of generalized increase of
the capacity of the whole system for all
functions you can think of that
biochemically as well if we increase the
efficiency of cellular metabolism and
cellular process if we increase the
die-off of old cells at AA the G and the
production of new neural stem cells
that's basically just a healthier
system so if we think of optimizing in a
zero-sum way where we're over earring
the system towards one thing at the
expense of others that's a problem and
that's pretty much almost all drugs
which is why you would want to use them
not that often right and not that often
is fun but if you think about how do we
increase system health and resilience
physiologically and neural
then you can get nonzero-sum and so then
you're you can increase the adaptive
capacity to go from like classic example
is when I want focus I want the ability
to hold attention on something and not
get distracted but task switching is the
ability to fluidly move between tasks as
I need you to be adaptive most things
will give you one or the other but my
own ideal flow state would be that I can
focus intensely and ignore things that
are noise but also be able to still
discern is it noise or is it not noise
and then be able to tasks switch fluidly
and so given that those are operating
through totally different circuits in
the brain if you would want to be you
would want to be optimizing for the
overall capacity of the system to move
between those kinds of states how would
you for a beginner who's just introduced
to new topics how would you recommend
somebody understand especially those two
different you know switching states of
the brain how would you recommend
because I mean many people just believe
that one thing one drug consistently is
the solution how would I recommend that
they they what are the kind of the
beginning steps of understanding these
two different processes that you explain
one thing focus and concentration the
other being kind of being able to
discern you know various tasks those
terms I'm not exactly sure had an answer
I mean if you want to think about task
switching there are a number of networks
in the brain that are involved in task
switching there's a number of things
from a computational point of view like
which brain frequencies you're in and
from a neurochemical point of view that
are in
and they quote all those same things of
course that we can identify with focus
and concentration but that's just one of
the dialectics right there's many like
but we want to be able to learn new
things we also want to be able to forget
all things a huge part of healing is
actually kind of selective loss of
Association so when you sleep at night
one of the things that happens is your
astrocytes or microglia to go in and
cleave old synapses that are no longer
useful so that you don't have these
automatic triggered associations between
things that are no longer relevant
that's why they use it or lose it thing
but it's also super critical so it's
like do we want to build new synapses to
create a new connection and automate new
learning or do we want to cleave old
synapses to dissociate things that we
don't want associated anymore both
pretty much everything worthwhile lives
in dialectic was something that's almost
the opposite thing our ability to be
totally in the moment and our ability to
think about the future and do time
management and delayed gratification our
ability to be outside of ourselves like
Jamie wheel was talking about and have a
sense of no self just being flow and our
ability to be very self-reflective and
with a more functional sense of self so
what I would say is whatever you think
is the thing top demise fine with the
opposite thing of that that also seems
meaningful is and make sure that
whatever you're doing is actually
addressing both sides of that dialectic
so speaking of healing I want to come
back to you Mike and I want to talk
about ayahuasca which has definitely
entered the mainstream consciousness
lately and you've been somewhat of a
proponent of using it can you speak to
your experience with ayahuasca maybe
some of the pitfalls that are the
following people today yeah and into
what Daniel was saying a lot of its
forgetting no maybe not forgetting but
having a different association with
something that happened in the past and
so a lot of a lot of my psychedelic
experiences
me is just that and especially I think
ayahuasca is especially good at that
which is helping you go back to the past
see a situation from a different
perspective and have a different
association with it for me there was I
was I went to do ayahuasca to optimize
you know someone asked me before I was
going to Peru oh you're gonna go to I
was like I don't know you know it seems
like I mean honestly I went down to Peru
because I wanted to get there before
everyone else did
so uh this is getting popular you know I
want to go before it becomes too
touristy and and I want like the the
gold-standard experience and I
definitely got that and you know in my
my first experience I went back and
really got to look at my childhood which
most people don't take the time to
reflect on what happened to them as a
child and how that might impact who they
are today and you know I spent an entire
night in really deep reflection and it
was a really painful agonizing process
it was I purged over a dozen times
throwing up and it was it was really
terrifying in nature really and I've
done a lot of things that people would
consider terrifying in my life and
that's definitely a top five probably
number one yeah be completely honest
because there is this you have to go
through a death and rebirth that to know
if you have to but my experience was
going through a death and rebirth with
ayahuasca and every time I've done
ayahuasca there's been a complete
letting go of who I thought I was going
into nothingness reintegrating and it
really feels like a defrag you know
you've got all your memories spread out
over your heart
drive and every time you're trying to do
something you're tripping over you know
these memories and what I like to really
think about what it does is helps you
see all the memories put them in a nice
orderly fashion and then that way you
can like step on top of them and it
creates a really nice solid foundation
for you to move forward instead of it
being in your way and in the way of the
path and creating barriers but yeah I
think ayahuasca super helpful I think
most I'm not sure everybody is supposed
to do it you know it's it's a fairly
adventurous thing to take on and I think
you know I would say the the year year
and a half after I get it I did feel
like everybody should do it and I think
anyone who has a huge life-changing
experience can get excited about that
and that that's just in line with my
personality that's who I am I discover
things and I like to tell everybody
about it like how you should do this too
and I'm now live long enough to know
that not everybody should do everything
but it's I think for I think of enough
people where to do it
the there'd be enough healing and enough
people walking around holding that that
improved perspective that would you know
raise the global consciousness so I saw
you shaking your head there can you
elaborate on a maybe who might consider
not doing it and then for someone who's
curious what kind of process they can go
through to determine if it's right for
them sure ayahuasca specifically yes but
you can elaborate on others as well as
you see that yeah outside outside of
like water there's not that many things
that are right for everybody if you even
just think about diet and something like
lectin sensitivity right how many people
do really and on a whole plant diet
versus how many people and it's the most
anti-inflammatory thing and other people
have a specific type of sensitivity and
they get inflamed on
plans and that's true for pretty much
any diet that you can think of any food
type and it's the same for most types of
chemistry so you know if you if you go
to our website and look at quality it
says do not take if you have and there's
a bunch of things where it's not
recommended for everybody now as you get
into more and more potent things those
not recommended for get more important
and ayahuasca is about as potent as you
can get so a few things if people have
anxiety issues they're dealing with if
they have PTSD that they're dealing with
if they have any schizophrenic kinds of
tendencies I don't recommend doing it
without psychiatrist supervision there
are some psychiatrists psychologists
that are well trained in both the kind
of ancient traditions the
psychopharmacology of it and also how to
do the right therapy DEQ's with it but
across the board without that I just
wouldn't recommend because it's those
are the conditions that make it too easy
to go into terror or existential breaks
now you can actually help heal some of
those benefits of those conditions done
rightly with the right psychedelics but
it's much more sensitive scenario
there's a lot the risk is higher so it
needs to be handled more carefully you
know you've also got that one of the
ingredients in ayahuasca is an MAO B
inhibitor and mao-b inhibitors are great
for a lot of people the mao-b levels
raise with age across the board so
pharmaceutical mao-b inhibitors like
Debra Nell have been associated with
anti-aging and some of the best state
anti-aging drugs but for people who have
already low mao-b levels genetically
which is chunk of the population has
they'll have a pretty bad experience so
the main thing I would say is find
someone to do it with it's very well
trained and they should ask you all
these questions so one question that you
touched on in the documentary that I
want to come back to for elaboration is
this
fear associated with taking many of
these nootropic supplements when there
isn't direct research or data because
we've kind of are in a different
paradigm as far as funding research is
concerned how do we or have an intro fix
users feel safe in using these
substances over the long term it's
actually a very nuanced question in the
disease State when we're looking at
drugs to cure disease there's a there's
consequence of not carrying the disease
right which is the ongoing pathology of
the disease so there's a higher risk
tolerance based on how severe the
disease is so if we were willing to take
pretty high risk tolerance for in
terminal cancer right for what the drug
might do one of the issues with
optimization like life extension
therapies and increase capacity
therapies is you're treating well people
and so how much risk tolerance are you
willing to have for no disease right
it's it's a it's a real and nuanced and
important issue and so that's one thing
another thing is that when you talk
about how well-known inotropic is this
again comes to which know tropics and
how much steady someone does so for
instance checks you mentioned central
Phenix seen in their centers actually
not a new drug that was developed in the
50s and we did a meta-analysis on that
we did a structured literature review
there 186 scientific studies published
in countries all around the world we
went and back and found before internet
when they were still just in libraries
somewhere in Russian or whatever the
language translated them because one of
the thorough meta-analysis including the
animal trials in human trials and I
would say that the safety data on that
is extremely clear right it's it if you
actually do a proper structured review
there are people who misunderstand it
because they didn't do that well but the
safety data is actually quite clear it
went through the process of becoming a
prescription drug during the whole time
it was a prescription drug it had you
know very serious regulatory process
that went through whereas say if we look
at soon if Ram it's been out almost no
period of time it's been a couple years
not that many people have used it we
have no long-term effects we haven't
done animal trials I I have a very
different risk tolerance now at least
with soon if Ram the mechanism that it's
acting on our mechanisms we know pretty
well for other things then you take
something like p21 where it's operating
through mechanisms we don't understand
that all and it hasn't been tested that
much or SR 9009 I don't think people
should be taking those like now that
said there are people who will take them
anyways just like all the early steroid
users and it's an interesting thing
because ethically scientists could never
put people on those things before they
had done the animal trials and whatever
but the knowledge of endocrinology got
radically advanced by the steroid users
because they and some of them like
 themselves up and method life
abut we've got human data because they
chose to do it anyways and recorded the
the info I would say the kind of elite
athletes hackers have always been who
who are fast adopters now a high risk
tolerance have always kind of done that
I don't want to encourage that but I'll
definitely factor the evidence that
comes out of it in further development
so you know what is right in uh tropics
use it's neither like the emotional
stance someone should take is a
tremendous amount of respect for how
complex the regulatory process of this
is and but not come at it with fear or
foolishness right they come at it with
just appropriate reasonable study and I
do think there are categories of
nootropics that are extremely safe
benign and well researched and other
ones that are extremely exciting and I
wouldn't put them in those people yet so
I want to open it up for any questions
again before we wrap up if anybody has
any questions whether it be about the
documentary for Mike or Daniel about any
of their topics of interests then please
go ahead otherwise we will wrap up for
the evening
all right if you guys could just mention
a little bit about where they can find
you barbell shrugged and I think most
these people know their own hacker
collective but yeah it's got a barbell
shrug calm and you'll there's a lot of
places you can go from there but you'll
find some interesting stuff if you look
go down some rabbit holes yeah stuff
that we're doing at neural hacker calm
and thank you for putting that movie
together
that was rad it was fun first
documentary on nootropics that I'm aware
of
so thank you did you thank you guys for
all for coming out as well
you