welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
let's begin check-ins some horny and
nervous maybe about 30 in between 30 to
40 percent for each and it's coated in
its stillness as well so welcome to the
stoah I'm the Stewart of the stoah Peter
Lindbergh the Stowe is a place for us to
cohere and dialogue about what matters
most at the knife's edge of this moment
and today we have maybe gray I don't
know how to introduce maybe gray so
maybe she can introduce herself in a
moment but I discovered her on Twitter
and she seems to be part of the
rationalists post rationals community
and she's a part of something called
only fans which I basically discovered
last month through Raven so we're gonna
talk about that and that how it's gonna
go
is that we're gonna have a 90 minute
conversation with with all of us
so if you have to leave out the hour
mark feel free and if you have a
question put in the chat box
well mute you you can ask it and then
we'll go from there so that thing said
maybe how you doing you guys I'm doing
good um I might introduce myself as
something that you would call like an e
girl someone who spends a lot of time
having an online presence that's
centered on being a feminine identified
person and relating to people primarily
from from that kind of a lens because I
think it's an important ones right now
um and part of being an e girl for me is
being on only fans only fans is a
website that got really popular in the
last little while maybe partly because
of the whole pandemic situation where
men can pay a monthly subscription for
access to photos videos chat with with a
girl who performs and post adult content
there um there's a lots of really
interesting stuff that I think we could
talk about around what only fans me
to people right now and why it might be
so popular but I'm really excited to
talk about just like our experiences of
sexuality in general and how we can
communicate better about them so why'd
you start only fans or why'd you start
to go on it um I had in the past done
sex work online as a full-time sort of
gay briefly I used to be sort of one of
those girls who is on the sub reddits
and would end up bringing boys from from
there to patreon and having kind of a
similar sort of subscription style um
but I found that to do it all the time
and to do it as your main source of
income required a sort of relationship
that was much more transactional than
what I really enjoyed about providing
adult content it felt less like
exhibitionism and more like work in a
way that wasn't fun and another thing I
found was that venturing out so far into
the open water of the Internet and
providing free adult content tended to
attract some bad apples that would would
you know interact with me in ways that
were scary and it became not worth it to
like pursue it as a full-time thing but
when only fans became popular again they
sort of provided a place where I could
set a permeable boundary around which
kind of men were interacting with my
contents it doesn't interest me anymore
to really use that as my main source of
income at all but just having like the
price of a latte every month uh to see
my adult content seems to have this
magical effect of weeding out those bad
actors who would ruin it for all of the
nice guys who just enjoyed a little bit
of like supportive attention when
they're expressing sexual attraction and
it's been really nice it's been a really
nice place for me to do what I naturally
enjoy doing being an exhibitionist
little like model girl whatever you'd
like to call it and
and men like it too it's nice to be
there for them it's nice to be a woman
who is like responsive and receptive to
expressions of attraction from men in a
mimetic environment that's often really
hostile to men regardless of their
sexualities yeah we talked on Monday
when I mentioned you had a journal my
journals that I do daily I started
put you in a category which you don't
belong into like this meta modern woman
trying to make a buck and then the you
know the many princes and you seen you
push back and said no I'm doing this
because I actually love it and I was
surprised but not surprised in a way so
I'm curiously if you can like unpack
that desire what do you get out of it
and what do you think you know you're
only fans get out of it um I think for
me there's a big way in which I am
reclaiming my my sense of sexuality
through art I was in relationships as a
young girl that were rougher and my
sexuality didn't initially feel like it
belongs to me I felt like something that
I liked had to kind of like negotiate
how much I was going to have to give
away just because of the nature of the
world so to be able to come to a place
where that's not the way that I relate
with men anymore and instead I feel like
my sexuality is very much in my own
frame on my own terms and an expression
of like joy and togetherness and it's
nice to feel like you can present
yourself and your sexuality in an
aesthetic way and not feel objectified
you you can do it in a way that for you
is very human and I think it makes a
difference I think when you when you're
doing it from a place that's not
transactional and you're doing it from a
place of like expressing a part of
yourself that is deeply human and deeply
beautiful
I think people resonate with it in a
different way and I think the
relationships that I have with my fans
or clients or whatever you'd like to
call them end up being much more like
friendships and much less like
transactions
it's it's interesting because you use
the term often the pair of social
relationships and I thought I'm the only
person that actually knew what that term
meant so maybe you can kind of tell us
what that term means for you and how
that kind of comes about because it
seems almost counter to what you just
said about actually being friends it's
true I think that one thing that anybody
who's tried to start a project or get
people interested in knows is that
there's a way that you sort of have to
funnel attention towards yourself so at
the broad level you you don't
automatically have full genuine social
relationships with the people that
you're interacting with when you're
putting your presence out there online
at the first interaction level the the
sort of relationships people are forming
with you our parasocial they're they
experienced as like almost friendship
for one of the people involved who are
interacting with the contents but
because at that point I don't get to
know you on the other side of the camera
or whatever at all it's not social for
me yet it's not it's not genuine for me
I am putting forward an online presence
that might sometimes seem like it's
addressing you directly but it's
actually just kind of broadcast to the
world at that first interaction level so
at that at that point the parasocial
relationship is all that's available but
that doesn't mean that it's not offering
anything valuable I think that even just
by being a presence that's out there
genuinely broadcasting a general
disposition to be positive around
sexuality whether it's experienced by
meal or female identified people people
who are vanilla people who are kinky
just general sex positivity in a pair of
social context is already like stealing
the culture back from this sort of
watered down hook up wanting to be
desirable more than actually do the work
kind of mentality that I think we're all
stuck in the nice thing about being able
to offer something so valuable at that
broadcast level at that parasocial level
is that it is so so tempting to people
we are so so hungry for something a
little bit
I see er then just porn hub and I think
for a lot of people including men it's
to decontextualized to just be watching
videos of girls doing erotic things
there's just not enough there to really
feel like it it gets you know that those
crush feelings that often go along with
our sexual feelings we want the romance
to and so only fans is responding to
this need in the market for for women
and for men to have a little bit more
connection even if it's still in this
like flirty sexual kind of realm and and
as people are drawn in some people are
drawn in really really close
some people are drawn in right into my
heart and I'm drawn in right into theirs
and what starts out as parasocial
absolutely progresses into a genuine
like full social friendship and and and
and that's not something that I offer on
only fans that's not something that I
can offer in return for the process of
price of a lot a month that's something
that's gonna happen because it's like
something we're both called to or or
we're just gonna pass each other in the
night and that's beautiful too but
that's what I'm really there for is for
the people who are gonna make it from
that like broadcast level thing that I
have to offer all the way to like a deep
collaborative shared life experience
yeah I love that about that what's
coming to mind is sort of like my active
daily journal writings and they have a
pair of social quality to because people
are reading them like I think talkies
you talking about knees you're talking
about me and there's like an uncertain
intimacy going on there but it's
associated with the stoah space so there
is like a real intimacy that's forming
as well so it's almost like Trojan horse
a seductive Trojan horse to get people
to the store and so we can become a body
together and it seems like you're doing
something similar with with that with
that parasocial relationship is sort of
like a way to get them into the only
fans and then that's a screening
mechanism and then via the discernment
or the essence or the de menthe or
whatever you want to call it then a real
relationship could form from that
absolutely and you have any sense how it
could go a step deeper into like more of
a community oz like an actual community
building from that
yeah absolutely I think that um there's
this way that sexuality is one of the
things that faces the most like social
stigma and personal shame uh and when
you set up the game as a sexual game you
set up the game as a game we're being
transgressive and subversive and
vulnerable and raw and carnal is like
automatically up for grabs and it's
amazing to me how when you allow people
into a safe sexual space so many other
things feel safe that don't usually feel
safe to when you're allowed to tell
people your sexual fantasies you're
allowed to tell people your real
fantasies about your life you're allowed
to tell people what you really want out
of your relationship with the world not
just your relationships with people of
the sex that you're attracted to you and
I think that that's what's really like
going to have a ripple effect it's not
necessarily that I might cause like a
wide chain of orgasms although that's
definitely true the it's it's this
creative spark that's really going to
spread and catch fire can you speak a
little bit on cope it and how it relates
to all this and the rise of only fans
yeah absolutely I think right now we
especially don't have the normal options
that we have for in real life social
contact and it's recreating a lot of
very strange dynamics that we probably
have an experience since we were
dependent on other people like there's
this way that dating right now for
everyone regardless of your age is like
risky and stigmatized and subversive
like it was when you were a teenager
sneaking around at high school and that
that is something that we need to be
able to talk about and and be honest
with ourselves about and honest with
ourselves about however we're holding
that if we want to make you know
rational decisions that are responsible
to our communities and at the same time
responsible to our own like humanity
it's really hard for us to all be this
ISIL
and it's really hard for us to go into
that kind of isolation with a
pre-existing stigma around longing for a
connection whether that's just sexual
connection or any other kind of intimacy
so I think that there I see often lots
of memes that have like a sort of
judgment around people who provide
content on only fans or pay for content
on only fans and I think that it's too
bad that the only way that we seem to be
able to express ourselves about it is to
have this sort of nervous laughter it
doesn't seem genuine to me that we
really think it's so funny when we're
spreading memes like this it really
displays to me a sexual insecurity of
like oh look at those people having
sexual feelings I'm not like them and
and I think it says more about us
feeling uncomfortable in general with
the conversation and having to like cope
with that through humor and judgment and
I'd really like to see that kind of like
all deconstructed love it
so I have a few questions more questions
for maybe but if anyone has questions or
maybe just throw it in the chat box if
you want me to read it on your behalf
let me know this will be going on
YouTube
I know we're talking about some
sensitive material here maybe for some
that as you just alluded to maybe so as
you know what I like about you is that
you're a nerd
can you take really good notes and then
you do your research and you did your
research on the store you went to like
every session last week and I saw your
nose too crazy and you seem to have
opted the steal the culture which John
Verve achey coined and then seduced a
culture which Raven coined and you're
purposing it towards this you know this
raw sexuality so how do you think we
could steal and seduce the culture with
this I I really love the the steal and
seduce the culture like tagline I think
that it already actually has like this
kind of secret nod to the goal of
defusing tensions between genders in
this culture war that were
I think stealing is so mercurial it's so
mercury it's so Hermes it's such a
masculine sort of like trickster energy
and it gets me so excited I love it so
much and then seducing is very Benison
it's very Aphrodite and and to have this
kind of like androgynous merging of
these two like different subversive sexy
ways to look at like influencing our
culture already like says so much about
the way that we can like have a lot more
fun working together across this gender
divide I think that one of the ways that
we can like start out really easy is
just by having integrity I'm having
faith I think that if we decide that I'm
gonna start ending the culture work
personally because that's my
responsibility and that means that I am
going to treat people with sensitivity
regardless of their gender I think
that's like a beautiful position to
start and I think that that will ripple
out and diffuse a lot of conflicts that
are going on around you
just by having that position even
peripheral to people who are having more
conflicts and I think the other thing is
sort of like a reciprocal notion of like
trust people to take that integrity Don
I know that it's difficult I know that
we're all getting conditioned to be very
adversarial especially around gender
issues especially around sex issues but
we see that in this community we're all
looking to make a change we're all
looking to cross these mimetic bridges
and shake hands and become friends even
if that's not how we're used to seeing
each other I think that we can do that
and and flirt a little bit while we're
doing it I think that we can make that
part of the game make it kind of a thing
where we start trusting each other to to
be flirting from a place of integrity
now we start having faith in each other
that we're all working together on
building these bridges again and that if
you're getting a little bit of a sexy
vibe from somebody it's probably because
they mean it in a good way
Oh flirting with integrity that's that's
 delicious it sort of relates the
mimetic mediation that project yeah so
I'll pivot to the Q&A portion right now
but I think I had another question yes
about we were talking about this and
when we when we zoomed in on Monday it
felt like philia with each other because
I kind of got what we're doing and then
the project that you understand the soul
project like very intuitively which is
impressive and amazing and just this
idea of being transparent you know like
I'm a man I'm horny all the time but I'm
still like ethical with my commitments
and my relational commitments and you
can do both at the same time it like you
said if you do it with integrity and
it's fun to flirt it's fun to do to be
sexual and be sexy and not pretend that
certain things don't exist certain
energies don't exist
we need to Roy she's having a session on
Friday on the lust field she's calling
it right like the last field is there
it's not pretend it's not there yeah
yeah so in when you were building
community communitas and we're finding
communities like this how do you think
we could go about not being ignorant to
that and then be shaming it I mean I
think one of the principles that I have
found really helpful is is this idea in
in in sexual therapist kind of culture
of don't
yuck a YUM somebody is enjoying
something if something feels good to
somebody it's okay I feel if you don't
think that that would that would suit
you but it's it's nice to have a group
norm where when somebody it expresses
enthusiasm whether it's around something
sexual or something that lights them up
intellectually or anything like that
it's nice to be like yes and both and
this is the same coin you know let's
let's just like make it an improv space
where offers are celebrated just for
being made because that's so exciting
that there's an offer on the table it
doesn't mean that you have to accept
them all you can just be aware of them
all and acknowledge them all and love
them all for coming into the space
beautiful all right so we're gonna grow
the questions I might not ask at an
order we might miss a few questions
but we'll start with Hanna you had
something about the push back on only
fans
so I heard that there is pushback from
the only fans website against hosting
adult content there and I'm wondering if
this is a big concern for you and other
people doing things likely okay um I
can't speak to how with sex workers who
do this for a living would feel I'm not
relying on this for an income so I am
NOT going to experience any sort of like
financial insecurity
if only fans decides to like give me the
boot
so I want to be sensitive to that and
and just mention that I'm not at all
speaking to it on a financial level but
apart from that I it doesn't concern me
it doesn't surprise me uh this is
something that's just tried and true
lots and lots of social media platforms
get very very far on adult content which
they once they get that far
promptly removed from their website and
it's just one of those fun ways that
people like exploit sex workers that
happens um it I guess at this point it's
just I'm used to it I'm bored of it I'm
adaptable I'm resilient I'm anti fragile
I started on Twitter having a thirst
trap thread and my big innovation was
just to actually thread it so that
they're always there so that you can
always find them because I don't need to
be like I don't know coy about the fact
that I'm somebody who posts adult
content if if only fans doesn't work
Twitter will keep working for me other
places will keep working for me I am
naked under my clothes all of the time
there is a camera in my cell phone and
there are just way too many places on
the internet to post content I will
always find a way to share those things
that I love to share thank you thanks
Camille you had a question about
practices
Hey
what life practices create raw sexuality
and what are some of yours um I love
this question I think it's a brilliant
question my Bible when it comes to this
question is a book called mating in
captivity by Esther Perel it is written
for people in monogamous relationships
but I think that it absolutely applies
to both monogamous and non-monogamous
relationships and it's very useful to
read even if you're not dating anybody
at the moment it talks about the fact
that the more security and intimacy you
seek in a relationship the more freedom
and eroticism you're going to have to
forfeit in order to maintain that level
of closeness an analogy I like to use to
explain it is that lust really is like a
fire if you smother it it goes out it
you need oxygen for that fire to burn so
life practices that work for me to keep
you know sexual sparks nice and a
frequent and spicy in my relationships
whether they're monogamous or
non-monogamous at any given time is
stuff like having your own projects just
having stuff that's going on in your
life that does not have to do with your
partner is a huge way to make sure that
there's always this like independence
and mystery that you two have for
yourselves and have as like this thing
to like flirt around with and like tease
around in front of each other it's very
exciting to my boyfriend that I am on a
Zune call right now doing my own thing
and being you know a big independent
personality I think that that's
something that he finds really
attractive and the fact that he's
probably over in another room making his
own music is like very attractive to me
the fact that we can give each other
that space to have our own interests is
super super important um
I think the other big thing other than
having your own life is sharing it like
fully be totally honest uh there is like
so many there's so many regrets and like
bad arguments that I've had in in my
relationships because I
had a five-second opportunity to fess up
to something and I got insecure and I
didn't quite take the opportunity and
then everything snowballs there's these
like moments of integrity that come to
you and they feel karmically loaded and
you have to be ready to like stop and
really practice your stoicism in those
moments and be willing to like fully
share exactly what's going on for you
even if you've conditions been
conditioned to think that it's not
acceptable it's the it's the face leap
that you make on a daily basis to like
know that your partner loves you beyond
the the limitations that society
suggests for them cool
rheya you had a question I do thanks
Peter and thanks maybe for being here um
Shin was or is how erotic art and being
on camera in this manner allowed you
connect allowed you to connect more
deeply with yourself and do you feel
that this practice whether it is sharing
or just for personal use is valuable for
more people to experience when it comes
to connecting to sacred sexuality within
their within themselves yeah I love this
question
I absolutely think that there is a lot
of joy and self connection to be found
with experimenting with creating art
whether it's of yourself or any any
other form of art I think in particular
though there's a lot of barriers to
celebrating the way that you feel about
your body I think that there's a lot of
realms where we are invited to talk
about how oppressed we feel by beauty
ideals and how difficult it is for us
and and I think that that's important I
think that those are feelings that need
to be put out there but I don't often
see a more constructive space that I
think naturally follows from that
deconstructive understanding of how
beauty ideals don't help us if beauty
ideals don't help us we need to reclaim
what we're allowed to think
aesthetic and make offers to to the the
meme space about what we think the
aesthetic boundary is should and
shouldn't be and I think that when we
say something like I think my body looks
really good in this piece of art we're
inviting people to have those kinds of
thoughts about themselves - and I think
that that is part of seducing the
culture and and like bringing people a
reason to feel on a felt sense that they
should be body positive and sex positive
rather than doing a sermon or preaching
to them that they have the wrong idea
about their bodies I think I hear from
you too that there's like something
about divinity I think I was at the
gender and transition and discourse talk
yesterday and something that came up was
this idea that we've talked a lot
recently in culture about masculinity
and femininity as scientific concepts
but they have been spiritual concepts
just as long as we've connected them to
biology I think that um there's this way
that different cultures across time and
different religions have presented
masculinity and femininity in these like
patterned ways and there's ways that
sometimes they reverse themselves but
they always kind of present a polarity
and that polarity I think says something
about what it's like to be a human being
regardless of which gender identity you
present more forwardly with and I think
that when you step into a space where
you're making art around your body in a
way that's likely going to be received
as gendered there's a opportunity to rub
up against all of these different
interconnections between mimetic spaces
that focus on science and spirituality
and relationships and money I think all
of those are really interesting spaces
that sex interconnects with and I think
that it's good for us to experiment with
spaces that allow us to look at it from
multiple perspectives
Theisen yet a question or statement yeah
thanks Peter thank you maybe I found
myself a little nervous to bring this up
and so I'll express a perspective that
I'm definitely not attached to but it
definitely comes up for me and that is I
can imagine myself being single and not
in a relationship and in that case
longing for connection and sexual
connection especially and going to
things like only fans subscribing to
content and then starting to get that
crush feeling in connection through
there and when I imagine myself in that
scenario it concerns me that that this
would happen and that this is happening
with other men that would enable like
some of my poorest behaviors like not
working on my physicality and my body
and my vocation and other things because
I can just escape here and some and then
it makes so the minute makes me
skeptical that a lot of women would want
to be with a man that has subscribed to
content say on only fans because of some
of the behavior that might enable so I'm
curious what you think about that I
think businesses are really important
like intuition that you're teasing out
and I think that it has to do with
something that like impacts us
throughout our sexual lives whether we
are more feminine or masculine
presenting I think that we often talk
about sexual practices and not sexual
ways of being and and that's where we
end up having these like dichotomous
relationships with things like
masturbating or using porn there's this
way that it can go really really well or
really really poorly and that makes us
confused about which sort of practices
we should choose because we're not aware
that the problem is actually like a
where your hearts that thing not of what
you're doing things so there's this way
that I think that it it's almost a
little bit like recreational drug use or
alcohol drinking I think that there's
absolutely dangerous to using
pornographic
aids in your sex life and it's something
that you should have like an open honest
relationship with yourself about and if
you have some sort of way in which
you're relating to pornographic material
that isn't healthy for you that's okay
that's that's that's a normal totally
not unique place to start at in your
sexual journey there's no reason to like
demonize yourself or think you did a bad
thing or you made a big mistake or
anything like that you just want to like
look at your sex life and think what
would get me off even more than this
would I get off even harder on having
better relationships and like treating
myself better would that be even sexier
because I think for most of us it would
I think for most of us we have a lot of
room to treat ourselves in ways that
make us feel sexier about all sorts of
areas of our life um I do want to speak
also though to the idea that that's
something that I do think about like I
am making adult content and I'm putting
it out there in a place where men are
vulnerable and men don't necessarily
have the resources to be using my
content in a way that's healthy for them
and that does concern me I really care
about that and my heart really goes out
to men who are having these sort of
struggles and and then finding that I am
like a crutch something that keeps them
coping and not thriving that that breaks
my heart
um the the the thing that keeps me there
that keeps me taking that risk of being
an abler
being an enabler is that I also know
that the very most vulnerable men who
very most need my help are probably not
getting really any interactions with
women except in these contexts and and
I'm willing to go to the darkest places
to find the people who need the most
lights brought into their life I I pray
I pray that that that I don't hurt more
than I help um but I'm absolutely aware
that I have like a higher ignorant
surround it I'm just doing my best and I
have my heart in the right place and and
for that that's my way of being issue I
have my heart in the right place I've
chosen a practice that I hope is
in alignment but I will always be open
to feedback and I will always be open to
realigning so that I'm doing like the
most good in the world that I can do mmm
that's that's beautiful and I really
felt that and I have the follow-up
question
it's about masturbation and the Moffat
movement and I mentioned this in my
journal that my stance is that most men
should stop masturbating and on and all
ontological domains aside aside where
did it and then you and I were talking
last time like I haven't masturbated
like I couldn't like five plus years and
it feels great I have no desire
to do it whatsoever there's a lot of
benefits that come from that and then
the whole no-fat movement supports that
as well and then you were pretty recent
like guys I thought oh you would push
back to it but you don't have that sort
of shame projected shame on it and we
were talking about how yes each person's
spiritual practice might be radically
different given their kind of trajectory
their past trauma all that type of stuff
and it seems like you have a sensitivity
about people getting stuck into like the
more pathological forms of self pleasure
so what do you think about the whole
know fast movement in general I guess
okay I'm gonna I'm gonna do a compliment
sandwich I like to give feedback that
might be a little bit more constructive
like bracketed with a lot of positive
energy so the first thing I want to say
is that people who are considering nofap
are looking at their sex lives and and
seeing that they can make changes that
make it a way that that would be more
exciting and make their life better and
I'm so excited I'm just so excited that
people would have ideas about how to do
different things with their sexual
relationships with themselves just that
alone is fantastic I think that
especially the idea that that you can
want something and see that it's
possible and those are the only two
ingredients to making a different life
for yourself it is like something that I
think is available to people from the
nofa a movement that might not be
available to them otherwise and I think
it's like foundational I think if if
that's the first place that you go and
you find out that you can change who you
are all by yourself that will that will
ripple throughout your whole life it'll
be more than just a sexual opportunity
for you um that being said I think
sometimes like so many exciting like
intellectual and spiritual insights that
we get we can like have them experience
this big moment of clarity and
spaciousness and then immediately start
striving so hard and and that takes us
into a different way of being we're not
open and spacious and excited about a
spiritual insight anymore we're striving
and trying to be good enough and and
tracking and monitoring and and
collecting statistics and and it starts
to be a little bit more on the left
brain side and a little bit less on the
right brain reconnected to my body
change my relationship with myself have
a more sexually positive experience of
my world kind of way of being so when
you can like keep an eye out for that
pitfall you can totally experiment with
this idea of like oh maybe sexual energy
can be used in other ways that I
actually find more fulfilling and that
really excites me I'm gonna make some
small bets and see how big they payoff
around that that I think is super
exciting I think it's just important to
make sure that when you pick up
something like no fact it doesn't become
another stick to beat yourself with
around your sexuality it shouldn't be
something that you should see us like
this opportunity to fail and feel bad
about yourself you should see it as an
opportunity to fail and learn about
yourself and try again and try new
things that's awesome very cool and so
maybe and I were talking about her
having a series here at the stove maybe
call it raw sexy or sexuality with maybe
gray or something and you just like a
question like you bring people in to
talk to you and I would love for you to
interact with someone the no5 community
and have this discussion because I think
you need to be placed to have in such a
good-faith way so uh Travis would you
like to ask your question yeah sure
so I just noticed that what comes up
with me is like a knee-jerk reaction
that things like only fans or
any sort of like I guess pornography is
largely driven by like hedonism or an
idea that like such sensual pleasure is
something that should be pursued revered
sometimes idolized and I recognize that
that's probably just the dominant social
narrative that's kind of been implanted
and so I I wanted to hear because I hear
tones of hedonism sometimes and then I
hear other philosophies and so I'm
curious from your perspective what the
various philosophies underlying sex work
are and what your perspective is on the
criticisms of vitalizing and like
pursuing sensual pleasure first one that
comes up for me is like Buddhism's idea
or like early Buddhism's idea that
sensual pleasure is like a trap that
gets us trapped and craving and that
leads to our suffering so any thoughts
you have on that uh yeah actually I like
that you bring up Buddhism because I
think Buddhism is like a very fertile
area to look at like difference by
sexual perspectives I think that yeah
absolutely
Buddhism has this surface level reading
of asceticism renunciants saying that
there are all of these like bells and
whistles all of these fancy toys in the
world that I could use to amuse myself
but that would distract me from curing
the sickness of suffering and and I am
very sympathetic to that like mainstream
Buddhists take on making sure that
you're skeptical about your relationship
with sexual pleasure making sure that
you have like a healthy sense of
questioning and curiosity around whether
or not pursuing sexual pleasure
ultimately actually offers you something
that isn't like just fleeting and
meaningless I think that that's
something that it asks about everything
which is important I think that it's
interesting that also within Buddhism
though there there are tantric
perspectives which say that precisely
because sensual pleasures are so
tempting are so distracting are so do
Andras they also have an enormous
spiritual power available to them if
we're willing to look at them as tools
from a more spiritual way of being it
reminds me actually very much of the use
of entheogens in spiritual practice
compared to recreational practice I
think that we have maybe like a picture
from media of like what a guy on LSD is
like and usually at some point in the
scene he talks about jumping out a
window and a bunch of less tripping
people have to convince him that he
can't fly or something like that and
that is a way that some people act on
and fusions but usually there's like
more emphasis in spiritual communities
on the use of those kinds of substances
to achieve some sort of like
self-discovery some sort of connection
to something beyond yourself beyond even
humanity and I think that there is like
a profoundly numinous aspect to sensual
pleasure in general but but sexual
pleasure especially and we should be as
curious about the power that we could
you know harness for our spiritual
development that is presented by sensual
desire as we should be about the hazards
of sensual pleasure in terms of our
spiritual development cool Ally you had
a question
you still want to ask it may be somewhat
touched upon this briefly when she maybe
when you talked about the following
phase you have and you care about their
emotional states and this is building up
on last Friday's session with Bonita
where we discussed somewhat extensively
the emotional the seven basic systems of
emotions and the lighting system
sometimes used synonymously with the
lust system and deprivation from this
system we know results in depression or
I just wanted to know what your
experience with this this liking system
or being separated from your experience
with your online following which I
didn't know existent until today
I mean we've been on the few sessions
for the past few weeks but yeah um so
could you rephrase your question
straight you're wondering what I think
about this kind of separation between me
and my fan base and whether or not the
way to their depression or something
yeah right um I I think that this speaks
a lot to an atomization that is like
just a crisis across different kind of
social realms right now I think that it
is really difficult to find alternatives
I mean especially right now with all of
the pandemic measures and stuff like
that but even before so much of our
sexual interactions have become mediated
by apps of various kinds and I do think
that it's it's something that I would
like to see become a gateway to better
real life sexual intimacy and not the
substitute for real life sexual intimacy
I think that that's something that we do
really need to build a community around
though I don't think any one of us can
change the dating culture by ourselves
and move it offline again I think that
it's going to take a lot of us all being
very clever about how we can build
bridges from offline or online to
offline communities and how to really
show up and be vulnerable in those in
real-life spaces so that they are
seductive and transformative for people
and they've become like a forceful they
gain momentum and are able to sustain
themselves the way that it our online
communities are able to like keep
feeding energy into themselves and
continuing forward into the future cool
and Jen do you want to take onto that
and I you had a question about porn and
hijacking okay maybe there's an
evolutionary biologist named Bob
Traverse it's kind of jargon Inc but I
had always resonated with me he had this
thing where he called Netflix even sugar
and porn phenotypic hijacking it's
something that's taking advantage of her
inbuilt propensity
I'm curious what's your reaction to that
and maybe as a follow-up do you think
traverses may be underestimated
today society how it's lacking a lot of
things that maybe we were used to in
more matched environments in past
evolution right I think that there is
this way there this sort of sexual
content that's available right now can
be compared to junk food or things like
they're very very packed with a whole
bunch of calories and sugar that usually
you're supposed to be able to like save
up and use and get by for a long time on
instead of just binging on and binging
on and binging on I think that you're
right though to note that if we just
focus on how hyper stimulating the
things that tempt us are we're not maybe
paying enough attention to why we might
need these like unbelievably powerful
sources of stimulation maybe it's
because we're starving
maybe it's because in some very real way
we do need that much nourishment because
we feel very malnourished in our sexual
lives I think that we need to like look
very far back in history and and and
read the story of our sexual
relationship with each other as as a
species and and understands that it's
been a leg of a dark place and it's not
easy for us to relate to each other on
this level we've been making it up as we
go along and learning and getting to
know each other this whole time and I
think that the cultural war really does
a very good job of
hiding from us how hard we have been
trying and how much we have been doing
our best and working together for
generations to prove communications
between the the the binary genders that
are imposed upon us I don't know if that
answers your question
if I get also asked there's something
that came up while you were saying that
have you read brave new world and what's
your reaction to that being the end
stage a lot of this stuff
I haven't read brave new world um but I
think just from it being in the meme
space I understand that it's not a happy
story it's pretty pessimistic is that
right yeah it takes our utopia shows us
I'm a fan of pessimism I'm more familiar
with Schopenhauer and his ethics of
compassion
Schopenhauer the point about brave new
world was kind of I guess it was written
at a time where it must have been crazy
it's less crazy today but it's just like
everybody's super sexually liberated and
they have like horny for tea parties or
they're just yeah things like that and
idea when Huxley wrote it this was
considered like everybody wanted this
people were so sexually conservative it
is interesting I think that there have
been like weird waves of sexual
conservativism and sexual liberalism but
they've all kind of required a lot more
synthesis there there's there's this way
that I can see how we match up to like
past fears about what the sexual
landscape could turn into but I can also
see ways in which those those like
pejorative paintings of the culture that
we live in now are just like glossing
over all of the escape routes we have
from this kind of culture I think that
there's lots of opportunities to break
out of like the narrow idea of the hyper
sexualized modernity we just have to be
willing to be more creative and all this
cool I'm gonna circle back to Raines
question range still want to ask it
sure hi thanks for being on here my
question well I have two questions the
first one is is kind of vague
intentionally but just curious your
thoughts about non-binary and queer sex
work like what's the status of that what
do you see
online around that and then my second
question is kind of in the realm of like
heteronormativity of like is the buying
power of straight men influencing the
way that sex work is framed and
understood and how the platforms are
designed and I mean that as a as a very
open question more than an accusation
and yeah curious to hear your thoughts
um to the first point
I find that a gender non-conforming sex
work is not super visible to me I think
it has a lot to do with the way that the
culture war is set up right now there's
a lot of sensationalism around men and
women and the the only kind of
discussions that we have in the meme
space going on around gender
non-conforming people are frankly not
sexy they have to do a lot with like
making sure you have your pronouns or
making sure that you know your labels
and they're very confusing for straight
people they're very confusing for
questioning people frankly it sounds
like they're quite confusing for gender
non-conforming people themselves I think
that the picture that people get of like
non-conforming sex work is is too
squishy and confusing and like trapped
in the collateral damage field of the
culture war zone so it doesn't it
doesn't get like the spotlight it
deserves and I think that's so sad
because I think gender non-conforming
artists are so hot and they're doing
such interesting things with their work
and the couple that I know person
so that I do get like exposed to their
artwork blow me away and influenced me a
lot and so I think it's it's too bad
that this platform isn't doing for them
what it's doing for people like me
because it totally could if we changed
the mimetic landscape to your second
point it's interesting I absolutely see
this like heterosexism insects work
whether it's pornhub or only fans or
anywhere else and and to link back to
your other question I do think again it
has a lot to do with the way that
culture wars sensationalizes gender as a
binary or maybe not like question mark
question mark question mark and so i
think that it that it encourages men in
particular to almost like spite consume
women's content a lot of the time and it
also I think inspires women to Speight
produce adult content because we're in
this like adversarial transactional
competitive sort of atmosphere within
and between genders a lot of the time I
don't know if I would call that like
something that's spurred on by the
buying power of heterosexual men I think
it has more to do with the parameters of
the sex work industry and how they are
influenced by social and sexual
limitations that are imposed on all of
us I think that there could be a lot
more interesting porn that is a lot more
like raw and evocative to basically
everybody but there's just kind of a
tiling structure there's this acceptable
kind of adult content that it was
already out there and it has a lot of
momentum behind it and it keeps getting
made over and over and over again the
wheel gets reinvented and men keep
buying it and it keeps being unsexy to
people outside of that little sis het
Mille sphere and I think it's just like
yeah it's just a Moloch problem porn
could be way better for everybody but
it's not because of the regular
practical miss incentives
cool rain DME follow-up to that no that
was great thank you
key you have a question hi maybe great
thank you for a lot of late you spoke
about today
um I think that it is really important
to tap into what is good with in our
sexualities and unleash that in the ways
that you've described so and yeah I've
learned a lot but my question is what
principles do you use to be aware of or
combat exploitation on either side so
the sex worker versus the consumer I
think that's a really interesting
question and I think it's one that's
gonna be difficult for me to answer
because the the norms and the boundaries
that I've developed around producing
adult content have evolved and emerged
really naturally over time one thing
that I think has helped me on my journey
as being an adult content creator is
having an attitude of starting slow and
uh and expanding with my comfort level I
think that a lot of women are maybe
offered opportunities to make content
that's more explicit than they're
initially ready to make and they maybe
feel like they need to take that
opportunity before really sitting with
themselves and deciding what's fun for
them and where the boundaries of
exhibitionism for them are I was lucky
to find really good mentors early on in
the adult content community who helped
me make good decisions about going slow
and respecting myself in the sex work
field but I think there there definitely
need to be more figures out there like
that for women like me who are just
getting started to encourage people to
take it at their own pace and and make
sure they're checking in with their
bodies physically to see what's arousing
to them because this doesn't have to be
transactional for women or other genders
that decide to make adult content it's
something that can feel fun and sexy for
you and if it feels fun and sexy for you
it will be premium content because a lot
of the time people are doing this out of
a place of needing the money or needing
the validation even and and to come from
this like selfish short place about it
will be really helpful for you well so
it's interesting that you say when you
feel fun and sexy its premium content
only because I'd like to focus on the
consumer side of exploitation kind of
circling back to Tyson's question
earlier like I think it's great that
there are mentors in the space that can
help women who think that they would
like to go into the space for their own
personal reasons but I I wonder like you
said because it's evolved over time for
you the lessons that you've learned from
me from the consumers side yeah
absolutely I think that uh the the the
advice inverts very well I think that
for men very much or and and anybody on
the consumer side of sex workers content
starting slow and maintaining a self
connection and a respect for yourself
are still the principles that I would
use to guide that kind of behavior i I
think that if you're honest with
yourself about your desires and you're
honest with yourself about the ways in
which masturbatory aids meet them for
you I think that shame and pressure fall
away very naturally in that transparent
relationship with yourself I think
that's great and that's like a type of
education that's required to avoid other
questions coming up about you know the
depression aspects or the sort of close
it situation that people are in right
now so
yeah thank you cool
so administrative nowhere at that hour
mark I think we'll continue maybe 15 30
minutes will end somewhere with the
sermon I'll throw a link on the chat box
to in case you want to continue this
discussion in a different room we'll go
for a little bit more Hanna you had an
interesting follow-up question okay so
there was an early question I didn't
scroll up to see who typed it but it was
something like is it unattractive in the
IRL dating world to be a purveyor of sex
work especially online adult content and
Peter and I had kind of discussed how
there is judgement and shame from the
dominant culture around that and it's my
personal hope that that's decreasing but
I don't know and I'm wondering if you
have any insights on that um I mean I
can only speak as one person for the
most part I I don't have my thumb on the
pulse of like how people are treating
each other in their circles or friends
around finding these kinds of things out
I don't know what it looks like on
tinder when these kinds of conversations
go on I just know about my relationships
with my clients and my personal
relationships with people I meet on
Twitter and in real life and stuff like
that um but to me I don't have some sort
of pejorative understanding of people
who masturbate and use porn or have
alternative sexual desires
maybe I'm a uniquely open-minded person
but even if I am I think the fact that I
can be this open about being that open
minded means that at least some of the
things in our mimetic sphere are
changing for the better
I really hope that people can learn to
be more accepting and excited about
people who are passionate about adult
content I think that there isn't really
any way
to judge somebody's sex life without
expressing your own sexual insecurity I
think that when we are genuinely assured
in our own sexual practices and sexual
beings and someone else lives out a
sexual practice or sexual way of being
that doesn't appeal to us we don't
actually get very much of a disgust
response or an urge to judge I think
that when we're feeling really secure in
ourselves and other people do things
that aren't interesting to us we are
excited for them to be exploring their
interests and excited to explore other
interests ourselves I think that we have
to be really skeptical of our urge to
look at anybody's sexual practices and
assume that they are unhealthy or that
they shouldn't be enjoyable for anybody
great Tom you had a question
yes sorry I I really have to go in like
five minutes so I won't have time to
hear the answer but I will listen to it
on YouTube if it's in the video this was
building up a little bit on Hanna's
comment on comparison with switch and it
really struck me is that this kind of
comparison really struck me and I saw
this what she said is that you can you
can have this kind of Trojan horses
which basically you get inside well uh
Trojan horse and what I wanted to ask is
basically you have this two side where
you can use Zeus Trojan horse too for
good for example or for bad as Tyson
said and from your point of view you see
the difference basically and what can
you do to influence those consumers on
which side they will fall basically will
they just be addictive and lose that
time and will they get kind of hacked
into this nefarious situation or can you
improve the situation I think this is an
awesome question I hope that you get to
hear at least some of it but I'm glad
that you'll tune in later if you can't
well I do think that it's a it's
something that I have this meta
awareness about that this could be used
as easily for good as for evil and I
think that uh having strong boundaries
around the quality and amount of
attention that I give is like the main
kind of diagnostic tool that I use I I
find that if somebody is engaging with
my content on a level that seems
superficial or COPI or even just
ordinary you even if it's just yet
they're here to you know assist
themselves in their masturbatory a
journey and then leave then that's fine
but I don't actually spend a bunch of
like quality time and attention
interacting with people who are only
interacting with my content on that
level I don't have any judgment for it
and I I'm not responsible for making
sure that that's like being used in
moderation for people who are using it
that way
leave that responsibility where it
belongs with the consumer but at the
same time that I don't I guess in like a
regular social context there's something
that we think of as leading people on I
don't do that if somebody is looking for
a masturbatory aid that is what I
provide them I don't give them some sort
of illusion that I'm secretly trying to
offer them something more
I offer more when I see a need for more
that I know that I can meet on a soul
level if somebody is interacting with my
content and then they're voicing things
to me about like the vulnerabilities
that they feel or the fantasies that
they have that they don't feel like they
can share in real life that's somebody
that I maybe like take a little bit of a
double click with and I want to see more
about that vulnerability and I want to
see more about those unmet needs for
sexual expression and see if there's a
way that I can offer an outlet that that
aligns with the work that I'm doing in
my life anyway um sometimes there's like
you know the 1% of times where I just
absolutely click with somebody and they
enter this space as an adult content
consumer and now they are my very best
friend and that's super exciting too and
then they get a whole bunch of quality
time and attention from me and that can
look a whole bunch of different ways
depending on the kind of connection that
we have but there really is that really
wide spectrum and the main way that I
keep myself safe and keep other people
safe is by having the appropriate
quality and amount of attention like
distributed at different levels of this
sort of like intimacy level of the
interaction Walter I think you had a
question that we missed at the the
beginning ok thank you thank you for
taking a question yeah you actually
spoke very well to a bunch of these
points but it's something that I think
might keep coming up so a lot of the
different internet groups that would
have led a lot of people to a group like
this one the stoah they used to we used
to spend a lot of time
about religion and fortunately those
arguments kind of toned down a little
bit and they've become more interesting
in my own opinion and then it looks like
the next thing that could really divide
people would be sexuality for example
when people host these sorts of events
it's sort of like the moderator almost
has to eventually take a stand on
whether we're kind of a pro monogamy
sort of a community or a pro polyamory
sort of a community or a pro corn or an
anti porn because those things are gonna
keep coming up I think it's possible
that it could come to a place where it's
more like a live and let live and that
there's sort of a balanced understanding
that people come to different worldviews
but I don't know do you have any sense
of how long that might take or if it's
just gonna completely split a bunch of
these groups because a lot of people
come to these groups without strong an
anti-authoritarian bent but also a
curiosity about the benefits of older
traditions absolutely really do that I
think that that's something that I see
is like a commonality that goes through
a lot of people in the you know meta
rational community this like idea of
like oh there's something really
important about traditions but we could
be totally different oh yeah absolutely
and I love that I love that we feel so
strongly and both of these like
seemingly like tense directions um I
think that the opinion I have on this
issue is an opinion I have on a lot of
like divisive political and mimetic
issues which is that the the problem is
that we approach the discourse with this
identitarian lens people have lots of
really strong feelings about monogamy
and polyamory because though those are
presented to them as categories of
people that they can choose to be and if
they were presented to them as what they
are which is tools like along a spectrum
that can help you shape your
relationship structures in ways that you
know maximize the Fremen and enjoyment
for everybody involved in them I think
that they would be a lot less divisive
that wouldn't suit the culture war at
all so the culture war isn't gonna help
us out on that we're gonna have to be
the resistance to the culture war and
bring in this kind of lenss mentality to
replace the identitarian mentality and
then I think it's just it's amazing how
quickly the tensions dissolve when
you're not being asked to pick a tribe
as soon as you're not like choosing a
team you can just be like oh yeah I can
see how both of these would be good for
different people in different situations
like I don't know why people fight about
it cool so this will probably be our
last question comment Mac I know you had
something burning I don't know if you
asked it in the chat room but you can
unmute yourself and ask it now yeah so I
was I was inspired by your question
period of nofap of this concept of nofap
and maybe gave an amazing response to
that and I wanted to actually draw a
contrast by proposing a fun little
hypothetical of what about a concept
like all FAP we're talking about
masturbating 20 times a day we're
talking about very very weak orgasms
we're talking about a serious serious
interest in pornography and as a
consumer and I was open um maybe be
interesting to see what you say just
just flipping that that concept of what
your reaction to that would be yeah I
think I think this goes back to the
point for me of like the the idea of
mainstream Buddhism compared to tantric
Buddhism I think that you you can you
can commit yourself to being celibate
and that is such a strong position to
take and it's such a commitment and it
takes so much investment and it's really
um like an act of devotion whether it's
to yourself or to a higher power or just
to the life that you want to live and I
think that you can absolutely like find
that same way of being and pendulum
swing it all the way to the other side
and be like no I want to understand
myself is the sexual being so so deeply
that I am willing
to make like my month about
investigating what turns me on and what
turns me off what that's like in my body
what that says about the nature of
reality and how it's like unconsciously
influencing the way that I interact in
seemingly non-sexual contexts I think
that there is like such a rich spiritual
mystery that we can like put our
detectives hats on and go out and
exploring if we decide that sexual
pleasure is as numinous and interesting
as sexual restraint do you have any
questions to that Beck oh no no I I was
just really enjoying the response I yeah
I think I think your perspective is
exactly what is needed and and I was I
didn't know what we were going to get
into I'm talking about sex work here at
the store and I mean yeah it's it's
exactly what we need to be honest yeah
and and I've actually had a very much
more healthy relationship with porn
lately and not mine moderating my use
but actually I'm really looking at how
phallus is expressed and how the the
female form is expressed and how those
two interact and then is absolutely
fascinating if you take it seriously and
not just a mass vitória 8 or whatever
and that's what I hear in your voice and
it's coming from like session authentic
police and I love it so thank you thank
you yeah amen to that
and Mac is like a crazy ass artist here
in Toronto so I'm trying to do some homo
social seduction to get him out the
stoah let's take you to some bath time
so yeah you have time for one more
question maybe like sarah dropped really
good one in the chat Sarah could you
wanna meet yourself and ask it yeah I
was following on to Hannah had asked a
question about therapy and I wanted to
ask do you feel a potential sense of
kinship with the role of temple
prostitute why
simple prostitute was or is a role that
fit with like traditional ways of
connecting with religious practice
through physical intimacy and then the
therapists role is like modernist
practice of like structured emotional
intimacy and is there kind of like meta
modern tantric philosopher role emerging
yeah absolutely actually this definitely
hits on like a passion of mine
I have religious studies kind of
background and so I particularly like
East Asian Buddhism and they have this
concept of the miko who is a sort of
like spiritual medium and and and and
sexual temptation at the same time in
buddhist spheres and I find that very
very poetic I think that we we have a
very long conversation that's been going
on about patriarchy and and what it
means and what to do about it and
sometimes I like to think about well
what maybe the good aspects of having a
power dynamic are not so that we can
keep it in place but spilitt we can
appreciate what we have been gaining
from it spiritually as it's been playing
out and I think that um the the Miko it
is is is providing a perspective that
that is a practical physical but also
poetic and and paranormal there's
something absolutely magic about it and
I think that it also reminds me very
much of the the paintings of the nine
stages of decay I wrote a paper on these
east asian buddhist paintings that
portray the the corpse of a woman in
nine stages as she decays and is you
know reduced to a skeleton and then
maybe there's a grave marker at the end
if anything and there's this beautiful
beautiful notion
I think that is conveyed by the use of a
woman's corpse in particular because
women have unbounded bodies they
magistrates they have this relationship
that is less bounded and more diffuse in
the material world and that goes counter
to the mainstream Buddhist values of
being closed and contained and and
complete in a way and there's this way
that we can subvert these purity and
impurity dynamics and use what is seen
as an inherent relationship with
impurity because of the structure of a
certain kind of body and and show how
that can be a mentor to two people who
have idealized bodies and and how
there's like an educational relationship
between being idealized and being
demonized and that by putting each other
in these roles we have actually been
playing a grand sort of spiritual
experiment that we'll have to understand
before we can start playing a new one
Wow okay good good stuff there let's end
it here
I'll make some closing announcements but
maybe you have any kind of closing
thoughts for us um only that I'm
absolutely happy if anybody feels like
there's something really burning for
them and they want to keep talking if
somebody throws a link for another zoom
room I would absolutely join and
continue this conversation I I know that
some of this stuff can be raw and I
don't want to leave anybody in this
conversation until everybody's grounded
and ready to so just know that I'm
absolutely available beautiful and so I
dropped I think I'm just gonna use the
game be coffeehouse for our after-party
room so just go to game beep coffee I'll
debrief with maybe for a couple of
minutes but then she'll joins that chat
room afterwards stop being said that's
awesome
first first introduction at the the
stoah that was really really great so
thank you so much maybe for coming hit
thanks oh and thanks for everyone for
asking excellent questions as well
announcements on upcoming events if you
go to the stoic CA we got Daniel schmock
dan berger coming in and we have over
like a hundred people RSVP for that one
converting Moloch to from SIF to Jedi at
7:00 p.m. Eastern Time live players of
Samuel Burgess tomorrow at 8:00 p.m.
Eastern Time that's gonna be a regular
recurring series at the store as well we
have a few other ones including Daniel
Thornton's welcome back party on Monday
6:30 p.m. Eastern Time a lot of
cool events coming so just check out the
stoah sign up to the mailing list and
it's based off a gift economy if you're
inspired to try to gift for the stoah
you just look at the information there
anything else no I think that's it
thank you everyone