[Music]
[Music]
hey everybody and we are back it is Jack
Murphy and this is the Jack Murphy live
podcast and find me on Twitter at Jack
Murphy live at the website at Jack
Murphy live.com Jack Murphy live
everywhere guys also got the book
Democrats horrible please go get one of
those on Amazon but enough of all that
already today I have a tremendous guest
somebody who is really out there movin
and shakin and making things happen
somebody who has been grind and hard
making a name for himself and recently
has got some excellent first-class news
and a presentation of a new venture I'm
really excited to have my good friend
and a repeat guest on Jack Murphy live
here in studio at the Jack where my
podcast headquarters my good friend bill
Chamberlain how you doing well doin
fantastic good to be back it's awesome
it's great to have you and everybody
just just FYI I know if you follow me on
Twitter you know that I've got a brand
new little puppy her name is Rosie and
she's right here with us and she's being
really chill and quiet right now but at
some point she may do her puppy thing
and we're just gonna roll with it
because we're keeping it real here
you're keeping it real and so if you
hear that puppy barking in background
just go oh that's so cute because we are
just gonna keep on going all right so
this has been a big big week last week
or ten days we have all had a great time
at CPAC we had there was people in from
all over the world literally it was like
a summit of conservative thinkers
right-wing thinkers new media types the
whole gamut well did you have a good
time this last weekend oh yeah no I had
a great time at a whole ton of people
hadn't met before some of whom I had
interacted in the past with on Twitter
some of whom I'd barely interacted with
you know like right before CPAC started
I think on Wednesday of last week I had
lunch with Jack Subic who's a you know
my close friend but uh Paul Joseph
Watson
Andrew Cobra Tate form I don't know I
think he's still on Twitter I won't use
his name no you don't don't use the name
don't don't get him banned again that's
right Cobra takeover Tate I had a chance
to hang out with him to that guy that
guy is a real deal yeah he's he's
intense and very funny
his brother Tony yeah same yeah cool
guys but that was pretty wild because I
mean I had discussions with Paul like
Paul and I knew each other and had
followed each other's work for almost a
year now I would say or maybe about six
six or seven months probably and but it
was good to finally meet him it this is
Paul just Watson former formerly or
currently of Infowars
I think he's still a contributor I don't
know if he's actually employed by them
okay but I like on his YouTube it looks
like he's doing his own thing now yeah
so famous famous for his very heart
hard-hitting and insightful videos on
current subjects yeah mmhmm yeah yeah
powerful powerful social media voice for
sure ya know and very effective at the
sort of medium of the the YouTube what's
what do you call it's not a rant
it's a polemic polemic lemak oh I like
ramp better plump lummox ound stuffy
yeah but he's British you know III it's
funny like the British language I'm
sorry
you know British rhetoric I would say
this is a lot of the way I talk because
I've you know I John lick Harry's my
favorite novelist Yes Minister is my
favorite sitcom so god I kind of
appreciate the style right right biting
yeah well you know I had a chance to
meet him too and he like and rotate
taller than I was expecting
yeah very tall very tall there was some
very cool pictures of us at Mike siRNA
which is a night for freedom and we'll
not a short guy either Jack phobic not a
short guy either
and then Ivan throne was there and
Tristan Tate and we're all in the we're
almost picture together with ball two
and like every dude what six foot and
way over ya know like I think six foot
two at minimum at minimum right like you
know a certain bitch would've showed up
he would've been the person like he's
like 511 or six foot will sink we'll say
six foot looks like what gives go give
him six foot but he would have easily
been the shortest person easily that was
a really good time so tell me who else
did you meet at CPAC what what did you
see go down at CPAC anything of note I
didn't actually see you know it was kind
of boring for the most part in terms of
the actual substantive speeches I only
watched about two or three I thought
Michelle Malkin speech was certainly the
highlight I thought she Spitfire but
what was she talking about mostly most
people don't know I don't so Michelle
Malkin just gave a speech and got up
there and immediately made the point of
saying
I'm gonna go along because there's only
one panel on immigration and that's
ridiculous because it is the most
important issue that we face right so
she made a big point of talking about
the harms of illegal immigration and of
over extensive legal immigration and so
I mean she's an immigration restriction
Asst
and it was a you know very powerful
speech she made the point of you know
aggressively mocking and criticizing
almost every previous Republican
administration from Bush onwards and and
other people as well Romney and even the
ghost of John McCain which apparently
made people very angry you know you're
not allowed to criticize a dead guy
apparently not well apparently not I
don't think the left got that message
no no I mean you know well it's like
many things it's where I mean suddenly
people who are useful to the Left become
oh that guy was so great I have a
strange new respect for John McCain John
McCain and George Bush - yeah George
Bush especially yeah but they haven't
gotten to that point yet with Ronald
Reagan y'know they no I don't think they
had a strange new respect for all but I
love out George Bush's become like the
less new teddy bear oh yeah of course
yeah he's such an old lovable guy you
know right he started the Iraq war he's
just a painter now destroyed our foreign
policy for 15 years what a wonderful
he's got no love within the you know the
conservative right now so you know he's
I think people sort of look back on him
as being a total disaster yeah I
think I think that whole era of
conservatism has looked on with kind of
shame and it just wasn't really that
present if you actually went around CPAC
and you looked at who was there it's I
mean there's sort of a Trump takeover of
CPAC yeah and in an in something of a
nationalist takeover to you know there's
still you know plenty of kind of older
school ideas but they're finding
themselves trying to fit in to the
modern conservatism rather than there
being this uneasy tension I think that
that there was a lot of tension last
year but this year you know for example
we had the social media censorship panel
this year right and last year I remember
it was stuffed into a teeny tiny room
where there was you know half of the
people were in there were like as an art
crew and then there was like another
like 30 people sort of stuffed in this
tiny little room right where was it this
year main stage main stage and it wasn't
just a full it wasn't just you know
hermie Dylan who was
wasn't it last year right first speaker
was Josh Holley senator Josh Holley of
Missouri who was extremely woke on
issues of social media censorship and
regulating big tech it's it's shows you
how far we've gone in about a year where
the idea of maybe we need to regulate
these guys has gone from this Fringe
ridiculous non conservative idea to a
part of the conservative platform I mean
and there's a lot of things you can
point to like our work with the petition
that we got started about a you six
months ago explain that a little bit so
we I mean about six months ago we start
a formal White House petition to stop
the bias hashtag south bias and try and
demand that new laws be passed that
prohibit social media companies from
banning lawful speech right we my view
and it continues to be in my view is
that you should have the same right to
speak on Twitter that you do in a public
park and I feel like that's pretty
simple but controversial is there any
legal precedent for something like that
no I mean there people make arguments
that there is a legal precedent use
using cases like packing them if we
really want to get into the weeds of why
I don't think that case actually
supports yeah you're shaking your head
yeah we don't want to get into the weeds
no but the the basic are I think we
actually do need new laws mmm like and I
take the aggressive position here that
we should use government power to
achieve conservative ends and existing
law is a tough fit with what we need in
terms of social media companies so we
should write new law to protect
conservative speech online okay now sort
of in the same context of CPAC having a
transformation revolution is this a
transformation revolution and
conservative thinking that you're going
to use the government to regulate
regulate the markets I mean perhaps I
mean it's not depends on how what type
of conservative you're thinking about if
you classify Teddy Roosevelt as a
conservative I mean he's the originator
of antitrust law I think you know I've
read some biographies of Teddy Roosevelt
in the past year and really sort of
empathize with him a lot there was an
attitude that the idea of regulating
John Rockefeller was preposterous among
Republicans knees like no actually it's
sort of ridiculous that this one guy has
more power than the federal government
or could have more power than the
federal government by virtue of his
ownership of everything related to the
single source of energy in our country
right
and that we ought stop that yeah use the
power of the government to say no it's a
dad right
you know we're and also I think to take
a stand on principle against the idea of
social media censorship and big tech
regulation you're gonna be arguing
against civil rights laws that's what
you're gonna be arguing against at the
end of the day I think is the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 was a serious
infringement on the private property
rights of restaurant owners hotels etc
right saying that you don't have the
freedom of association used to and the
reason we did that is we said you know
what yes there's an infringement on
freedom of association but stopping
racism is more important right a public
good of common gets a cut it's a public
good and you know we're tired there's a
great anecdote from Lyndon Johnson's
biographies by Robert Caro where
apparently one of Lyndon Johnson's
employees a black man had the job of
driving his car his favorite car all the
way from Washington DC back to the hill
country of to the country of Texas for
when he took his vacations and the story
that it was told was that he he'd there
were plenty of stretches along the route
that took him through the South where he
just couldn't get a hotel or couldn't
even use a bathroom so he was you know
relieving himself on the side of the
road because he's on the wrong race and
Johnson's like you know what that's
that's fascinating about private
property rights but that needs to stop
that's gonna end yeah we're gonna use
government to end that and I'm tired of
waiting we're not using waiting for some
invisible hand mechanism to solve that
problem right so but is really big I
don't know it's begs the question the
right phrase I think people misuse that
that term all the time raises yes a
question is risen has risen in my mind
now
it's a powerful thing to use the
government to infringe upon civil
liberties yes private property rights
etcetera for a common good there has to
be some sort of threshold right there
has to be some sort of threshold by
which it becomes more important how do
we judge how do we judge whether or not
it's now appropriate for the government
to take to take away other people sort
of right to do what they want whenever
they want however they want it for the
quote common good I mean if I had an
answer to that question I would have
solved political philosophy that wasn't
a softball question no that was not a
softball question that's probably the
hardest
of political philosophy or one of the
five you know like well at what point is
it justified to infringe on liberty and
not just in one particular instance but
in as a general rule well let's think
about it more practically speaker and
like how and we don't have to get too
deep into this but it definitely rose
rate begs the questions in my head and
out okay uh you know if we can't solve
that question then at least we can put
like roadblocks or obstacles or hurdles
or breaks or a governor on on that like
do you have any fear that you know you
start you will you start we do it again
and then you you like the threshold gets
lower next time no I I they're they want
the left want socialism there are that's
already part of the mainstream discourse
like the question is whether or not
we're willing to do what's necessary to
prevent them from having a complete
stranglehold on politics so that they
get it right the you know if you're
thinking oh well if we do this we might
risk setting a precedent that the left
will be able to abused in the future my
argument would be on the contrary if we
don't do this we're risking not a
precedent being set but rather a
political takeover in essentially a
paradigm shift in the way politics works
because of the dominance of the left
over social media in addition to every
other institution they dominate mmm and
if that happens then the erosion of our
liberties and the creep towards
government intervention will increase
far more dramatically than it will is
the result of any precedent we create by
regulating big tech now mmm fascinating
that's really fascinating and one of the
things that brings up that I discussed
on Prior podcast with John rabe that you
know our current sort of you know call
it a civil war or not I mean you know
the current conflict that we have right
now between the red insurgency the
resistance and there's a third group of
corporations and right now it seems as
though that the corporations and
resistance are have an alignment where I
have an alliance against the insurgency
and they're working together not
necessarily because they have common
goals because they have common enemy
sort of the same thing but you
understand the distinction right to what
extent does the insurgency becoming the
ones that wants to crack
down on corporations thereby only
further embolden that alliance against
us and have them just sort of have a
longer and stronger reason to be united
in the war against us because I was
talking with our friend Jack so back the
other day how do one strategy is we have
to like drive a wedge between the
corporations and the resistance I fear
if we do this way we're just gonna like
solidify that alliance against us for
the next 10 20 years to come so I think
part of the reason the there's two
reasons that the corporations are on the
resistances side one is a change in the
geographic center of our economy to
Silicon Valley which is a deeply liberal
place right and the staff of the most
important corporations of the world is
you know derived from a place that's
like 95 percent democratic and then the
second is sort of a underlying shift in
the parties whereby the Republicans have
become more of a party of the working
class
then the war ever before and there's
this class divide manifests itself and
people who were previously big business
elites deciding that they're more
aligned of the Democrats than otherwise
so I guess my answer to that is that I
think those two dynamics mean that the I
don't think that we can change that I
don't think the prospect of putting a
wedge between corporations and the left
is that will work that well because at
the end of the day the people staffing
these core personnel is policy and the
personnel despises the nationalist
movement thinks it's totally wrong and
misguided and I think moreover that it
is not a bad thing to be on the wrong
side of the corporations I really don't
think it's that bad if we in a world
where we can make sure to use the
government to ensure that we have access
to social media the ability of big money
to influence elections is seriously
constrained right like one of the
interesting things about modern politics
the left is so focused on campaign
finance reform to me that's just be its
its passe it doesn't matter as much
anymore because social media
amplification there's little you know
money plays a little bit of a role but
Donald Trump spent one tenth of what
Hillary Clinton spent so can we use the
resources we have
to put together a winning political
coalition and I think it's easier to put
together a winning couple itical
coalition when you're defending the
people against the corporations and not
vice versa
mmm that's interesting you know it's
funny I remember in the the 90s the WTO
protests in Seattle it was an Tifa and
black bloc uh and then Occupy Wall
Street and Occupy DC and Tifa black bloc
all against corporations corporate greed
big money etc now all of a sudden and
Tifa black bloc all those guys they're
on the same team with the corporations
how the hell did that happen well well
it turns out corporate it's easier to
beat your opponents and remove them from
the public square potentially if you can
get the corporations to do it for you
so they infiltrated them and staff them
up so that is obviously the threat to
having corporations the wrong side of
you is the hope is that they might
censor you which was why we need to
regulate big tech to rent them from
censoring us right if you said that
we're not allowed to do that and I'd say
well then we need to figure out a way to
get the corporations back on our side
somehow I don't know how if we don't
have this control because I don't know
how to make Google conservative I don't
know how to make Facebook conservative
or Twitter conservative like you have to
make it profitable to be conservative
right and even eat and even then it's
like cultural you know it's in 2019
culture matters more than economics it
really yeah it's just you know my
libertarian background I went to George
Mason and studied economics there which
is like basically the number two capitol
of libertarian thought in the whole
country after University of Chicago and
it's actually only gotten I say worse
now it's only gotten worse since I since
I left but you know this idea of
regulating the markets just grates me
right because of my training in my
background and such but I was I watched
a monologue from Tucker Carlson the
other day an old one but I came across
it again and it was where he went on for
about 15 minutes about free markets are
not a religion and they're not the goal
free markets are not the goal the goal
is you know some other metric of human
you know happiness success health or
whatever and that free markets are but
merely a tool to achieve whatever we're
our goal
is for Humanity and that really struck
me as a as a sensible empathetic you
know future forward thinking perspective
that is I you know I I'm not exactly
like a Republican conservative historian
here or anything but like it strikes me
that that is a new perspective would you
say that that's true like that within
the right-wing thinking cuz I think a
lot of us went through a libertarian
phase I mean it's hard for me to talk
about what say Republican thought was
like in I don't know the 1940s and 50s
I'm not actually that good a historian
of political thought really but I do
know that in the modern era ever since
you know the 1970s and 80s that that
would that is very hetero Doc's right
and that's forty years of political
thought and political positioning on the
right
I think it's overdue III find thyself
I found myself very persuaded by that
point as well and I also am a big
believer as a corollary I think the
right needs to avoid any self-defeating
principles right like if your principle
leads to your own political defeat then
it's not a principle worth keeping dis
genic yeah is familiar with this is a
bad principle for you to hold on to so
very principle is we're not gonna ever
discuss regulating big tech companies
because the free market should be this
only solution we use to solving any
problems we have politically and it's
like well that's funny because the
Socialists will been and then you'll get
nothing of what you want right right and
Republicans and conservatives will find
themselves the continually excluded from
more and more things and by the time you
realize that oh my gosh we need to
actually do something about how the
world has we've turned into the private
GDR right a private jerk you know German
Democratic Republic where you can't say
publicly what you want a privately
enforced Social Credit System it'll be
too late
right yeah there's an interesting
thought experiment out there about when
you make everything free total freedom
liberty and whatnot then like tyranny
well that's the conditions for tyranny
to arise right so you have to amman this
balance this essential balance which is
what's been debated forever and will be
debated forever and it's very
fascinating that we have this this real
case study right now yeah
and you know we can say we're gonna have
to go circle back and wrap up on CPAC
but I wanna just this is a good time to
talk about Tim I think yeah Tim Poole
the the youtuber extraordinaire
independent journalist former vice
journalist cool guys smart guy he's been
really working hard to bring the message
to the masses really through Joe Rogan
now about social media centre stuff so
what yeah what did you see happen over
the last couple weeks and how effective
do you think he was and what of his
arguments do you think have weight and
legs versus which ones that don't
because I have some thoughts on that
myself so I thought Tim was
extraordinarily effective you know the
funny thing is I mean Tim was hanging
out with us a few weeks ago he was at a
knife of freedom in here just at the
party just last week he was at night for
freedom last week I think literally he
was talking about going to LA he didn't
tell any of us what he was about to do
and no no I talked to him and he goes he
goes there's big stuff coming that's an
understatement here huge stuff coming
yeah
but ya know like we were playing secret
Hitler with him the other day maybe week
and a half ago look great it was really
fun I had a great time no Tim did a
fabulous job
I think apparently they were keeping it
secret because they just didn't know
when it would happen and they didn't
want to like preview and then have it
fall flat so they just were like Tim was
like I'm not gonna talk about what I'm
doing until we actually are ready to go
live what you just explained just real
quick what happened so he's living in a
closet four people in a closet so Tim
Poole went on Joe Rogan's podcast with
Jack Dorsey CEO of Twitter and vigía
Gotti the trust and safety lead so the
head of their moderation team to talk
about social media censorship in various
high-profile bannings so they got stuck
you know this is because I think Jack
Jack Dorsey first went on Twitter on Joe
Rogan and Joe didn't really push push
him on anything Joe was not like
particularly prepared to talk about
social media censorship which struck me
as odd yeah right like I thought that
Joe wouldn't wouldn't know I mean he's
talking to Sam Harris and he's talking
to the Weinsteins and Shapiro and
everybody you don't think that he had
gotten the download on that already
apparently not I mean it's you know it's
not unthinkable right like you think
about you know I know that I think
myself about being a Content producer
we'll be talking later about periscope
but we are
content producer especially a prolific
one you're often not actually that much
of a content consumer Zoomer yeah you
know like I don't for example I don't
really listen to many other people's
periscopes you know I like Scott Adams I
like Mike I like Jack but if you say do
i regularly listen when they go live no
I don't you know I can talk to Jack
sobic on the phone whenever I want so
why would I listen to his periscope I
don't know but it's true and even even
as your ear as your content creation
grows and the people responding to you
grows it's even you can even you just
get danger there's a danger of just
living in your notifications and living
in your mentions right you know that's
the bubble no one talks about it's like
you don't even go over to your main
timeline or your list anymore you're
just so many people responding to you
and interacting with you that that can
really suck your time away so I guess a
Joe Joe you know he does spend a lot of
time producing content but I just would
have thought in the conversations that
he was having with people that he would
have gotten the download but apparently
not so Tim so Tim gives him so he goes
Jack Jack Dorsey goes on the show
Joe basically softballs him the whole
time just talks to him about Joe so -
like to run a company you know and like
Jack's the boringest interview you ever
ever saw in your whole entire life
and it enraged Alex Jones because Alex
Jones felt like Joe a pass up an
opportunity to really dig in onto the
issues and then Alex goes on Joe show
they they make up Joe promises to dig
into it a little bit deeper and who does
he pull up to dig into a little bit
deeper but our buddy Tim ya know cuz
apparently Tim did a video on what he
thought the podcast itself was bad and
then Joe apparently apparently Joe had
already been following Tim like
they described this on the Rubin report
right in Tim poo and on Ruben yesterday
I think and so they have this DM
conversation and Joe was like hey call
me up and eventually they have like that
ended up - Tim being brought out to do a
podcast one-on-one with Joe that went
well and then apparently there was
already some discussion about bringing
him back to go have a combined podcast
with him Jack Dorsey and somebody else
in this case it turned out to be vidya
right so that was how that came about
is an incredible podcast I think Tim did
a wonderful job of confronting Jack and
Vidya with
and considered the idea that their rule
about dead naming and misgendering was
inherently ideological yeah and a
demonstration of an underlying bias that
various of these bannings were overdone
or ridiculous or ridiculous and that
also that the sort of the problem of how
each of these individual decisions
always seems to go in one direction you
know it's like grains of sand making a
heap look like every single decision you
make where you say oh we made a mistake
or oh you have to understand the full
context or oh whatever
if every single one of those decisions
is ending up with the left-wing outcome
result like you're biased right even if
any individual decision is explainable
like if they're all coming out the same
way right your bias I mean I live
through Twitter bias I mean a year ago I
got doxxed and somebody like literally
engaged in a full-on targeted harassment
campaign of daxing like definition of
daxing revealing a pen name contacting
my employer seeking destruction in my
personal life dogpiling bunch of people
on top of it spreading misinformation I
and all of my followers reported all
these all these tweets they all came
back is approved without any problem I
mean there couldn't have been a more
clear case of like violating or Terms of
Service in terms of daxing targeted
harassment you know misinformation lying
actual harm created in the real world
etc but nobody nobody cared yeah I mean
I tell people now that you know Twitter
has gotten better in the sense of they
are less likely to come up you know ban
you for things that aren't rule
violations so like in the last year or
so I think they've sort of gotten a hold
of okay we need to be at least somewhat
more consistent so when we do actually
enforce the rules we can point to real
violations and not just ban people
arbitrarily right but that doesn't mean
that they enforce the rules against
everybody equally correct right so it's
like basically what it means is if the
rules apply to you as a conservative
they don't apply to the Liberals and you
know I do tell people that it's like but
you know that right like stop why I mean
in the context of your own personal
Twitter use look the fact that they're
going to just enforce the rules if you
stay within the lines you're not gonna
get banned like stay on the lines right
it's some unit or something you have to
deal with and like I'm dealing with it
all the time I I feel as though there's
just any minute it could
hammer could come yeah and I worry about
that intensely and a lot of people do
and I think one of the interesting
things to come out of that is you really
did see Jack more than Vijaya who seems
sort of intensely focused on the nuts
and bolts or for a job but like Jack
sort of get a handle on like oh this is
what everybody's upset about Yeah right
like this is why the Conservatives are
livid because one it's just so crazy
consequential to have Twitter taken away
from you as anybody who wants is
anybody's job requires some ability to
influence the public square right
anything having to do with media Twitter
is the only place to be right yeah I
mean it becomes incredibly difficult to
do any job in politics any job the media
if you don't have Twitter now so super
consequential to take that away and the
fact that conservatives see it like the
you know where the decisions come down
whenever there's you know where there's
a gray area whenever there's an acuity
whenever there's context that needs to
be evaluated it seems to always come
down with the outcome that progresses
favor as opposed to the opposite now one
of the things and I didn't watch the
entire podcast but I did read some
attempts follow-up comments um it seemed
to me that he was making an argument
about fairness mm-hmm and he was also
making an argument about Twitter's terms
of service operating sort of in a
smaller circle than what the
Constitution provides for and so and
then he brought in the idea of like
foreign influence and therefore were
like allowing foreigners to have a
greater impact on our dialogues and our
citizens etc but I didn't hear him none
of those actually were very persuasive
to me yeah I didn't hear him making the
public square argument right there like
this is now a utility we need to be
talking about regulation and we need to
be talking about government involvement
in managing what is now basically the
new form of television right Guga who
regulates the airwaves and sells you
know sells us cell phone bandwidth and
and and over there broadcasting rights
government who regulates how much it
costs and who's able to get electricity
the government also same with you know
plumbing and sewer etc so
where is that argument in Tim's
presentation and where is that argument
moving forward because that seems to me
to be the one that makes the most sense
yeah I mean I thought I thought Tim's
framing was interesting in the sense of
trying to but it could have been framed
much more simply your your platform is
too powerful to exclude people from your
platform is too important to exclude
people from mm-hmm right that's the
simplest way of framing it yeah
like rather than talking about it's
important because people try and
influence it it's just no it's important
it's the center of all this discussion
and to have a culture of free speech in
America not just what the First
Amendment permits because like again if
you think of free speech in the First
Amendment its concentric circles the
First Amendment protects a particular
free speech in a particular context
namely government infringing on it but
free speech is more than the First
Amendment it's a cultural value that
says we should all have the right to say
what we think and participate in public
discourse and you know if that's why I
say again you should have the same right
to speak on Twitter that you do in a
public park I firmly believe that I
don't believe current law requires that
but I believe that that's what ought be
we ought change current law to manifest
that as a reality and that's because
free speech is of value as a cultural
norm is much bigger than that and
requires a cultural commitment to it in
the same way that you know private
companies could discriminate and it
wasn't unconstitutional for private
entities like restaurants and hotels to
discriminate against people of color we
passed laws because the importance of
the government not discriminating is
that's only one part of a cultural value
of non-discrimination right we actually
need to have laws that say you private
companies are not allowed to
discriminate either right
sandy'll it is the same deal and I worry
that the free speech is like one of our
common stories that we tell each other
that unites us in our imagined order
because American America today is not an
ethnic based bloodline heritage based
nation right it's it's a nation that is
held together through what John rabe was
calling on the last broadcast fictive
kinship what other people
the name of the author escapes me but
from sapiens about re re about imagine
order shared imagine orders as we all
know about you know for just living this
experience that we share these
narratives and these stories didn't we
talk about imagined communities when I
was on it we certainly did right like
that's the Benedict Anderson book that's
exactly why I'm bringing it up again
free speech free speech is like at the
very tippy top of all or the bottom
foundation of all these stories and all
of whatever our imagined American order
is that unites us and so it's a valuable
thing for us to protect if we're going
to have a civic nationalism if we're
going to have a nationalism that's not
based on blood heritage and geography in
a lifelong history of occupying the same
lands free speech is the one that we
have to defend right right if we
actually that's true
that's and that's a really good point
about why it's so important to defend as
a cultural vacuum because I think you're
right I haven't thought about it this
way but it's actually key to American
nationalism yes right and non-ethnic
American nationalism is going to be
rooted in common values common
traditions what is a more common value
or tradition in America than free speech
there is not I don't think there is well
so yeah I mean if you're if you're
rejecting free speech or just and the
cultural norm of it and you're rejecting
some I don't know how you even get to
what unifies us as a nation
you really don't so I can i I understand
now you know ten years ago I wouldn't
hear the phrase free speech warrior and
I didn't quite understand the power of
it but you know all these experiences
that we've had over the last few years
all the learnings all the cultural
evolutions technological evolutions all
of it has led me to believe that free
speech defending free speech is the key
to keeping our civic nationalism
together and from preventing us from
spiraling out of control into warring
factions however the irony of that is is
that this free speech also then sort of
facilitates especially online through
social media facilitates our tribalism
right and it also facilitates these
collective intelligence networks that
have arisen and this network warfare
that's going on between the resistance
and insurgency
so it's like it's like the key to at all
but it's also part of the problem
it's alcohol the cause of and solution
to all our problems yeah so are we gonna
we gonna square this circle today that's
two questions now two questions that I
don't know that we're gonna answer in
this podcast we have some other things
we want to get to we definitely do we're
gonna do that we're gonna do that okay
so that without covered our free speech
talking and what was happening with Tim
so moving right back down the agenda
let's go back to CPAC there was another
party at CPAC that was very important to
you personally and right where I had a
wonderful time myself it was on Friday
night and will is gonna take it from
here and he's gonna explain what
happened and you have an announcement
also that stems from that so why don't
we just go right to the party and right
to the announcement and we'll get into
it go
so Raheem and I announced at a party
Rahim who Rahim kasam and he he is the
former editor-in-chief of Breitbart
London former aide-de-camp to Nigel
Faraj and Steve Bannon oh there we go
you know an important right-wing
commentator and I have purchased the
rights to Human Events the what is human
events Human Events is was the name of
the oldest conservative magazine to be
published it was published in the modern
era is plot start being published in
1944 so older the National Review older
obviously older than the Weekly Standard
but older older than all those it went
it had been a you know actual paper
publication and so I think 2013 when I
went digital only and by 2015 it was
basically defunct so it's just been sort
of sitting dead for four years or so
Rahim and I were had been looking for
things we could do together in terms of
a project we've been talking about a
non-profit to think-tank various other
things when he remembered that human
events was up somebody had told him
human events might be for sale and we
quickly coalesced around that idea both
because we saw a sort of a lack of
institutions on the right that you know
prestige institutions that fit in are
the nationalist pocket if you will and
also the fact that Rahim himself had
been editor-in-chief of Breitbart London
so in terms of finding something we
could clearly do that was clearly within
our kin to start with right let's go
with something Rahim knows and right
that I am part of so and also I mean the
markets clearly speaking about this
because you got some other people out
there trying to do something else right
now too
right Jonah Goldberg and Steven Hayes
are trying to put together a
yet-to-be-named new media company to fit
into and what I'm sure is a vastly
underserved market of people opposed to
Trump on the right I think this sarcasm
yeah a little bit a little bit 93% of
the party is proud Trump and they want
to be Trump skeptical good good luck
guys okay so you and Rahim we're trying
to figure out something dope and you
guys came across the fact that Human
Events was for sale I almost said the
wrong name yet yeah I have actually miss
miss dated the name a couple times so no
their Friday and something or other
anyway so you you stumbled across this
and you guys have actually purchased the
entire organization mm-hmm right the
name the content social media so we
don't have all the archives we have
we've purchased the name then we
purchase all the IP basically got it and
all the domains and all those social
media accounts perfect so that's that's
basically the core of the purchase we
got we own the trademark we own the name
we own all the human events related
domains beyond the Facebook YouTube
Twitter accounts
and any other accounts we find and where
does the name come from it comes from
the Declaration of Independence when in
the course of human events of free
people blah blah blah I don't even know
if that's the right one I know when in
the course of whatever is the
Declaration so that's awesome okay so
you guys have now purchased you're a
publisher yes
Rahim is the editor and a global
editor-in-chief global not just the
what's that your idea was that was
reading is not lacking for Flair no he
certainly is not yeah and you know the
scarves are his pocket squares yes the
the name of the drink at the party that
we went to was called Raheem his dad
Raheem his daddy so echos of a little
Milo you Nautilus in there but certainly
a way to get attention certainly a way
to raise a profile certainly a way to
get people excited the party that I went
to on Friday night that was hosted by
Raheem will was sponsored by a whole
slew of people project ferret among
others project ferret eyes open the
books friends of fish a few Rob wasing
or a few other organizations yeah so
there was a lot of support right out of
the gate for something like
right right and how have you found the
reception in the marketplace to be to
your announced oh it's been it's been
remarkable we mean we've gotten all
sorts of people coming to us you know
offering us congratulations wanting to
contribute bringing up the fact they
have old memories of it like even my dad
for example mention that he you know my
my grandfather passed away about fifteen
years ago but so my dad handled the
estate and he said to me that he had
found tons of old human events and
National Review like in my dad's my
grandfather study like there's just this
old memory of human events that in the
past generation because a lot of people
wrote for it a lot of people used to
invent as like a big intellectual
influence so there's this long memory of
it and people are stoked to see it
coming back and also people are just
excited for Rahim and I to get a project
going like you know as you say Rahim is
very charismatic guy has a lot of flair
people want to see him succeed
definitely you know I've got my own
audience that seems pretty pleased with
the idea of me doing something instead
of just doing periscope yeah and and I
think that there is widespread
acknowledgement that in order for this
sort of emergent new philosophy ideology
of the new right or whatever it's being
called these days American nationalist
right whatever to have any legs the post
Trump era etc there needs to be
institutional support whether it comes
from think tanks whether it comes from
political consultancies or lobbyists or
academia or whatever it also has to come
from the media space yep I mean the
neocon set human event I'm sorry not
human events New York on saw the Weekly
Standard and that's a big institution
for them that you know built up a lot of
talent so we need the same thing so it's
gonna be not only a way to be
information but also a talent and cue
Bader absolutely I mean we want to we
want to hire people we want to bring him
in as staff writers and we want to build
them up to I mean I think a big part of
how we approach this is the reason that
we want we think will be successful is
partially because we've got
personalities at the top that people
like and are attracted to you know I
don't mean the prestige brand is
valuable but it's not as valuable as
having people at the top who are
charismatic and that people want to
follow like the name national view is
not was not as important as William F
Buckley right playing that Buckley was a
star right and there really aren't that
many stars left in
conservative media who like run outlets
I mean you think of people like rich
Lowry and not to be dismissive but you
know it's not he's not he's not with
Buckley it's he'd probably met that
himself right right exactly so that's
that's very exciting well and you know
you have spent the last I don't know
year or two years you know we all we all
sort of came into this thing with this
this whole Trump phenomenon starting up
in the fitt in 2015 in it the election
in 2016 and we're all sort of they were
attracted to necessarily Trump himself
because clearly there's a lot of
downsides but really to sort of what his
popularity represented and we've all
been sort of evolving and trying to find
our way in this space and you've been
working very hard to build your own
audience and you've been doing that
through your periscopes and yeah so
let's let's talk a little bit about that
because dude you have been just killing
it almost periscopes yeah so I mean for
those if you don't know periscope again
live streaming platform on Twitter and I
do a pretty simple periscope very
regularly I'd say I try to do at least
like four or five a week where it is
usually between 15 and 25 minutes and
it's me commenting on an issue and then
taking questions and so my setup is
unbelievably simple like people are like
thinking I mean I see a lot of people do
periscopes and they have a lot of
complicated layers of production I've
tried some of them and I quickly went
back have you tried to dig into like OBS
and everything oh yeah no I used OBS for
maybe a week yeah and I went back to
what I still have found to be the
simplest and best way to do periscopes
of the style that I do what's that an
iPad on a tripod just an iPad just not
bad and like a white yeah and and the
reason I say that is because I think
periscope is a unique medium as a form
of live-streaming I mean there are ways
I don't even produce it on multiple
platforms I keep it on periscope I might
start doing multiple platforms but it's
there's technical complexity they'll
have to deal with the core value and the
core offering I think of periscope is
the ability for an audience to
participate in a performance that is
totally unique yes like if you do a
podcast like right now you guys are
listening you're not I love you you're
not participating in the performance
that Jack and I are currently doing
crack
right when you listen to watch a
television show you're not participating
and when you watch a YouTube video
you're not participating you are
passively consuming when you watch a
periscope and if the performer of a
periscope is interacting with the
comments live then you are participating
in a live performance that's really cool
and really unique definitely and then
has that has that experience that
interaction it's forced me to think
deeply about issues week knowing that
I'm gonna have to defend them against
comments and if I fail to respond to a
solid query in the comments it's
embarrassing yeah it's sort of like
being in court and you have 400 judges
asking you questions as an advocate do
it do your do the other followers say
hey hey you're gonna answer this one
occasionally but I'm pretty good about
being responsive you know I was I was a
teasing I was a decent attorney and a
decent law certainly very good mood
court participants so I know how to do
it and an expert debater
he had an expert so might even say a
master debater that's that's an inside
joke with me and well will is a national
debate champion and as well a national
debates or star coach or people - so
that's where we'll got a lot of his his
skills around debate presentation oral
argument ation of which he is absolutely
unquestionably an expert and the
periscope medium is perfect for him
because he also thinks very quickly on
his feet mm-hmm yeah and so tell me how
do you see because like I don't I don't
see guys that are the editors in chief
or publishers of major publications
sitting around on periscope engaging
with their audience and like allowing
for that interactive experience which is
this is a very you know new media
cutting-edge medium that you know you
have become an expert in so how do you
see it working together in your so
recitative resuscitating an old school
publication and combining it with your
new media skills how do you see that
working in the future so I see it I mean
I view the way that a media publication
succeeds is through it starts right we
just talked about a Buckley running
national review so part of it is having
building your own personal profile as
somebody who runs a magazine so that's
one part right you want
people to like you moreover if if I
continue to do periscopes it gives
people an avenue to participate and
engage with the people running the
periodical right when I think about rich
Lowry engages a little bit on Twitter
but how accessible is he how accessible
has been dominant she's also very good
at the Federalists there's it there's a
sense in which there's this distance
between the audience and the publisher
yeah I think if I keep doing periscopes
I can reduce that distance enormous Lee
right and by reducing that distance keep
my audience and the audience of Human
Events deeply invested personally in the
success of the venture correct and
that's the thing people don't understand
about the value of social media social
media amplification and marketing works
best when people want to help you it's
it's a lot like high school like life
it's like yeah it's like personal
relationships and so it's your
authenticity right and it's your connect
wreck connection with people that has
sort of given birth to the support that
you have and then and then has fostered
it and and Givens are the the backbone
for its growth so I'm challenging you
now don't lose track of that right right
when you end up you know Rahim was
already on Tucker Carlson and when you
end up at these conventions and whatever
on stage with whatever yucky yuck don't
forget your periscope roots in that
social media connection with the people
because that is what kicked you so
kicked you off yeah no I won't I loved
periscope and I think that my ability to
do it gives me a unique advantage I just
don't want to give it up I don't think I
have any particular advantage well a
little bit maybe in like a TV format I
don't have experience a lot of people
have you know a decade or more of
experience doing TV hits for example
I've done one yeah it wasn't it wasn't
on a mainstream channel so I think done
right I did I did cheddar once for Tesla
Tesla oh right but I've never done one
for politics oh you got a call up jack
yeah oh no I've done I've done some hits
on our way in yeah like those are those
are only talking head hits where you're
even in combat oh oh that's what you
mean you getting like back and forth
like back and forth any sort of you know
kind of contested arena but soundbite
fighting yeah soundbite fighting but you
know I do they haven't done any Paris
right I've done hundreds at this point
yeah I think by a virtue of you
listening to this podcast guys that
you're not interested in Tosa those hit
the soundbite as sword-fighting and
neither are you are i interested in
delivering that kind of content because
we like to explore the issues we'd like
to go deep on things and in fact talking
about we were talking about current
events and we drilled down deep enough
on each at least two of them where we
got down to the like most fundamental
question you know on each subject right
and you don't get that in sort in
soundbite sword-fighting true you get
that through you know having in-depth in
meaningful meaningful conversations and
so that is something that I look forward
to seeing continue with you with your
periscopes and with the new venture with
the new publication any thought to
taking the publication back to print I
mean eventually hopefully but that would
be sort of a vanity project at the end
of the day I mean I I haven't read a
paper periodical in years so I don't and
I don't know that most of you have
either I've read on my phone and I read
on the computer yeah so I don't expect
my audience to do do the opposite either
yeah and I and you know so we're much
more likely to add newer forms of media
like to human events live streams and
yes podcasts and events videos and we
are to go paper I think that creating
more ways for people to engage with us
personally and with our content is ideal
and that actually gets back to a point I
we we got a little bit off track on like
why I think it's so important why do
have so little production value Wow
right yeah oh yeah tell us right because
this is this is like a key point people
I think oh I need a really nice video in
a really nice mic and whatever if you
use that stuff you're using periscope
producer or some other fancy program
there's going to be a time delay between
you saying something and the comments
showing up oh my god dude I was playing
around with OBS yesterday in periscope I
mean it's not just a couple of seconds
now it's like five seconds yeah that
makes it impossible to really carry on a
meaningful conversation yeah with your
audience yeah which is the entire point
of the medium as far as I can tell right
right and so then what you're doing if
you do periscope that way you're kind of
doing a live podcast and it's not that
much better than a not live podcast
right like I mean there's some benefit
to being doing it right after a news
event hits you know so you can
immediately get on
err but the unique value of periscope
being able to have a participatory
performance goes away when you use all
these layers of production so I think
that many people starting periscopes are
thinking oh do I need all this setup no
you don't and in fact it it almost hurts
it you need to get good at responding
and interacting with an audience and not
getting distracted I think the best
periscope I ever did was I did right
here on my iPhone 6s plus which I
haven't upgraded because I'm a Luddite
right I mean I started doing most on
periscopes on an iPhone I did you know
first I did Facebook live streams with
just a small group of friends to get
used to the format and used to the
dynamic of having a comment having to
respond to it yeah
most low-tech thing imaginable then
literally no I mean it's just like I
would put my phone in in the sort of
crevice of the laptop right and then
just just I was just laughing at the
low-tech thing possible being also a
thing that involves mobile technology
right that's true low tech is wrong low
production yes or low effort you know
it's the thing you everybody owns right
all you have to do is just oh you just
hit start broadcast yeah and then you're
going and then and then I started doing
periscopes getting amplified by a few
people and now I mean I really do
believe that you know I'm not gonna
change from using an iPad in a tripod
just so I can stand while I'm doing it
and have the beauty of an iPad is
obviously the comments appear larger so
it's easier to read them and interact
with them but that's been the secret
sauce for me and I think like so you
know if you're if you're listening to
this and you're like I'm thinking about
starting a periscope don't worry about
production just don't do it you need to
worry about content quality and your own
ability to interact with your audience
yeah I would I would say for the podcast
is a little bit different like I made
sure to go out like you guys can hear
the quality of our voices on these
microphones and the recording equipment
that we have it makes a huge difference
oh yeah on the podcast cuz you know a
lot of you have this in your ears and
it's like something that's very personal
I've been debating whether or not taking
taking the podcast into a live format
also with video everything I've read
about expanding your podcast audience as
the video to it things really take off
I've been having good success I mean we
have had
extremely good growth feedback online
has been tremendous the reviews that
have come in you guys can check it out
at Jack Murphy live.com forward slash
podcast I've been capturing some of the
best reviews I mean the reviews have
been tremendous so yeah I'm just looking
to add new layers as we go on as we move
forward but you know the periscope thing
is definitely a little low-tech relative
but super powerful and it's just an
immediate connection to your audience so
let's write but I'm last on that tip
unless you have something else I want to
just talk about authenticity
right it has authenticity look okay I've
been writing about this in a few of the
last podcast we did we talked about sort
of the death of expertise and part of
the reason the expertise doesn't have as
much value anymore is because the world
is too complex for any one person to be
an expert and able to say if we do X
then Y is going to happen basically at
this point the only thing we can do is
be like hey let's try XYZ ABC and then
see what happens and then maybe we'll
pick one of those and we'll run with
this so that's why expertise is like
there's other reasons but I think that's
why expertise has become less of an
important idea because the world is just
too complex for us to predict the future
and to predict the actions or the
consequences of our actions and we've
also had a proliferation of people
thinking and talking and sharing ideas
and so what's more important these days
seems to be a combination of
discoverability and authenticity
once you become discovered I mean that's
like that's like ten-millionth the
problem definitely times the problem is
like becoming discovered and I can do a
whole podcast and a whole series of
essays on disk how do you become
discovered there's strategies and
there's like roadmaps but it's not easy
and there's definitely some luck
involved
but then the authenticity part in a
world awash with Talking Heads
commentators and million billion Twitter
feeds and YouTube you know got youtubers
I never I'm not comfortable saying
youtuber yeah authenticity is what sells
authenticity and I don't even mean self
I mean authenticity is what drags people
in keeps them there and keeps them
connected to your content so will how
are you going to maintain your
authenticity as you become the publisher
of like a nationally known
or publication involved with people that
are nationally internationally known
authors and journalists you're probably
gonna end up on boards and panels and at
conferences and on the TV and all that
stuff how are you going to remain
authentic authentic and protect you know
continue with your authentic authentic
connection with your audience and your
persona I mean I think it has to be
through periscope that's the beauty of
doing them I think one of the things so
I'm a lawyer too and in law school I
learned that the best way to learn
something was to actually subject
yourself to Socratic questioning by the
professor so you because if you subject
yourself to questioning by person you
know intelligent person then you if
there are any flaws and the way you're
approaching things they will get
revealed if you haven't thought through
something that will get revealed yeah
and so and in some sense periscope is
just that times 100 right instead of
taking questioning from a single
professor I'm taking questions from 300
people at a time now it gives me escape
routes because it's easy to avoid
questions if I want to and I'm not
taking it's hard to like chart out a
list of questions or a path of questions
that can force people into revealing
their contradictions right but at the
same time subjecting yourself to
questioning is a way to easily make sure
that you're and by anybody is a way to
kind of keep you grounded yes you can
get cut down to size pretty quickly on a
periscope if you just don't know what
you're talking about
you know so we and you would say that
the quality of your periscope viewer is
such that they offer challenging
questions oh yeah absolutely
you know they post challenges and and
you know initiate some conflict and
sometimes I'm not in the mood for it and
I just if especially if they're
obnoxious I mean I have a general rule
about Twitter and periscope and
everything is like you don't get to be
obnoxious to me into I mentions nope you
don't or the other people or to other
people right like if you're obnoxious in
my mentions you're getting blocked yeah
period kind of like unless you're a big
account in which case then we're having
a date I'm gonna try and steal all your
followers for me okay I'm gonna win this
fight right exactly but it's not if it's
not a fight worth winning then you're
getting blocked yeah and I have taken
that same much more liberal block
approach in the last six months or so
and it's made my life better
mm-hm it's made the lives of my
followers better there's less irassman
in the mentions that my timeline is
cleaner
and I think my content is stronger for
it you know I certainly maybe two years
ago would have said like Oh walking
that's for babies and also back then I
think we all many of us believe that the
conflict is a tension model was the
right model mm-hmm
but I think that that has moved into the
background somewhat especially with
people at or sort of social capital
level and down for sure but the the
battle is with the ideas and with the
events and with the big the big people
at the top right and that kind of
conflict still still works yeah that
kind of like still works and I mean if
the conflict is substantive right if
you're opposing associative challenge
annoyance or it but if you're just being
an asshole then you're getting blocked
right and I don't I mean I just don't
hesitate and I think it's yeah it's
important to your followers it's
generous right if somebody is an asshole
enough to annoy you there certainly
annoying the people who want to read you
right definitely you gotta stand up for
your people yeah yeah it's like an act
of leadership I think yes yeah and yeah
people don't block enough they should
block more lock more block more that's
what's more mute less well yeah totally
because if you mute them you can't see
the way that they're harassing people in
your mentioned someone right okay so I
think we've made it through most of the
items on our lists I think we're gonna
jettison some of the other ideas because
we've had a really substantive
conversation on a number of a number of
items and I'm just really happy for you
dude congratulations I mean it's a major
announcement you're you've moved from
being just an independent voice in the
wilderness here into owning a prestige
media name and partnering up with
somebody who is first rate in Rahim and
his background experience and the future
just got a lot different for you didn't
it my friend oh yes it did you know we
yes it has I mean I'm very very excited
and can't wait to see what we're able to
accomplish yeah with you I'm excited for
you too man I'm feeling some good energy
out there I know that Ali Alexander and
his crew with culture has really made a
splash lately they're really moving in
the right direction will you are too
I've got great momentum here on the
podcast the guest list has been
tremendous the information that we've
delivered has been fantastic the topics
that we've explored the most meaningful
important conversations that we're
having in the country today really you
know in every podcast we seem to be able
to get down to fundamental question
affecting our society and have a
conversation about it that is digestible
that's understandable I know some people
have to the Jordan Hall yeah Jordan Hall
podcasts were like man I listened like
three times and things are just rattling
around in my head still I haven't been
able to process all that but you know
listen to it again and and really my
whole point in doing podcasts like this
is to bring today's best thinkers to the
table and have conversations meaningful
conversations with them that will help
us sort of create a new mental framework
for understanding the world around us
because the old frameworks that you were
given no longer work the operating
system software in your brain that you
were handed as a child that's a product
of the blue church and of the early and
mid 20th century and if you were you
know born in the late 20th century for
sure whatever you got from your parents
culture and society is whack and it does
not work and that is why we're feeling a
nationwide sense of cognitive dissonance
when we're looking at the world and it
doesn't match with what our mental
models tell us it should be it doesn't
match with the feelings that we have
inside of us
I think we're experiencing like a
national cognitive dissonance on all
sides right now which is why everybody
feels a little agitated it feels a
little off feels a little confused and
the whole point of the podcast here is
to help us create new mental frameworks
for understanding the world so we become
more at peace and we can understand what
to do and where to go and how to make
progress in a chaotic and confusing
world that's becoming increasingly
complex you know we are as John rabe
said in the podcast previous we are in
the midst of a war that sees no
distinction between military and
civilians that is being fought on the
battlefield of information technology
and social media where each of us is a
participant whether we want to be or not
we've all been conscripted you can run
away but it will still come after you
you know this is a world that's very
confusing and very complex and we're all
trying to make sense of it and that's
what we're trying to do here at the Jack
Murphy live podcast you can please go to
the Jack Murphy live.com website sign up
for the mailing list so
you can get additional Jackman people
have content that's where all of my best
content is going these days besides the
podcast going to the mailing list I'm
emailing like three and four times a
week go to the podcast page Jack Murphy
live.com podcast and sign up to
subscribe to the podcast follow me on
Twitter at Jack Murphy live go to my
youtube channel Jack Murphy live at
YouTube as well basically Jack Murphy
live all around the internet
will where can they find you you find me
on twitter at Wilt Chamberlain on
periscope at Wilt Chamberlain and soon
at WWE main events calm for human events
all the news and commentary you'll need
understand the world around you
awesome dude that was a real strong hour
I really appreciate you coming over here
to Jack Murphy live headquarters thank
you to my new puppy Rosie for being
pretty darn chill the whole entire time
oh yeah she's beautiful she's 12 weeks
now dude I took her to the vet the other
day she was fourteen point five pounds I
had taken her to the vet three weeks
prior she was ten pounds
that's forty five percent gain in three
weeks this puppy is exploding right
before our eyes so if you want to see
cute puppy pics also follow me on
Twitter I love posting pictures I won't
post pictures of my kids but I will
invade the social media privacy of my
puppy because we haven't legislated that
yet you know but one day one day very
well might again thank you everybody for
tuning in we've got great and more
guests coming up I think I can't tell
you because I don't know what order
these gonna come out in but what an
awesome way to finish
thanks again we'll thank you everybody
everybody for listening hit subscribe
and I'll see you guys soon thank you
[Music]
you