[Music]
Jamie we recently put out a film with
Daniel called war on sense-making that
did really really well kind of slightly
unexpectedly it sort of really seemed to
catch the zeitgeist and I know that
you've been thinking a lot about some of
the same topics in that film what were
you struck by and what did you feel that
you wanted to add to that particular
conversation I think the first thing it
was just amazed at Daniel's absolutely
fluid flawlessly structured stream of
consciousness laying that out for
whatever it was an hour and 40 minutes
just thinking holy Daniel you know
like that that is that is some
exquisitely articulated and presented
I know thesis points and and kind of the
ecology of the information space he was
describing and I found myself at the end
you know Daniel I have rift on those
topics before weren't hanging out and on
two occasions priority I'd even told my
wife Julie I was like yeah I think we
got to the point in the conversation
where he almost told me the answer you
know because he was introducing that
that brilliant metaphor of hey what does
you know we've talked about rival risk
games and how that buggers up the
information ecology and you end up in
win-lose dynamics and you end up with
all of the things that pollute the
information ecology the the virtue
signaling the MIS signaling that
distinctions between truth and
truthfulness right the the weaponization
of content and misinformation and all of
those things and then he was saying well
hey there are examples of antivirus
cooperation and introduced the ideas of
our organs all doing the thing the liver
does the thing that kidney does the
thing but together somehow
they boot up into us the idea that one
eye sees without depth perception you
know or peripheral vision you put two
together and you get parallax binocular
vision you know fantastic and I was
looking and I thought oh fantastic he's
actually gonna finish the story and
that's exactly where it ended that in
your guys interview as well and and and
I think he just hinted at it at the end
which was you know the reason that our
organs can do that wonderful antipholus
cooperation into
something more than they are as separate
parts is because they don't have egos
and agency and the moment we introduce
egos an agency into the game we're back
to the bottom of the slide of game a
rivalries competition and game theory
dynamics and that is you know between
Brett Weinstein's arguments on
evolutionary biology and Jordan Hall and
Daniels discussions of game theory you
can sort of feel like man that those are
incredibly dense forces you know you can
create castles made of sand on top of
those based on what we'd like the well
to be but millions of years of
evolutionary selection and encoding plus
our cognitive biases and heuristics or
sort of rules of thumb and shortcuts for
the way we do things and think things
that sort of equals game theory in a
nutshell and I've been increasingly sort
of in grim aw and respect and
appreciation for game theory dynamics
and largely full hat tip to Jordan and
Daniel for articulating and expressing
that so well so for me the question is
is how do we break out of that
centrifugal force of that rock bottom
denominator and and so that's really
that's that's the kind of the stuff that
got me thinking having having seen
Daniels brilliant kickoff to this and
sort of really interested in exploring
well how do we do better than that in a
simple way because obviously in game a
game be as nomenclature is probably new
to folks I think that was Jim rut and
Jordans articulation from several years
back that is now kind of coming back
into the conversation but just to render
it in terms that maybe people might be
more familiar with is and this is an
analogy not necessarily a direct
one-to-one but in many respects game a
kind of the way we have always done
things as humans can be seen as playing
the finite game right versus game B
which is arguably the infinite game
James Casas book finite and infinite
games which introduced and socialized
the concepts and actually I think simon
Sinek is just about to come out with
another book by that title a slightly
different emphasis but yeah the idea of
if a finite game is basically win lose
and and it's an arguably might makes
right then the infinite game is is the
anti reverse version potentially win-win
the aim is is right you know basically
just power mix might and the purpose of
the infinite game is not
winner-takes-all the purpose of the
infinite game is to create conditions by
which we all get to keep playing it and
so in some simple sense if that's an
analogy that maybe people are familiar
with you know we can think of game a to
game be in in those terms and so as we
look around for examples we think I'm a
bloody hell you know like evolutionary
biology that's a big weight game theory
that's really hard to beat and so we've
got to have something if this is going
to persist if this is going to work we
have to have a mode of coherence or you
know what again Daniel and Jordan
they've got so many great neologisms
what they might call a strong attractor
right has to be stronger than ego and
ethnocentrism because that's what we're
encoded to do so again to and if anybody
hasn't seen brett weinstein and his wife
heather hang who's also an evolutionary
biologist they did a brilliant interview
with joe rogan where they discuss gender
and they discuss all these things but
they wind it all the way back to like
mating habits and birds and all these
kind of things and they say hey look
before we get into socio-political you
know tirades against each other let's
just look back at what are the
foundational substrates that have always
been and let's take a look at that and
say what are deep structures this is
what shallower social structures which
is something that brett and eric have
said that our evolutionary toolkit
that's what we have to build with we we
can't start from anywhere other than
what's hardwired into us yeah and
anybody that's holding out solutions for
us in this day and age that are
aspirational right that are very much
relying on the better angels of our
nature as it were that is fragile as
 you know the moment you know mike
tyson's 101 everybody
plan till you get hit all right
everybody's got a better angel too they
get bitch-slapped and so the trick is is
how do we create conditions to play the
infinite game together when things
aren't optimal and you know the good
news is that I think we don't actually
have to start from scratch and many of
the building blocks are sort of staring
us in the face and weirdly
it's sort of if we can go in go into the
burning house fire that are the sort of
culture wars right now and realize that
in fact we have been inching our way
towards the infinite game for some time
and it is arguably the Western tradition
microwave I guess my question at this
point is how is this related to the war
on sense-making
why is sense-making infinite in because
it was in in daniel's explanation as
well we get wind up in the same
territory but we got there through sense
making why are those two things linked
well I mean my sense is is that the only
way we share information is electively
or with a gender so the question is is
what would inspire or motivate us to be
both truthful and true to be open book
and transparent with each other and that
fundamentally requires trust and that
fundamentally requires an alignment of
motive and at some sense of shared
outcomes as long as there's an ask them
as long as there's a win-lose as long as
there's a rivalry as dynamic we will
continue peeing in the pool of the
information ecosystem unintentionally
and intentionally and so we will never
clean that up the only way we can say
don't file our own nest and we actually
all sleep together and so that that's my
sense my sense is that at you know this
basically the linkage is Daniel got to
the metaphor of the symbiotic bodily
system so the question is how do we
learn to play well together
bottom line is sent you know you could
obstruct it to the level of the war on
sense-making is simply about data and
information but it's really about what
do we as humans and you individually and
collectively consider salient or
relevant advantageous or disadvantageous
to our very human agenda and so how do
we add Rao do we address those things
and agree to open source a thriving and
vibrant information ecology on behalf of
effectively inhale Bodhisattva 101 all
sentient beings that would be the jam so
so the idea that we don't have to start
from scratch and the fact that you know
really and this is right smack dab in
the middle of the culture wars because
there's a lot of critique these days
particularly in universities as to why
are we teaching old dead white guys
right and and we need to have better
representation of different cultures
different ethnicities different
backgrounds and experiences and that's
overwhelmingly worthwhile let us
increase the span of consideration and
typically the defenders of the Western
Canon are often they don't exactly
represent that well they're often
reactionary come marginally old white
guys going rah rah rah
this is the way it's always been done
and this sort of you know some feeble
appeals to tradition you know or
excellence or whatever and you know the
postmodern critiques of power and
hegemony and all those kind of things
just eviscerate those arguments but I
think there is actually something really
important that is getting lost in that
firefight and that is that you know if
you really think about the articulation
of the West why do we and you know
discussing the cannon right discuss the
Greeks and the Roman Republic and the
evolution of the Magna Carta and even
you know the etherion legends and so you
know the the rule of civil law and tort
law in the British judicial system and
the articulation of the American
Republic is that these were the seeds of
the beginnings of the articulation of
the infant
game and what I mean by that I mean
think about the Magna Carta at 101 we're
saying hey the Divine Right of Kings not
so much right we weren't actually gonna
clip and bound that even though you can
claim that and you have the you have the
force to enforce that we're beginning to
clip your wings
even the legend of King Arthur and the
knights of the round right the if
explicitly geometrically saying we are
no longer dealing with hierarchy and
we're going to equivalence based on
virtue and a code based system so this
is no longer might makes right it's
right the knights of the round
chivalrous Knight make make might just
power and so and again with with the
accumulation of civil civil and tort law
the idea that the law sits above power
privilege prestige and no man is
absolved now that said a thousand
exceptions perversions mutations
co-optation of game theory warping
bending co-opting that experiment but
nevertheless it's that experiment and
when you have and you know the critiques
of Thomas Jefferson and George
Washington being slave owners etc etc
etcetera and so we shouldn't honor them
and they should always senior like right
absolutely those those are legitimate
critiques we now go one step further
George Washington before the
Revolutionary War his nickname in the
French Indian Wars was the butcher of
Fallen Timbers
he was a cold-hearted and merciless I
mean it was like the meal I massacre of
the 18th century so there's no need to
dress them up in sort of hagiographies
that you know that acknowledge none of
their humanity or culpability in the
things they did and right when the
founding fathers of the u.s. got
together they're like okay well we're
trying to do something really hard let's
look back through history and see who
anybody who's come anywhere near this
and they ended up with the Republic of
Rome they ended up with hey do we go
Nero and the descent into Empire or do
we go Cincinnatus The Reluctant
gentleman-farmer
who is called to service and then
relinquish his power
the moment his service is no longer
needed and that absolutely informed
Washington and you've got Jefferson
Madison Franklin and they send they're
saying look these are the guys with all
the might and they actually tried to set
up a flexible massively I mean think
about it
even though it's creaking at the seams
right now and on our recent politics
isn't damn nearly gumming up the works
they said we've got all the toys we have
won the rival risk game we are going to
build the conditions to play an anti
rival risk game three branches of
government checks and balances veto
power term limits write constitutions
bill of rights all men are created equal
and entitled to the same things and
basically you can make the case that all
of us history the Civil War
re you know read litigating that
argument right civil rights you know the
same thing saying hey we're not there
yet there was a city on a hill there was
a promise part of this infinite game and
he think about Abraham Lincoln at the
Gettysburg Address you know massacre in
Gettysburg I mean tens of thousands of
citizens killing each other and he said
we're not here to honor the dead we're
here to recommit so that original
promise Martin Luther King did the same
thing and as I have a dream speech he
said this is not there yet right we're
here to say I have a dream that there's
a cheque that hasn't been cashed
insufficient funds we're entitled to
that thing that that infinite game
promised life liberty the pursuit of
happiness
Obama did it after the church bombings
he once again attempted to double down
on that commitment and and the critique
randomized juh I was just I had the
honor to speak at the Santos Royal
Military Academy in the in the UK and we
were brought into the chapel and given a
tour and on all the columns of the
chapel within names and even brief
stories of only officers who had died in
all the wars that that the British Army
had for him and it was it was
Afghanistan in the 1890s it was Crimea
it was the Boer War in South Africa it
was world war one and two it was the
entire spectrum and you're like holy
 this is just a litany
of colonialism and the projection of
force around the world and on the other
hand noble and courageous the charge of
the Light Brigade right and I was
thinking it's it's it's both you know
it's absolutely both and and and you
could see that from the from the inside
you know the Brits absolutely felt that
they were bringing civilization and
justice and rightness to the world and
they were merciless bastards in doing it
and can we hold both of those things and
can we see and you even think of someone
like Noam Chomsky you know who has
offered relentless critiques of American
hegemony and power around the world and
his muse his books manufacturing consent
and all of those things saying democracy
is basically a sort of puppet show sham
and all those things and you think
rather than saying oh you know almost a
sort of family dynamic of like oh the
data you know daddy in power let's knock
him off the pedestal he's disappointed
me and he's not all that rather if we
can hand back two more steps and say
this articulation of the infinite game
includes the exceptions includes the
contradictions includes the hypocrisy
includes the returns to the deepest
ideals and includes the critiques the
fact that Chomsky has been a tenured
professor at MIT one of the most storied
institutions on the planet and gets to
do like this is built-in to the
infinite game we've been playing so
where we are right now socio-politically
around the world is I think we are in
perilous danger of torpedoing that
experiment of the infinite game and
having a regression to the finite game
all the populous all the tribalists
around the world South America the US
Europe for sure Africa and Asia right
there is a there is a return to might
makes right there is a rejection of the
global centric promise of all humans are
entitled to inalienable rights it's me
and mine
and there can be there's that
irresistible adolescent temptation to
say burn burn and we're
gonna tear it down and it's going to be
better afterwards and I think that is
wildly naive and I think that people we
will be left with the burning wreckage
of what actually could have been our
best bet like yes this is imperfect yes
this is riddled with contradictions this
is riddled with CAPTCHA and game theory
dynamics rent-seeking behaviors you name
it and the premise the promise is still
one of the best things we've ever had
and if anybody has any questions about
that just check out the transition of
Rhodesia does in Bob way and understand
what has happened to the GDP to the
civil liberties to everything in that
country and you think there is there is
actual real merit in a we don't have to
start from scratch be we've got a pile
of inertia and momentum moving us in the
direction of the better angels of our
nature we have the systems we have the
legacy we have the lineage we have the
stories and can we say in fact that for
those who have said yeah but that train
is a mirage to me my people myself my
ancestors ran as fast as we could and
that thing accelerated down the track we
had no chance of catching it and let's
slow down that train and get people on
it let's not blow up the tracks and
that's it that's a critical distinction
I mean a lot of the talk in this area is
about sort of game B game B dynamics are
you saying that there's a kind of that
there is a trajectory within Western
culture or world culture that implicitly
has gained B dynamics within it is that
what you're saying I am I'm saying this
did not spring soui generous out of
nowhere and the and the notions of the
infinite game were actually seeded in
the last you know in the last three or
four hundred years you know if the
French enlightenment I mean I've always
had issues with Steven Pinker I've
always felt that he was a bit of a white
washer you know and in the sense of like
everything's getting better and look at
all these things you know child literacy
and infant mortality and
and the decrease in Wars and conflict
and you're like yeah me but there's a
lot of externalities there's a lot of
blowback there's a lot of repercussions
you're not including in your
cherry-picked stats but lately I've
really been coming around me like man I
get it I absolutely get where he's
taking that stand and where he's kind of
like ringing the bell and saying hey
please pay attention babies in bathwater
there is something absolutely cherished
and tender here and essential and so
rather than us kind of being in the
realm of you know egg heady pundits you
know whiteboarding a perfect future
reality that no one can ever figure out
how to get to my senses is like let's
look the answer is almost always in the
text the answer is almost always in our
story and can we can we double down on
the better angels of our nature even as
we are dealing with some of the devil's
and in my sense is is that a lot of
people in the kind of consciousness
space whether that's meditation or
psychedelic Renaissance or you know you
name it but people who are sort of
saying hey our answer is elevated
consciousness and I think they are
absolutely right if we take a look at
all the trend lines of what's happening
in the material world most of them go
off a cliff sometime in the next you
know three to five decades or sooner and
the only sort of asymptote the only Hail
Mary can we actually pull this off
against all odds' play is some
substantial and nonlinear up leveling of
human consciousness and collaboration
right such that that warlin sense making
right becomes massive collaboration and
we actually become what we boost our
collective intelligence and coordination
and no matter how cynical you are about
the state of Western democracies if you
if you assign some heightened capacity
to higher stages of consciousness and
even like multi-dimensional awareness
and the universe and information theory
you can you know take whatever level of
wildest guesses as to the nature of
reality let's say you're really far up
that stack still all of it is mediated
by these meat suits in 3d right until
further notice
consciousness is animated via cognition
Hido and bodies and brains and hearts
and lungs and oxygen and every time no
matter what our views are of this life
and other lives there's you know with
rare exceptions of like Tibetan Tulku
sand Lamas who claim to have
recollection of prior incarnations
basically when we lose these meat suits
it's a cold reboot and we lose all the
data at a minimum so the question is is
that where else would you choose to park
your meat suit to engage and all of
those higher-level
pursuits explorations even even
objectives other than in a civil society
with rules of law civil rights and
protection of private properties so you
can be as cosmic and out there in your
philosophy as cosmologies ontologies and
you would still quite rationally come
back around to being a highly engaged
citizen that does give a about your
vote and does give a about what's
happening because the key is obviously
how do we go from rivalries egocentric
ethnocentric game a dynamics which is
arguably the sort of inheritance of Homo
sapiens right the ape who knows but also
the ape who games the apt who is is
working to win right - what Johan
wheezing and the the the Dutch theorist
called homo Luden's
right the playful ape the ape who is
playing the infinite game and the
infinite game is really only accessible
not from an ego ethnocentric level of
consciousness but from a global centric
level of consciousness and that's the
critical note how do we move as many
people as possible from ego ethno
century to global centric as fast as
possible then there's something really
interesting about that those
developmental moves which is that it's a
skip level play so the only way that a
baby gets to develop
egocentrism right because it you know
when it big when a child is born there
in just fusion so they've been in the
womb me and mommy are the same organism
I have no separation I come out of the
womb I'm still I'm attached to the teat
right I'm hugging and there's just I am
just this blob and I'm absolutely
connected to that heartbeat and that
love and all of those things and then
egocentrism comes online when I realize
there's me and there's not me there's
mommy and me and that is how the
terrible twos come online I'm like I am
a free agent I can do things I can move
things I can pen things to my well hot
damn so the only reason the only way we
get too egocentric is to realize there
is someone that's not me the only way we
get to ethnocentric is to go a level
beyond that and realize there's someone
that's not us there those smelly
bastards across the river the talk funny
and dress funny and don't deserve what
they've got and we're going to take it
the only way to get to global century is
to realize this there is something or
someone that's not human so we have to
glimpse a Cosmo centric expensive
perspective in order to annex a global
century stance now how the hell do we do
that okay so one of the only examples I
think we've really got other than
individuals sparking off sort of the
axial age greats of Jesus and Mohammed
and Buddha and Lao Tzu and that lot
astronauts and the famous sort of
flyover effect right and this has been
persistent from the original Apollo
missions all the way to some of the
astronauts on the space station these
days but there is something absolutely
profound about looking down on that
little blue model and seeing the Sun
come up and go around and seeing it
rotate and seeing the Amazon and seeing
the Nile and seeing the Himalayas and
realizing man all the boundaries go I
mean all the normal cliched that
gets said about that and in fact that
original photo was what Stewart Brand
put on the Whole Earth Catalog in the
early 70s right and it was game-changing
I mean humans had never seen our home
right from afar and it literally was was
credited with kicking off the entire
environmental movement of the 70s now we
you know that doesn't scale
we can't all buy tickets to Virgin
Galactic and go get our shot of that but
rather than being astronauts you know
can we instead perhaps become
Psychonauts can we explore levels of
consciousness they give us that actually
lived experience that somatic sense of I
have gone beyond my tribe and I now
definitively come back to the level of
global centric life liberty and the
pursuit of happiness because all men are
created equal if they're not created
equal they are sure should entitled to
that aspiration on the move so the
question then is is how do we do that
because it's one thing I mean bottom
line is we can be anti rivalries right
when there's enough to go around
and and if we're thinking about
future-proofing that isn't that's a
partial and inadequate condition right
if it only works when everybody's got
enough that is fine but temporary and
and not actually likely to closely match
our conditions going forward so now
let's boil this down to actually like
people because we've been talking about
systems and history and culture and all
that kind of stuff but this really comes
down to people it comes down to you in a
moment of choice do I open the
proverbial kimono do I bare my heart do
I show my cards and do you do the same
and what I've been noticing particularly
around communities of practice that are
thinking of these kinds of things and
are trying to explore the way into
collective coherence and ways for us to
play better together is there's this
consistent and sort of I don't know what
you'd call it sad frustrating concerning
but it's a it's a pattern and it seems
to come up which is that folks are
discussing these ideas and concepts they
are realizing yes game a ooh game B yay
you you think the same things we say
we're believing the same beliefs let's
get together in play and there is often
an initial spike of enthusiasm
excitement feeling met and a sense of
holy maybe this is how we
this done right collaboration many of us
have been carrying the burden solo you
know and a lot of our pause to get to
this conversation have been by exclusion
and exception you know we have found
ourselves persistently misfit toys you
know persistently cost out of the
socially defined norms persistently
losing at game a not because we are
necessarily bad at it we might have even
been able to win at it we've just found
it distasteful or not satisfying or not
congruent so there's a lot of you know
bumps and scrapes we've accumulated
along the way and then we get to this
place where we find our nominal allies
our nominal conspirators those who
breathe together and there's often a
spike of optimism euphoria possibility
and then we get to this stutter step
where I say wait a second if we're
really gonna do this post egoic thing if
we're really going to dump all of our
puzzle pieces out that we've been
carrying so carefully right and mix them
all in together and holy maybe
there's even a bigger picture that none
of us had but our puzzle pieces fit
together beautifully wait wait a second
am I sure because I've taken a lot of
hits to get here and this means giving
up all control this means giving up all
safety this giving means that giving all
guarantees and even my cherished vision
of the version of the future right that
I've been living and dying for and as we
do that as theirs as their vulnerability
it's like okay well I'm self-aware
enough I think this is actually this is
good pain this is productive distress I
think I do need to open and relax into
this but then something happens
and there's a conversation there's a
decision we start seeing our humanity
poke back through through all the
idealism and we see somebody do
something that we're like I'm not a
thousand percent sure that was quite
right we see money power influence
control what do we do on Monday morning
right who
the credit who strokes the check who
gets the likes who gets the post you
know who gets the funding who gets the
peer-reviewed rights whose name is on
the pay on the top of the paper or the
book and suddenly we go back down into
the inevitable substrate of game a and
we've started out seeing each other's
light from each other's light right in
many ways we you know most of us we've
gone through our lives looking for who's
got the shine right who's got the shine
and in middle school in high school it's
often those crazy charismatic kids that
act out you know and razz the teacher
and do this because I kids got the shine
let me gather around them I want to be
close to them or the the captain of the
sports team or the star in college or
you know or the one who only seems to
know there's always something about
those folks that seems like they're on
the inside of the secret and we're drawn
to them we seek them up we that's who we
feel we want to be with and our people
that would so we find each other
and we say ah I see your light
hail-fellow-well-met right and we're
drawn to that and then as we accumulate
these error messages and as we go from
sort of this Mirage of crystallizing
infinite game be possibility and then we
start seeing maybe shadow maybe blind
spot making ego or pride or contraction
then boom boom boom boom we go back down
the floorboards to seeing each other's
shadow from each other shadow and
there's this persistent pattern I've
noticed is that the people we've often
been closest to aligned around some of
the most aspirational positive projects
possible we often end up spitting bricks
and pissed off hacked off cynical ah you
don't really know them they're not all
that or we end up fracturing from the
very people that despite our miss hits
despite the frictions and the tensions
we are absolutely on the same team
rowing in the same direction and yet we
end up more distant from them than we
are even from the quote-unquote
opposition and my sense is is okay so
how given all that can we recommit to
seeing each other's light from
oh there's light right and my sense is
if you do that like if somebody's burned
you a few times you're naive
you know you're the NED stock of the
world right you're like I'm gonna go
with honor and duty and do the right
thing and you know as socially once say
you know the game of Thrones man you
know you win or you die you know and I
don't remember who gave him that if
isolate just don't ever go to King's
Landing in fact I think was Jordan said
that we were riffing on this he's like
the rule is if you're Ned stud don't go
to King's Landing so how do we hold
honor and courage and you know and and
decency and hold up that infinite game
at the same time it's just not just
leaving us exposed to get slaughtered by
those folks still playing game a and and
and manipulating the finite game so you
can't be naive right and and and yet on
the other hand we have to trust we have
to trust and in fact there's a there's a
great book called the trusted advisor it
comes out of Duke Business School but I
highly recommend folks checking out if
they're interested but they've actually
boiled trust into an actual equation and
they said that trust is credibility like
I actually have the capacity to do the
things you think I can reliability
I do what I say I'm going to plus
intimacy
I actually feel connected to you and new
to me I feel that you get my world right
and that's a part of your thought
process and decisions all divided by
self orientation and so because that's
the self orientation as the denominator
you can destroy a very high schooler
across the top if somebody is saying I'm
not convinced we're in it for the same
reasons I'm not convinced that person
isn't covertly playing game a dynamics
rival risk dynamics with game be
lip-service effectively the the covert
sociopath right and so Jordan and Daniel
have articulated the idea of rule Omega
and we actually rift on that on that
last talk together and the idea of rule
Omega is basically you know and back to
information ecology is to say I commit
- presuming that there is signal in your
noise and then I am going to inquire
until I find the truth that you are
holding no matter how messy or noisy it
is or as you're presenting it right and
and they actually made an interesting
clarification after that talk we had
which is that rule Omega cannot be
demanded by another it can only be
extended based on mutual agreement based
on that intimacy right but my sense is
is that for us to be able to after
seeing each other shadow go back to
encouraging each other's light right I
mean Goethe it has that great quote he
says CMN as he is and he will only and
always be as he is but see him as he
could be and should be and he will
become what he could be and should be so
how do we do that right without leaving
ourselves exposed right at a time that's
mission-critical and we've got we've got
this far let's not the bed right at
the end by being overly naive don't do
the NED stock and so my sense is that
rule Omega works best we can create that
trust right based on that equation if we
balance rule Omega with code Omega which
is that I can commit to not ignoring
your shadow not ignoring those error
messages but continuing to see you as
you could be and should be if and only
if I have the confidence that we have a
priori ahead of the conflict right agree
- and commit it to a code that is higher
than ourselves and our own personal
preferences because particularly in back
to the notion of sociopaths right
particularly in the postmodern
culturally relativistic social justice
world there is a cult of sensitivity and
my process and my experience and and
weaponized nonviolent communication I
hear what you're saying but what's true
for me is and all that
right what typically happens if we try
and clear those issues we get lost in
that space and I'm like you're you're
making the mouthy sounds I don't buy a
 word of it right and I'm just
actually just gonna back away from you
now and rather than us having this
expanded global centric sphere of
concern we end up shrinking our circles
to the people who we actually still do
trust and there's just no way that
scales there's no way if every time we
bump up against another potential ally
we get the error messages we attempt to
resolve it seems to be squishy or
weaponized and our efforts to deepen
trust actually divide us and create more
suspicion that's the wrong vectors so my
sense is is what could code Omega look
like and again the same argument about
saying hey we don't need to build or
theorize game B from scratch already the
seeds of the infinite game are actually
in our living tradition yeah you know
and specifically I mean just you know to
go back to colonial expansion I mean it
was God awfully brutal but also look at
the tribalism look at the factionalism
look at all the places in the world
where there where there are far more
regressive and in fact we're seeing it
in the u.s. these days which is takeout
career professionals install cronies
this is no different than Salaam Hussein
dealing with his village and clan and
populating the Iraqi government we're
seeing the resurgence of that that is
not an improvement that's not an
advantage so what code can we install so
we've got the infinite game over the
last three four or five hundred years
depending how far back you want to trace
it we've also got the obvious
right I mean rabbi Hillel who was one of
the prime inspirations for Jesus of
Nazareth teaching and he basically
cribbed a lot from hello there's a great
story where Hillel was cornered by the
Pharisees and they were basically in a
showdown because he was a bit of an
iconoclast and shit-stirrer
and and they were like okay you need to
get out of Jerusalem he's like no no you
guys need to get out or something
they're like no we got a lot of people
you piss off he's like okay I'll make a
deal with you they said okay we'll
challenge you to basically a poetry slam
like you know if you can recite all of
Scripture on one leg while standing on
one leg without touching your other foot
then we'll leave but if you can't then
you have to bugger off and never come
back it's like you're on so he stands on
one leg and he says do unto others as
you would have them do unto you
the rest is mere commentary so we don't
need to over build this alright you can
take what's his face is it Don Miguel
Ruiz The Four Agreements
all right and just you know that that's
been a very popular book in the last
decade or so but I mean it's pretty
bog-standard simple I think it's
something like you know basically you
know this is paraphrasing just like tell
the truth
lighten up don't make up and do
your best
oh yeah okay that works that is it
enough to be dangerous that is enough to
act on and so you know if we if we
realize that ahead of time we have
committed to a code then I can trust
that when I transgress I will
acknowledge it you don't have to be
vigilant we don't have to be down in
that level of you holding onto your
shadow right watching out for mine
because you trust and this is you know
the old back to you know I mean I'm sure
it up is hopelessly traditionalist in
this conversation which is kind of funny
because I'm typically not but the idea
maybe it's because we're here in London
but that idea in English culture right
which is you know the phrase that's not
cricket and that doesn't mean we're
playing cricket you know was someone's
picked up a baseball bat it means that
is a violation of the spirit of the game
right and the spirit of the game the
spirit of the infinite game is that I
self-police the spirit of the infinite
game is might doesn't make right
just because I'm winning doesn't mean I
get to bend the rules in my favor right
the spirit of the game is when the ball
is out I call it even when I lose that
point or the match right and so if we
have the ability so I think there is
something particularly in education over
the last generation or two that has been
you know self-esteem self-esteem
self-esteem anybody can grow up to be
astronaut egg yes the earlier if the
most feeble effort gets praised
you're wonderful and perfect as you are
we've kind of really diminished the role
of shame in society now guilt the idea
like I'm worthless and I don't you know
and I don't have enough and I don't
deserve absolutely we should lift people
up from experiencing needless guilt but
shame I think is a massively under
utilized social nutrient which is
basically saying shame is I have
transgressed our cherished norms and I
feel that in my core and I am willing to
atone for it and if we reintroduce
healthy shame based on code Omega so
that we can self police so that each
other can see each other as we could be
and should be if we can engage in the
peak experiences right the astronaut
flyover effect but internal
consciousness if we can use those peak
experiences to affirm our shared
humanity and come back and mend and
integrate our trauma alright so that we
don't get triggered so that we don't go
back down the slide to evolutionary
biological games theoretical rivalries
 right if we can then connect
with each other in communion right
something larger than ourselves
something bigger than ourselves then
we've got a shot you know then we've got
a shot at unlocking our collective
capacity then we've got a shot at
unlocking and our collective humanity
and then we've got a shot at dusting off
this banged up damn nearly broken seed
of the infinite game and seeing it grow
and flourish into a tree that shades the
world
let's say we get to good us a good sense
making ecology as Daniel did such a
great job laying out in the first half
of this this conversation and he was
predominantly focusing on the systems
and the structures literally the kinda
you know that the sort of you know
exterior quadrants right of system
society technology and talked a little
bit about the interior of an individual
making sense of that polluted
information ecology and are people
holding things back I was sharing
clearly is there a difference between
truth and truthfulness that signal all
those kinds of important points and then
we're all getting to yes yes yes yes yes
now the next crux is how do we do
collective coherent sense making
together how do we drop in to what
Victor Turner the anthropologist called
communitas right you could also Keith
Sawyer at the University of North
Carolina
you know describes it as group flow and
I think that it's and I think they're
pretty pretty damn near analogous right
it's basically the idea of what happens
when we all get together and something
more than what us each could have come
up with individually emerges from that
thing right and so there's a lot of
wandering and there's a lot of
theorizing there's not a lot of
demonstrable practice yeah and even Otto
Shama who's a friend and colleague of
his at MIT he popularized theory you
which is all about co-creative emergence
their world cafes their varying other
modalities around this most of them are
all about just talking better
with each other which I don't find super
compelling I think that pretty pretty
weak sauce when it comes to overriding
all of evolutionary biology the
prison-house of language and game theory
dynamics I just don't think they're
really adequate they're aspirational and
you get a bunch of tightly self-selected
people in a group like that and they can
sometimes with a lot of time and effort
and often not a lot with not a lot of
practical outcomes so my sense is if you
look at it and you look to see well
where do people get into communitas
high-performing communitas true group
flow on a regular basis they are almost
always
violently meritocratic organizations so
if you take Special Operations military
they brutally select for who gets in and
they massively over trained for what
they're going to do and if you can't
like there's a shared knowledge and a
felt sense by the Masters in the group
of the thing we're trying to get to what
does it feel like when we draw what does
it feel like when egos dissolve and we
create a high functioning hive mind so
there are people that are anchoring it
and then as you bring in new people to
that it's a pretty brutal test of can
you get there with us can you contribute
to that thing or not and so it's sort of
up or out and we will swap you with the
next person in line for someone that can
if you think of Miles Davis's jazz bands
right I mean he was a genius musician
and was utterly ruthless on who could
hang in his band right if you couldn't
swing if you couldn't hit the chord
changes if you couldn't play at that
level you would be swapped for someone
who could okay and the same with the
Golden State Warriors or the Lakers or
any of the you know any of the you know
European Football League right I mean
you look at Real Madrid you look at any
of these teams and you would make that
case as well
they are ruthlessly meritocratic right
and you have to have the skill set to do
the thing you know ultimately so you
could let's say you know alternately
you've got a lot of egalitarian
communities of practice gatherings et
cetera particularly in the kind of the
progressive space extinction rebellion
would be an example among thousands
where the value set is very different
they're saying hey we are trying to get
to this co-creative emergence via
consensus via inclusion and it's very
difficult so just to acknowledge that
sofa this thing this ineffable drop into
communica into communitas or into high
level coherence is rare and tricky so
first can we just acknowledge if they
were easy we'd already all be doing it
secondly is that the
the majority of the exemplars we have of
it tightly controlled highly focused and
quite exceptional when we then just
pivot over without necessarily noticing
we've done so and we end up in and
within a community of practice with a
different set of values which are
generally skewed towards inclusivity
everyone having a voice which others are
noble ideals they just might be
antithetical to what we've known to date
about how to get into those states and
in that light from light shadow from
shadow experience that we were
describing earlier I think that's kind
of what happens so you might find a lot
of people that are paying lip service to
shared espoused ideals we get together
we say we're gonna try and do this thing
and whether that's the early stages of
game be you know you know five ten years
ago you know whether it's any of the
movements right now on you know future
proofing the world you get a large group
of people together they all think
they're on a shared mission you start
getting the error messages you start
seeing shadow from shadow you start
increasing doubt and decreasing trust
and what do people do they typically
just shrink their sphere of concern
they're late they create break offs
right and actually Daniel I think
mentions that in some of his other
description descriptions of group
information ecology you create factions
and defections
splintering withholding of information
and basically intuitively while it feels
shitty and it feels like backstab you
tribal politics quite often once we live
through those things it's actually a
rational movement which is oh if we
can't get there with all of us because
we can't trust all of us to know how
right into play well then the very
natural thing for me to do is shrink my
sphere to the people I do still have
trust with and do think we can cohere
with until you get smaller and smaller
but obviously that's antithetical to any
of our hopes and sense of urgency about
scaling this thing so step one is just
to identify are we right valuing
exclusivity right whatever it takes to
get the high hard gold done or do we
privilege inclusivity right and then in
the polarities mapping model there's
basically saying identify the upsides a
what can happen if we do get it right
but also identify the downsides what
happens if we over index to this pole
and we start seeing the negatives right
so for exclusivity right it would be
that it's a small agile group of people
they're deeply skilled there's very
little clutter or distraction and we
actually get there
we get to coherence and we get to
coherence and a high trust low friction
framework fantastic but the downside of
exclusivity is you leave a lot of people
on the sidelines right it can create
resentment it can create blowback very
difficult to scale and often turns up
being sort of tops down dissemination
right which is you know sort of
potentially overly hierarchical or
exclusive got it all right well let's
take a look at what happens what are the
good things of inclusivity everybody has
a seat at the table there's a diversity
of voices there's an inclusion of former
out groups right there's a heterodox
nature to our meaning making and sense
making together right and there's a
sense of this actually just you know
more closely matches our humanitarian
values in the first place
what are the downsides but we're all
acutely aware of the downsides of you
know pathological inclusion which is
that any singular voice can hijack the
thread it's very difficult it's sort of
like a hippie drum circle you know
versus a master djembe player right you
just get noodley mud things take an
awfully long time quite often to get to
consensus consensus is fragile and can
be firebombed by anybody playing an sjw
card or any other kind of agitator
victim drama triangle kind of dynamics
and because we value inclusivity we are
obligated to stop the presses when
anyone says help help I'm being
oppressed right and so the ability to
weaponize cult a sensitivity nonviolent
communication and all those things is
abundant and when you have narcissist or
sociopaths or just you know chatty
Cathie's and needy Ned's infiltrate
those scenes and they often do then it
never gets off the ground so the
question is how do we steer between
those and I think that that's you know
so a couple of examples of that my sense
is obviously is there a both/and
is there a way that we can acknowledge
this is hard it's subtle and nuanced and
it actually requires a surprising amount
of skill and facility and even the
ability to drop ego right now but I
think you knows you've explored the
difference between the IDW the
intellectual dark web and what with what
with the tenor and flavours of some of
those conversations versus more of these
kind of emerging conversations I would
sense I mean one of them is rational
separate egos slinging great thoughts
constructs at each other versus people
looking and listening to play jazz all
right and so you can make a kid there's
almost that watershed moment so how
might we have the best of both of these
things high and hard rare for now and
we're going to need some we're gonna
need a vanguard and on the other hand
all of us are none of us we it's really
critical that we find ways to help this
propagate so you sketched out the ego to
ethno to kind of global centric
perspective which a lot of people
probably familiar from ken Wilbur's work
for example the idea that we have to
kind of go from one to the other in the
society today especially kind of on the
left there's a real ambivalence or
outright rejection of nationalism for
example and ethnocentrism is your sense
that that's something you have to go
through to get to world centric because
for me certainly I feel like unless
we're stable in our individual
identities and probably proud of proud
of our own history it's very difficult
then to bypass straight to a kind of
global centric consciousness yeah and I
may think a general premise of
development is that skipping steps leads
to dissociation and pathology and so the
question of a have we securely enough
annexed our ethnic centric awareness I
think it's fair to say that the last
century has been increasingly
dissociative people lived in villages
that were their parents and their
grandparents had grown up there was the
migrations to urban areas you know the
situation that average and American
families move seven times in their adult
lives a majority of people live in
different states than their parents
their children don't grow up knowing
multiple generation
of their family there's this absolutely
they'd often don't even know their
neighbors Geographic right next doors
let alone generations of who they are
and where they've come from so I think
you can make a case that we're in a sort
of aberrant condition developmentally
we've become atomized fragmented
hypermobile non-local consumer
identities right and so that is a
problem and they've been some
fascinating research on kids that do
know their grandparents on both sides of
the family and just just those extra you
know just three generations being aware
of each other being you know decreases
likelihood of anxiety depression suicide
whose test scores boost college
attendance it's it's literally that one
of the most healthy inoculations for a
kid you know adverse childhood events
abuse bad things that happening they can
they are more resilient so it's a little
bit like extending the wheel base on a
car when you have a long limousine and
it goes down the road it's very very
smooth when you have a short little
electric car it's bumping up and down
all the way and so when our only
perspective is our life fractured from
everything around us the world every hit
all right sends us spinning so I have
wondered I thought okay take every
alt-right neo Nazi Aryan Nation whatever
give them the 23andme test should be
like hey clearly you are yearning for an
identity right let's actually steer into
that's good
go and study yourself understand where
you are dollars did don't notice you're
not biking I'll tell you that
much right and then you get to wrestle
with and incorporate that so I think it
there is a bit of it go back to go
forwards and it's almost like the houses
and Hogwarts right you know during the
Quidditch matches we're tooth and nail
but at the end of the day against the
Death Eaters were Hogwarts and I think
there has to be some element of yes
let's go back and truly NX where we're
from so that we can opt into
participation the global human story
well done for making it to the end I
just wanted to let you know a few things
we've got coming up including the
biggest event you've ever done the rebel
wisdom festival which
be a mix of ideas and dialogues between
people like Daniel schmeckt and burger
Bonita Roy Rupert Sheldrake Jamba Vicki
and many more and because wisdom isn't
just intellectual it's also about
practice will be offering experiences
like circling different interpersonal
dialogue mindfulness breathwork and many
other with world-class facilitators and
if you're enjoying the content you can
help us make more by joining the rebel
wisdom club which will give you
discounts and the courses and the events
and also access to a load more content
on the website including all of our live
events it'll also give you access to our
growing community which is something we
want to make a real focus for 2020
adding more meetups and other services
for members so I hope you enjoyed the
film and see you soon
you