howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
listeners have asked us to provide
pointers some of the resources we talked
about on the show we now have links to
books and articles referenced in recent
podcasts that are available on our
website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
ruts show com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Jamie wheel executive
director of the flow Genome Project hey
Jim
good to be here my man hey yeah good to
have you here Jamie Jamie is an expert
in the neurophysiology of human
performance his work combines a
background and expeditionary education
wilderness medicine and surf rescue if
it wasn't in me to time I'd probably
make cool comment about that but we'll
just coop move on over that playthrough
he has over a decade of advising
high-growth companies on strategy
execution and leadership not execution I
know some of that leadership needs
executing goddamn right Jamie's coaching
ranges from fortune 500 companies like
Cisco Google and IKEA the Navy War
College at Red Bull was Steve cobbler he
wrote the best-selling book stealing
fire how Silicon Valley Navy SEALs
maverick scientists are revolutionizing
the way we live and work leads a team of
the world's top scientists athletes an
artist dedicated to mapping the genome a
peak performance state known as flow and
so you've like got to hang out with the
seals that write you know we haven't got
to spend some time with some of those
guys and some of the guys in the UK as
well what was that like well I mean I
think just you know humbling and and
fascinating to see people that have
honed anything whether it's elite
extreme athletes or spec ops guys is
just the degree of no-nonsense precision
in their world worldview mode of
interacting situational awareness choice
making all of it they're just
fascinating specimens of the keen edge
of human performance yeah I met some
very elite military guys and yet indeed
they are all that the thing that was
interesting is they are not intellectual
in the slightest least the enlisted men
that I've met hmm well you know and
that's interesting because I think I
mean a obviously massive mass
organization and different communities
within within it but I have found that
the more senior in the strategic special
operations domain the more humble the
more self-effacing the more curious the
more lateral and divergent in their
thinking I mean I experienced some very
discipline but voracious learners at
that level of the organization's yeah of
course the higher level the officer
corps I would expect to see that it
makes it I'm continually blown away by
the thoughtfulness actually the depth
and the thoughtfulness of leadership at
that of those commands that's good to
hear actually because they are the short
point of the spear protecting us all
right yeah at the whim of an executive
department you know then it's somewhat
McCarrick all at best right yeah a lot
of your work deals with individuals and
groups achieving the state of flow flow
was first defined by a guy Kenny would
pronounce his name mahalia clicks I'm
Mick Lee Mihaly or some damn thing why
don't you start by telling us what is
flow hmm well I mean it's just a subset
of a whole broad category of what you
could call non-ordinary States we might
as well even call these specific ones
benign non-ordinary States so so not
schizophrenia and not dissociation not
something like that but actually ones of
peaks peak information a perception and
and hyper efficient action from there so
it's a kind of neuro chemical profile it
has a neuro physiological profile it
also has a psychological experience or
profile and then also kind of an
operational range of application of what
to do with it when you're in it and
you're saying I've fallen into flow
States on several occasions in my life
and they have been extraordinarily
productive like you know 10x the normal
horsepower quite remarkable straight up
anyplace but at some point tiring I'm
her I fell into one that lasted six
weeks for no apparent reason I was
writing a business plan and I just blew
through at about two weeks and I had so
much mental firepower that a friend of
mine just started lining up like company
CEOs you know chief technology officers
and just had them marched by me and sit
down for 10 minutes tell them tell me
their problem and I'd give them the
perfect answer every time it was
remarkably uncanny
and did you like sleep for a month what
happened afterwards it's funny I can
actually feel myself drop out of it over
a period of about two hours first one
step down from you know immaculate to
just really really really good and at
another two hours later back to normal
and I think I did sleep for a day but
but it was pretty cool I know I'd also
know to our people that on the website
for your flow Genome Project there's a
thing called the flow profile we'll put
a link up on our site people go take a
look at it take a test and I took the
test oh yeah
it has a hard charger oh sweet which was
mostly right but it was wrong about me
being interested in physically active
sports
I'm way too physically lazy for those
but I do like that do crazy and
take risks like legally manufacturing
homemade explosives shooting large
high-capacity guns high-stakes poker or
doing ridiculous things on a TVs that
might not be all that wise so as long as
they don't require breaking a sweat I'm
all in do it that's fantastic
yeah all the risk none of the calorie
burn it's perfect exactly exactly right
so yeah I guess I fit a sort of a hard
charger non sweat variety but yeah it's
kind of fun I advise people take it you
also say on your website we take a
rigorous multidisciplinary and supremely
practical approach to the science and
research of peak performance at our core
were flow hackers well I mean I would
say that's probably an anachronism and
lazy copy on a marketing team I didn't
have full oversight over so I wouldn't
necessarily position what we do as that
however the understanding that at a
neurophysiological level consciousness
is programmable is a key insight and
then you start reverse engineering
higher states of perspective Allah when
as not by trying to talk our way there
through you know Zen koans or
contemplative prayer or you know or
psychoanalysis but actually just to
boost the body brain into those those
optimized zones and then see what your
information feeds and sense-making feel
like yeah I liked you know frankly it
wasn't terrible for marketing
multiple disciplinary and particularly
like supremely practice
all right well sure that foolish war
that yeah cuz too much in the spaces you
know is just like unholy horseshit right
no I mean I mean that that's what I
appreciate about mountains and oceans
and and gravity sports is that is that
the you know it gravity does not lie and
it's a no teacher and and then
big wild environments you know drop you
to your knees in in the vastness and
scale and the requirement of having your
wits about you I find them to be very
very clean teachers yep reality is a
very excellent teacher sixteen second
per second bitches exactly that's
gravity right in a Harvard Business
Review article by Steve Cutler you were
quoted as saying researchers described
flow as a source code of intrinsic
motivation once an experience produces
the state will go to extraordinary
lengths to get more of it I recently
said something similar about myself on
the Zion 2.0 podcast we were talking
what to do about the zillionaires is a
time for the guillotines mmm-hmm and I
distinguish between those driven by
extrinsic motivations you know big
houses flashy bimbos private jets and
the like
and those driven by intrinsic
motivations you know desire to create or
to win or to explore you know I see flow
as a possible way to those intrinsic
States but not necessarily required hmm
yeah I mean I think it you could make a
case that it's really just the you know
super economic version of that general
directional pursuit of intrinsic
satisfaction
it's the pathway you know you're it's a
way to do it better right or at least
certain slide yeah I mean if you get
that sucker going right it'll it'll
speed you to your destination in the
most enjoyable way in the least amount
of time yeah but on the other hand I
would also like to say to warn people
that it could become a hope for panacea
well you know as I said I've fallen into
flow state several times at and often at
exactly the right time but sometimes not
for instance in 2011 after eight years
of research I sat down to write a long
document that was the digest of this
research and in fact this document
events
the game be named name if game B
succeeds this document was probably the
most important thing I ever wrote
oh let's jump over to game B stuff and
future culture architecture and what
what are the perils of non-ordinary
States as they get operationalized
commodified and weaponized and we'll hop
there how's that sound
so dude this is important which is I
started three times to write this
document and you know hacked at it for
two or three days and the flow state
didn't come and so I just said it
and you know let it go for another
couple of months did some more research
finally the third time it was appear
after six months of wanting to write
this thing I just said to myself flow or
not I'm just gonna you know hack back
through this thing I just muscled it
right and it was good enough though it
was hard to work and it took longer than
if I've been in a flow state so I would
yeah I was put out the warning yes it's
great when you do get the flow state to
boost your power but if you don't that
doesn't mean you can't still do good
work yeah the one the one I had to die I
agree completely cuz I had to override
that in my brain too of like waiting to
craft the perfect verse and then I
started thinking myself much more like a
carpenter and there's like rough framing
and then there's finish framing and then
fine detailing and like a know which
fate and then there's caulking paint you
will they know which phase you're at and
and and sometimes just if you're not if
you are having to just grind it out to
just be like I am just rough planking
some right now
yeah it'll all ink later yeah exactly
and you know and it may take three times
as long but you'll just get it done and
you know of course it would be great if
we had flow state more or less on demand
and your views that's something that's
possible um I mean that's I mean sort of
yes end right I mean can you you know as
we get more skillful at all of these you
know neuro physicians right so we really
are just kind of like truly dialing or
programming states of awareness for
different conditions and they're already
doing that and one offs and experiments
and specific technical conditions but
let's just say for all of us then like
we still have the human existential
questions and we still have both grace
and grief and life so like that is
table stakes and you have to be able to
metabolize
those things regardless of what type a
button you you got installed yeah no
doubt about that
China to that point early on it's let's
switch now to your book stealing fire
which I read a long time ago you
actually gave me a copy of it sound nice
and I read it when we had coffee in
Austin a few years ago and I reread it
over the last week or so as I typically
do thank you thank you for my episodes
that I can speak cogently about people's
work right not just my way
through one of things I loved about your
book on like on page two you talked
about the Eleusinian mysteries right
yeah Lucy and mysteries I don't know how
the hell you spell this pronounce that
but something like that anyway I yeah
there's something I did a bunch of
research on 20 years ago and 20 years
ago there wasn't much tell us what you
know about them and how they were so
central in you know grounding
essentially the meaning of life for
people back in the day yeah I mean it
was a sort of like a 9-day ritual people
from all different costs of society
could could participate it involved sort
of theater pantomime archetypal roles
potentially even and this was sort of
like never disclosed super secret super
secret you know some kind of I don't
know whether it was like a coffin like
death rebirth but some form of fairly
profound initiatory shazam experience
kind of like Michael Douglas in the game
you know like something of that level of
juju and then ha you know highly likely
to been involving the intoxicating
sacrament of Chi Kyung you know with
with me know that they their
instructions were to dilute one to ten
with wine and that alcibiades right
Rudolf on pain of death took it and
threw a banging house party with it so
you're like okay so we know it's super
strong and a little ton of fun right and
and that kicks off the Western ecstatic
tradition I think and many of the great
thinkers of both Greece and Rome were
initiates including Plato and I believe
Aristotle as well yeah although you know
I'm not sure about Aristotle and my
particular actually I think it was so
creates in Plato but you know but
Aristotle I think this is my guerilla
thesis which is I think that Aristotle
couldn't hold his brew so he minded
tried cuz think about their philosophies
right I mean played it was like there's
this world of forms there's this super
cool
information layer you can launch up
there everything is perfection you can
manifest that down here on the on the
lay on and Aristotle is like the only
stuff that's real is what I can touch
taste see or grab a bit more sure right
and we got the Aristotelian Branch of
like the the tripper who couldn't hang
and that became them the modern Western
scientific tradition that's a really
interesting theory I like that though I
will put my cards on the table and say
hey you know on that Big Fork platonic
or Aristotelian I go interest aphelion
every time right oh nice I think I think
I'm like a vestigial Pythagorean by
mistake I think that like it's taking me
this long to like try and track down all
the threat and be like you know what I
think that's that's the main core like
lineage core that I feel most affinity
for do you hate beans do I hate beans
you know I'm not super keen I must say I
mean even some like hopped-up fatback
cooking beans you know from Texas I
could have a tablespoonful and then I'm
good well you may be a pythagorean
because people don't know that what that
was the number one belief of the
Pythagorean so that beans were evil hmm
yeah well you never know you never know
you can give you bunk with someone yeah
I mean their whole thing of like
gymnastics physiology mute the music of
the spheres the the interrelationship
between geometries number and and chords
you know like they were way into it they
were into wrestling and philosophy they
had a highly embodied kinetic mystic
tradition Mystery School basically I
wish we knew more about him yeah they
are all those pre-socratics were was
Pythagoras pre-socratic yeah he was
nojima and he was the absolute kicker to
the whole thing I wish I'd learned about
more about him later but I just thought
it was his triangles and cool
that's why you're not so of course you
learn in school at the seals a little
bit one of the things you talk about in
the book and I think elsewhere is
something you call dynamic subordination
yeah where leadership is fluid defined
by conditions I sometimes called this
role based leadership rather than
position based leadership and to my mind
that's something that's very game be in
fact that Zion 2.0 podcast other day I
said something like this natural real
leaders will arise soft role based
leaders rather than position based
leaders someone says I'm the president
of game B I think everyone's gonna laugh
and say you're not
game B you're a asshole right
anyway you know tell us more about
dynamic subordination and leadership
that changes as the need arises yeah I
mean I think you know pretty much the
key is is just that any form of
structural hierarchy either is set aside
or non-existent in the first place
for who is sensing thinking feeling
perceiving and then acting with them the
you know the most information closest to
real-time emergence like that person has
literally become the tip of the spear
and so there's a flock follow-on effect
of opposing action so there's a sort of
degree of coding it's not like well he
just made something up now what do I do
and you end up with you know like the
Hokey Pokey or something it's it's
discipline formation flying and action
and so that allows them to basically
offload into the you know the logic of
the algorithm right they've encoded a
kinetic battle plan and now they're all
acting it out moving through time and
space in synchronized coordination but
also real-time adaptation to novelty on
the ground and yet somehow keeping that
coherent I mean it's been you know game
five NBA Finals no-look passes and
alley-oop dunks you know like that's
another one is there any weight for
anything other than ultra elite people
who spent 20,000 hours practicing to
achieve that do you think I mean yes you
know I think you know macrame and
ketamine
you know Roberts your mother's brother I
mean you know the the point is that I
think there's a ton of ways in and
actually in our research I think we have
over I don't know how many maybe 20,000
30,000 maybe more psycho graphs of
people's flow profiles and I think it
was 47 48 percent actually test is deep
thinkers so that their way in is
actually more contemplative imaginal
creative intellectual that whole realm
was sort of interior 'ti is where they
find their pathway through so it does
not need to be flashbang and external
it's just those are often the easiest
examples because what they're doing is
is made visible versus someone sitting
at a desk or a computer or or a loom
that's interesting you know from the
earliest days of game be thinking
certainly been something that we thought
ought to be
part of the foundational code of game be
the deep code so to speak that mm-hmm
that there are no names in boxes on
charts if there are hierarchies they
arise very for a very brief time for a
specific purpose and then disappear
again as soon as the need is gone and
that literally might be ours right and
it sounds like that's what some of these
elite guys have been able to achieve and
well yeah but it's also way harder than
it looks in the sense of it's all it's
everything I had to say no to to create
the space for that to emerge like that's
where the battle is won and lost you
know so it's the no corner offices no
special you know exact team meetings
with the same ten people who are asked
to present and everybody else they're
like sort of out in the hallways with
their heads down you know like
constantly changing things up I mean
they didn't they grew beers they didn't
wear just uniforms they barely and often
didn't salute commanding officers that
the chief petty officers ran the ship
the guys from Annapolis were you know
with respected apprentices like they
were on a rotation you know they weren't
lifers like there's a whole like
ecosystem of favoring and honoring
experience an actual commitments in time
versus the externalize hierarchies they
could fall back on you know I love it
and as you point out you know preserving
that space is hard right because
unfortunately in our modern world
particularly military guys you know
they're everyone's trained to think that
the way you get ahead in life is moving
your name from one box to another up
some chart yeah yeah although I would
say that those guys are probably more
internally motivated than than most you
know like that is embracing the suck
instead of a very very rare a very rare
sense of satisfaction I think yeah it's
true that they are not into you know the
big houses and the flashy cars because
well these days and military officers
paid a decent middle-class income you
ain't getting rich that way and you're
putting your life on the line so you're
right it's got to be a different set of
motivations and the people who climb the
climb the tree in corporate America you
know something I licit it from me when I
saw that was remembering the book
hierarchy in the forest by Chris Boehm
anthropologist who has written an
extraordinary book about
how hunter-gatherers manage to defeat
the tendency to hierarchy that's
probably in our genes if we look at our
close relatives both chimps and bonobos
there's really rigid and really vicious
hierarchies that are different in the
two species but they're very rigid
hunter-gatherers apparently had no such
thing and what they did once they
invented weapons is they there was
apparently this was worldwide there was
a commitment to take down big men who
tried to usurp positions and the ability
to have Spears and bows and arrows meant
that you know two babies could kill one
alpha without any problem but I mean
conjectural as all get-out like how on
earth were they a son England's kinship
structures and and big man Theory uh
read the book didn't do they make a good
case I think so
I really do one best evidence we have
our existing hunter-gatherer peoples and
he surveys a whole bunch of them and
looks at statistics on various
attributes of other archaeological
societies he goes into the genetics of
both bonobos and their chimps it's an
amazing book hierarchy in the forest I
would strongly recommend how our
ancestors developed an immune system two
big men and something we obviously lost
about twelve thousand years ago with the
rise of Agriculture than the state hmm I
wonder I mean I honestly I truly don't
know and I mean my grad work was in sort
of like narrow anthropology and
millenarian movements and a lot of proto
your pian contact and that I mean that
is it's such a fascinating inquiry and
I'm also just you know like not sure how
precise we can get about stuff that's
that old as far as cultural artifacts
and upstreaming like going to
present-day you know intact nominally
intact or they're not you know
indigenous communities now is a is a
wonky game of back casting what it might
have been way back when we also know
it's there's some weird selection
effects going on the last few are
probably different than mainstream
twenty thousand years ago yeah I mean I
it is amazing how far we've come out
fast
a little staggering kind of spooky but I
mean holy these little naked
monkeys with clothes men exactly and
even more so in the last you know three
hundred years or so it's just like what
the hell we're going straight up and
whether that'll kill us or not it's
another
but we found an accidental stash of
fossilized sunlight so we basically just
onion in the in the petrol era
we've just unlocked millions of years of
loaded starlight and have been just
spraying it all around the world it's
been a good ride and probably there's
enough of it to let us get to the next
level which is some combination of solar
and nuclear and wind etc that windfall
of petrified dinosaurs or whatever seems
like it if we're not stupid too is big
enough for us to get to the other side
where we won't need it anymore that
would be right that would be cool you
know let's go back to something that has
big bearings on again how to think about
game B and I think about what comes next
in terms of a society one of the things
you talk a lot about with respect to the
seals we also talk about with respect to
some MBA students is that there seems to
be a very narrow selection keyhole type
selection for these kinds of groups in
terms of leadership the number that are
filtered out are astronomical and so
again I'll come back to the fact do you
think these skills and types are
inherently rare or is it that our
society has been such that not many have
been made maybe in a better society we
can build more people that are capable
of this position based dynamic
subordination yeah I mean my sense is
because I mean I've been thinking a lot
about this lately in conversations with
Jordan and Daniel and Bonita and others
and my sense is there's two different
value systems at play so if you look for
like hey really dropping into high hyper
coordinated group flow is a very rare
specific task with tons of attrition and
tons of overtraining required to bring
it about in most even elite populations
then the question becomes how do we do
this communally how do we do this where
everybody's involved how do we do this
where everybody's on the bus and there's
a commitment that nobody gets dropped
and coordinating that is often a
progressive lefty shitshow you know by
any other term and and they never get
off the ground so there are these two
competing holes of values that's one is
thick extrinsic value can you do the
thing and if you're a seal if you're a
pro basketball player if you're if
you're you know Miles Davis is drummer
you know you either know how to swing or
you don't and they get someone who can
so that's that's pure extrinsic value
system
then on the other side like we're a
community we're an organization this you
know consensus having everybody's voice
having diversity all having inclusion
having all those things are things we
really value then it can often be really
hard to get off the ground so the
question is is is there the both and
right of coherence which which would be
balancing those two polarities in the
sense and this is like Laszlo Bock at
Google and and you know the in fact Mike
Gervaise everybody who's this the
performance psychologist for the Seattle
Seahawks right then they've done the
same thing and won Super Bowls that way
but it's a culture of safety a culture
of risk-taking a culture where we're
engines occur is affirm that everybody
actually feels it in their nervous
systems and at the same time there's a
starting 11 on any given Sunday and and
we also hold that that capacity that +
dynamic subordination feels like a sort
of potential provisional set of like you
know guidelines or protocols for kind of
game B leadership in dynamic conditions
yeah though you mentioned interesting
the lefty shitshow right you know these
days I actually expose a fair amount of
lefty progressive when I can't get
my game B right now goddamn it right cuz
it's better than the alternative on the
other hand I'm not impressed at all with
the quality of human functioning over in
that space in particular you're laughing
your ass off I can tell you alright
totally yeah keep in mind I'm a former
Goldwater Republican longtime
member of the NRA huge gun collection I
still like hunting fish get off my lawn
you pesky kids
goddamn kids you right anyway one
particular capability I've really been
wondering what I thought about - talk to
us I gotta ask this question can courage
be taught that your physical courage
emotional courage social courage because
that's what I see missing so often
amongst the screwball left mmm balls and
backbones yeah yeah
you already balls but you certainly need
backbone well I mean I mean ovaries
huevos is like just that the fortitude
yeah exactly
could it be thought I had a conversation
with actually a a commander of the SAS
who has just come off to lead the Center
for army leadership at scientist
in England and we had that conversation
over dinner and it's like you know
because because he's like hey we take
you know we take 18 year old lads from
the East End or from Glasgow lousy
social systems poor role models and in
six months we train them to be able to
legally take another person's life like
that is a tremendous responsibility and
imperative and they held that so
strongly that they actually guide a
majority of those young men through that
and at the same time even though I you
know my whole career isn't Learning and
Development and training I kind of think
that you either have an unbendable
integrity or you don't
and then you've you find those folks
that's the nature pot and then you
nurture the hell out of those who have
that ineffable core quality and I know
that sounds essentialist reductionist
about you whatever but you sort of like
I've never liked the seals have that
that Bell that they ring at Budds if you
want to quit right so there's the brass
Bell up on the pad and they're always
being taunted and baited and encouraged
to go out there and just ring the
 thing and it'll all be over and
then when they do somewhere in the last
decade they started allowing guys a
second crack yeah I'm like hey you've
been training your whole life for this I
know this is a big dream if you want to
go back in you can and and fascinatingly
not one who's ever rung the bell once
ever makes it through buds interesting
yeah creases they will fold again you
use the word integrity which is one of
Jordans absolutely favorite and probably
now foundational words for game B and if
you know your sense is integrity can't
be made that means at least for a while
till we start getting into child rearing
practices and education game B's gonna
have to be pretty selective well here's
the thing though it can be modeled and
it can be entrained and it can be
encouraged and supported you can create
conditions by which we drop into
resonance and we start actually creating
cascades of you know vocal and nonverbal
learned imitated observed behaviors does
that include integrity I don't know i
honest to god don't know because then
we're getting into a level of like
psychological modeling that I just don't
feel comfortable with in the sense of
like I don't know is there an
essentialist seoul-based you need
self or are we just near ons habits
patterns and foggy memories and the
answer is probably some of both and that
part that we think of it's real is
actually a residence back from our
social group that's why I mentioned you
know once game B is far enough along
that it has game B child rearing for
infants mm-hmm very young children and
game B education for older kids I
suspect even if integrity is hard to get
inculcated if you're able to start young
you can probably inculcate it in most if
not quite everybody oh that's been the
Wishing Well fantasy of every single
utopian movement ever you know and then
you try raising goddamn kids and you
realize it's way trickier than look that
is true Here I am violating ruts no new
man hypothesis right but so so we
actually have an empirical question is
the core capability integrity found in
everybody or can it be nurtured and
everybody from adulthood onward if the
answer is yes fine the answer is no then
game B has to have a fairly tight funnel
to only bring in people who are in
integrity as adults and try to go yes
that file that one under
abso-fucking-lutely yeah and I don't
know if we know the answer that yeah by
there I do agree with Jordan that
integrity or what we used to call
honesty in good faith I think his
concept of integrity now is a little
broader is absolutely the bedrock on
which game B has to be built and then
you know if it turns out that it is that
we do have to be selective then the next
question is can we without turning into
utopian assholes provide a culture that
a much higher percentage of the next
generation that comes up in the proto
game B culture haven't as their
foundation integrity yeah yeah I mean
obviously in the Devils are in those
deets so the question is how to have to
enforce it now what I wonder is it
sounds like yeah you you if you're doing
a sort of decentralized organization
there is that that also is a poll of the
decentralized pot and the organized pot
and you know do you go like articles of
confederation and the loose
confederation of early colonies and but
you cement it with a contemporary loose
in Ian mystery so you get high
coherence with looser governance than we
were able to pull off the first time
around yeah well what sure is that the
kind of thing you're imagining I mean I
mean yeah something like that in fact
the term I try to have been trying to
get out into the world a little bit what
I call coherent pluralism which is there
is a core really strong coherence and
maybe it is something completely
subjective like a mystery or maybe it's
a series of doctrines like the founding
fathers but this is the key is it's not
too all-encompassing so it leaves room
for lots of variety so you know for
instance if you want to believe in one
of the old hoary religions go right
ahead
write that let's say that's not
incorporated within the domain of the
coherent and outside the domain a
coherent I would say I would be a rabid
Madisonian Jeffersonian which is do what
you will so long as you don't violate
the core and that sounds cruel Ian more
than more than Jeffersonian but you know
like but I but I respect your sass oh
yeah do what my world and it homme none
do what that will that is the law of
love under will yeah exactly and you
know it strikes me that if we look you
know just in a caricature version of our
left and our right today you know the
right wants to give a very long list the
prescriptions of what thou shalt do and
thou shalt not do you know very
controlling a lot of it pulled over
bodily from the Old Testament they
forget about that New Testament on the
other hand the left is loose and loose
decadent and you know lacking in strong
values right and so strikes me that the
right answer is something in between
which is we're not we are gonna be a
society of values and here they are
goddamn it right if you don't want to
adhere to the values the relatively
tight core values of game B get the hell
out on the other hand King B needs to be
self police to make sure it doesn't
become an utopian nightmare where every
single thing is specified down to the
enth degree like a lot of these creepy
ass cults that well that we see out in
California what happened oh that was
awesome yeah that was that was that was
a Goldwater era
that was perfect I mean you know that
the left's actually become a good bit
more pious so that they're not they're
not nearly as lucious they used to be
and some are really quite quite
self-serious
and then the right you know you've got
the super all right burn it all down
folks that are literally out flanking
like Eric Trump jr. and a flaming like
you're like booing him off stages cuz
they think he's a race traitor they're
not going far enough out so we're
getting a fragmentation on a
fragmentation and the sort of centrists
of each camper I've been completely
outmoded by the bomb from was on either
side but probably not outnumbered that's
the important thing right and these
jackasses on both sides them
basically right well I think there's an
important thing it's almost like we're
into like an upside down sorting hat you
know because it's no longer that you're
necessarily I mean we've got we've got
think we've got a split on us on a 50/50
so we've got quarters and and that
central quarters are nominally no matter
how corrupt and entrenched in an you
know rent-seeking like stitch ups the
centrists are nonetheless still
ascribing to a version of the
Hamiltonian Jeffersonian infinite game
of the American experiment right they
are agreeing to kind of give back the
ball after they've after they won and
not break the rules etc etc but the
folks on either side are like the
infinite game that's 300 years of the
French enlightenment to NAFTA it
we're burning it all down and those
folks want to go back to very finite
games identity political tribal right
faction and vendetta driven almost
you're evinced River driven and that
that that's the sorting ad so it's like
if you're in on perpetuating the
infinite game and the spirit of Lincoln
and Kennedy and Obama and whomever right
and you know and show about you know
that stands against fashion isn't like
the Western tradition to now through
here like let's dust that off and
stand it back up and and double triple
quadruple down on the premise because if
we don't and it goes mad max fuel that
takes an awful long time in a well to
have to rebuild from yeah and you said
it in passing to my mind this is the
other critical one we must fight to
preserve the Enlightenment now yes the
Enlightenment was full of the bigotries
of its age
but it made such a difference in the
transition from essentially the past the
world dominated by superstition with no
ability to tell truth from to a
world where we had developed a mechanism
or we can actually find incremental e
and never perfectly movement towards
what is actually true
and we have you know the idiot
postmodernists on the left we have the
rigid reactionaries on the right both of
which one to dethrone the Enlightenment
for God knows what on the left and some
on the right are explicitly saying they
want to return to a medievalist
perspective when you need him
yeah exactly right anywhere from Hubert
Humphrey to Bill Buckley they were all
decent folks actually we said we saw
that there was a show I think it was the
macneil-lehrer maybe but it was
basically it was Tim Leary and Bill
Buckley having a discussion and Leary's
in his full like muslin smock with the
mala beads The Hobbit and the level of
discourse was so high the engagement the
witty banter the the the it was like
watching two swordsman engage in like a
foiling duel it was it was beautiful
you're like oh my god what's happened to
Civic discourse yeah indeed people
respected each other you can't imagine
people in that time further apart then
uncle Tim and and will Buckley so we
only got a few minutes here I got whole
bunches and notes of things I wanted to
cover so I'm gonna give you a choice two
different branches one are the you know
the three forms of X TASIS mm-hmm
selflessness timelessness effortlessness
effortlessness yeah yeah yeah that's err
it is or the four forces psychology
neurobiology pharmacology and technology
you know I mean we can talk about this
stuff but this is sort of a couple of
years in the rear view mirror from the
things that were actively thinking about
now it all builds on it 100% all right
 you the path then let's go
what are you thinking about right now
well I mean how about this that the
notion that ecstatic technologies like
instantly fire laid out here's the three
pitfalls as we gain access to state
changing technologies insights
experiences you know exciting
and culture right and the challenges
were threefold one was weaponization
the other was commercialization and then
the third was sort of he denies ation
you know they're getting hijacked by our
own lizard brain impulses and then as we
see that playing forward now right into
everything from the psychedelic
Renaissance and the big move of venture
capital and and IP protections and
patents and basically the full weight of
the market economy piling into
psychedelic therapies as they're getting
ready to launch and that's creating all
sorts of ripples and sort of
disturbances in the extended
professional and research networks all
the way down to the therapeutic
communities that's one DARPA investing
and denaturing psilocybin ketamine and
MDMA so there's literally a modern-day
soma and not the good kind the brave new
world kind and then you have the
excesses and the delusion loops and the
dissociation and the spiritual bypassing
of the sort of transformational culture
scene which is nominally the ones who
are these sort of often the spokespeople
for any form of progressive new vision
for what's coming but very few of them
have their feet in the ground so so
watching those trends and paying
attention to those three things and then
you know obviously throw in retina
tracking and fulfil big data biometric
assessment into narrow marketing in the
commodification space you know so that's
sort of the landscape and it's unfolding
in real time as well as it intersects
also with you know whatever whatever
your level of existential risk awareness
an assessment might be let's jump into
one of them because this was actually in
my opinion what killed the game be 1.0
back in 2013 and it's a term which i've
only heard about two weeks ago for the
first time a spiritual bypass god yes
it's a thing it's a thing and my with my
scientist realist hat on you know which
is what I basically am but again I think
I denounce this in using different words
and a essay I wrote called in search of
the fifth attractor which I have on
medium which you know first talks about
things with like game babe in complex
systems talk but also specifically warns
falling into the trap of spirituality
right when things get tough you know
don't retreat into yourself you know
just suck it up and go out to the world
and kick some ass get some more
allies right and I now realize that this
is not just something that poison game
be 1.0 but is big in the world that
there are an awful lot of these social
change people that instead of you know
putting their life on the line for
social change like every social change
person in history has ever had to do
instead they wimp out and decide to
spend their time on these interior
explorations instead yeah I mean I think
you know I wouldn't want a baby
bathwater it you know in the sense that
people is yearning for meaning and
transcendence legit you know sort of
psychosocial nutrients we crave you know
for balanced growth so the actual that
the yearning for that I you know just
kind of want to give a little bit elbow
room to the excesses and the idea of the
fact that it's more enjoyable to go back
to the Wishing Well one more time than
it is to you know pull up the proverbial
bootstraps yeah you know and go do hard
things that scare you that part yeah so
so that that bifurcation is certainly
problematic yeah you know and and it's
and it's sort of it's a it's a it's a
known issue of ecstatic state technology
and it kind of makes sense so you know
as you and I know going out in the world
of doing something is hard right and
sitting back and gazing at your navel is
easy well at least I would say so and so
yeah you know a lot of people are just
don't have courage don't have toughness
don't really want to go out and engage
the world and get their head beat in and
all that good stuff like those of us
have ever been on the street no could
happen sound check this out so here's an
encouraging thing though right so in the
sense of like wanting to believe in
people and really believing in their
best and we're trying to go from it the
key is can people start learning to play
a game be together without collapsing
into game like game theory game making
game a dynamics right and and it becomes
really hard if you're not sure your
baseline needs are being met it's like
we can play the highfalutin lovey lovey
collaborative game as long as everything
so
but if I or mine have a different
factional interest from the distribution
of basically fungible sunlight and
whatever form is shown up in I'm gonna
get needy and start collapsing down my
stack so what are the practices and
protocols to keep everybody's you know
vibe super high and coherent versus
getting dropped out of the cloud and
guttering along on the bottom maybe
taking others with them yeah and I agree
that that game beam it's gonna become
something real it has to step up and
actually start to build right provide a
game be way of life least for a few
pioneers in fact I'll have a essay out
in a week or so which will have a very
penciled hand-wavy proposal about the
road I wouldn't call a proposal a naming
of the road forward because if game B
just sits around and is a talk shop
about you know arcane spiritual values
or philosophical lots of people
are going to drop out cuz not doing
anything for them it's only a very very
very few people that are interested in
that stuff yeah most people learn
sitting how can I live a good life and
provide a better life for my children
and leave a society that I'd be proud to
leave to the next generation that's what
most people are interested in they're
not interested in some arcane inside
baseball ethical argument right Oh
but yeah you I think you're taking a
rational utilitarian approach to what is
much more volatile and profoundly
emotional decision it's good like
connecting as tribal affiliation but
longing are huge drivers and people will
continually vote against Homo economicus
self-interest in favor of supporting
tribal identity and affiliation and and
that's a deep F bio structure and if
we're attempting to articulate idealized
best cases on top of that while ignoring
the longer levers that those systems
represent I mean like if we think about
it right oxytocin is the last thing that
comes online for social engineering
right you got you got dopamine and
pleasure reward you got endorphins you
got all these things make you feel good
and happy but man oxytocin it's not just
the cuddle hormone you know or the trust
drug it's it's it's the ethnocentric
tribal so you know stomp your stomp the
other across the river and feel great
about it
and I'll get that right she meant
humanitarianism is optional elective and
fragile effect over system research came
out the other day that shows that high
empathy also seems to be strongly
correlated with stomping the other which
makes that wait a second high empathy
yeah cuz empathy where it's really
powerful is in the inner group right so
your empathy well you may have powerful
empathy in general it's more effective
within the tribe and so people who have
really strong empathy for their tribe
are more likely to go stop the other Wow
interesting how about that and it's not
the first such paper
I'll find a copy of it and we'll put it
up on the website for this for this
episode nice but I think you're
absolutely right you know Homo
economicus obviously has been disproved
by anybody's look at the human behavior
even slightly on the other hand it does
have to deliver the goods sooner or
later it has to be able to provide a way
to make a living for people that's
honorable ethical and resonates at the
tribal level so it can't just all be
symbols and talk yeah you're gonna gonna
move some matter from time to time yeah
again we have food energy education for
the kids shelter from the storm
you know these things need to start
being talked about in the game be world
or you're gonna just get yourself a more
and more concentrated community of
pinheads yeah I mean honestly I get
baffled by any excess philosophizing
about any kind of culture design because
nothing talk about battle plans not
surviving first contact you know culture
architecture never gets out of the first
meeting so it you know it's brick laying
ahead of the thing and and it's a sense
of you know unless or until you found
ways to explicitly navigate currency
taxation resistance of armed enforcement
have said nation-state you know with
with declared sovereignty unless we've
solved for those things explicitly
cleanly and durably then everything else
just feels like angels on pins yep and
you can't jump up a cliff you can't
solve all those things simultaneously
except in the case of collapse
but until collapse it makes much more
sense to build peace parts try them out
it was which why people are rooting for
the end because they're like this is
just an utter clusterfuck I've been
staring at this for half my career
we better just blow it all up and start
again like a giant at your sketch
you know from heaven and and that's
that's the scary thing because the
moment that everybody starts that
tipping point and we're seeing it with
that the rescinding of the commitment to
the infinite game yeah right and then
there we dug you know tribalist populace
win lose finite games are being are back
on the table and strongly lobbied for
yeah I gotta say if anyone who
understands their history knows that the
the pain from a true collapse is
unbelievable
and yes the current world sucks but yeah
yeah well it does not suck so bad that
we really wanted to drop five levels of
civilization in you know three years and
watch you know 250 million people in the
United States alone died you know it
actually would be the best case would be
that give us some time to build many of
the peace parts and even done some proto
game B communities to demonstrate what
works from the social side and some of
it won't work and then having a soft
collapse like a financial collapse you
know financial collapse not that big a
deal look at you know like the Soviet
Union had what was essentially a
financial and regime collapse nobody
died yeah life sucked for a few years
unfortunately they got caught by a bad
attractor that was worse
wasn't it worse than the one they were
in but it wasn't as good as it could
have been by any means they fell into
the neo-fascist attractor rather than
into one of the better attractors well
exactly that's also a case study right I
mean those who still control the engines
of war like Milosevic didn't Serbia you
know like if he had in the military
therefore he wasn't he was able to
project force you know so like as things
as things unspool you realized that
those things are gonna be have to be
dealt with on basically feudal level
dynamics if things fall that's how far
they fall right well then yeah and I
think as things fell apart you know
nobody paid much attention I think
that's the problem with Anarchy right I
read these arguments for an archaic dude
come on let's look at history we know
how Anarchy really goes first it goes to
criminal gangs then warlords and then a
master Lord warlord crowns himself King
yeah no no I mean you know it's human
human history is fascinating and
the modes and models that we've all
grown up with and taking this table
stakes and seeing regurgitated and I in
our kids history books is this a
fleeting fiction you know which we've
just a temporary wobbly Mirage on the
you know arc of human culture and
civilization development with freaks I
know you took it as table stakes yeah
you know since 1694 basically all right
let's switch back here now use last bit
of our time or so we can really get into
your expertise you know you know about a
lot of what's going on in pharmacology
technology neurobiology etc what do you
see that's out there either proven or
advanced in the lab and that the R&D
level that might help make this
conversion to a better world happen
faster and better yeah well I think you
basically just put them all together and
build badass chambers to like boot up
you know like next level humans you know
you just combine all integrative trauma
release therapies you make use of
schedule three four compounds and you
integrate light sound music massages
like it like an automated Japanese
massage chair gravity blankets for vague
on the tone etc etc and then you you
basically dial people through a neuro
physiologically programmed synchronized
consumption of prescription
pharmaceuticals that deliver a you know
and and a breathing protocol in the
whole bit that deliver a peak energetic
pulse and release with whatever interior
psychological content shows up for that
person they get to make sense of it
themselves that's their own data set and
you use it to defrag nervous systems and
then boot up post conventional thinking
in basically particularly theta gamma
and waking Delta EEG signatures so you
basically just steer the self over to
that place make sense like process at
high velocity information lateral
connections patterns meaning making into
relationships and then come back down
with a kernel or a crystal of you know a
thesis in you know information research
branches and arms that you can then
follow up on and instantiate in 3d so
that to me seems like a sort of
necessary
no adaptive innovation it sounds like
there's a control system there too
though you need to make sure that you
use the state correctly and don't wallow
in it don't burn yourself out etc oh
yeah you have so you have periodization
and certain protocols almost like diving
and the rules for the bends and
ascending and that kind of thing so you
absolutely have that on Rails and and
then the other part is also a hundred
percent acknowledge that like those
reformatting technology psycho
technologies right pretty much with few
variations identical for basically you
know 21st century Western alchemy or you
know spook black-budget
brainwashing yeah or paestum what it's
just that the latter is design intended
to dissolve sovereignty and the former
is intended to galvanize it okay how far
along is the experimentation with this
multi-part approach that you've talked
about are you do you know anyone that's
actually doing this uh yeah I mean
there's a there's a there's a whole lot
of experimentation and innovation going
on much of it in the I would I suppose
the kind of EDM transformational
festival scene because there's a real
progression of light sound interactivity
biometrics that kind of thing so sort of
interactive experience or biometrically
queued or indexed experiments piece of
performance art interactive exhibits
training spaces that kind of thing so
yeah it's a fascinating field and what's
really interesting is that you can
absolutely program a peak state of you
know whatever five minutes to 15 minutes
dial it up dial it down not send people
out the door on a feather and they can
use it as a post conventional
metacognitive substitute for bodywork or
a float tank or you know the spa day
let's get a little more practical you
know I try to be a practical guy if
we're trying to build game be mmm how
might we use that well because all the
leaders going to be incorporating micro
PTSD across there across their days and
need places to skillfully and
efficiently defrag their hard drives
reset
nervous systems and process and
integrate information because as I said
and that the richness level of those
states tend to be high data bandwidth so
it gets combinatory recovery like active
recovery and also strategic cogitating
again let me get leaving more practice a
there's the first proto game b group of
200 people that go out and decide to
build a game b village somewhere would
it be your thought that they should
build or take with them the kernel of
these capabilities to have that within
their civilization as an important part
of how they build out proto game be 1.0
yeah I mean I mean yes sure of course it
doesn't have to be this it could be any
any sort of integrated dedicated full
spectrum life practice or set of
practices that anybody else has found
and sorted and learned and pursued in
their life it's just absent that and
with a little bit of tech assist and a
little bit of fun instructional design
you can also just pour this one in but I
mean it includes basically what we need
I think these days and more soon is
going to be highly highly coherent
highly highly resilient high integrity
leaders who are completely surrendered
to mission and and selfless service and
to playing by the the highest
aspirational rules of the game and self
policing when we don't and that rent and
that requires that you know that doesn't
lend itself to burnout reactivity
retrigger trauma etc etc so healing and
rejuvenation are critical to then do all
the other huh 3d you're discussing
so all I'm talking about it's like
what's the psychosocial software to map
to the techno-economic stuff that you're
thinking about that what I'm trying to
get at should this be cooked in
essentially to the you know the initial
boot program and it sounds like there's
a good argument that it would help the
boot program be more successful yeah but
you know I mean YouTube being culture is
tricky because then you almost always
end up back to teach the children right
you're like oh it's so hard once adults
are baked they have these all these bad
habits we don't want them anymore and
then eventually we start fantasizing
about what what we really need to do is
get the kids first then it'll be alright
right and if you do that then you're
like it's actually you get a
double-edged sword because unless you're
truly putting your kids out of all
mainstream society then the better you
do it raise them in game B or any other
utopian experimenter experience so worse
they fit so you are wounding the
children you love the most by making
them misfits right on you know on the
island of toys like and and and that is
a brutal thing or you're like we're
leaving it behind we're never looking
back so it won't matter and then you've
gone full bore prepper so you know
that's a lot to impart or inflict on a
child some come out amazingly out of
super alternative lives and then others
make a transition that's a little
bumpier I think an interesting data is
that the Israeli kibbutz which is one of
the more successful alternative micro
civilizations only about 2% of the kids
stay it's amazing but yet yet they do
very well in the world yeah you know
it's on that note about kids staying
have you seen that documentary The
Devil's playground or about the Amish
and the and the end the rum Springer no
that's oh my god it's so good
so so it's the whole story of a
present-day Amish community in
Pennsylvania and their rum Springer
which is there right of adolescent
passage which I think when they turn 16
or maybe 18 then it's like wheels off
they're completely officially out of
 they get to do anything they want
they hook up generators they run
Nintendo's and Playstations they have
parties in the farm feels like they had
pictures with like girls and bonnets all
passed out on Chevy Nova's with the door
open at sunrise like mayhem they move
down to Florida they start dealing
methamphetamine they get apartments they
go absolutely stark raving batshit and
by the end of the movie you're just
crestfallen you're like oh my god like
that was the city on the hill the last
best hope for the agrarian Jeffersonian
you know contemplative so there's you
know like quiet and non-assertive
piety that we just love in this country
right and you're like it's over it's
over there's no saving that youth the
youth of tomorrow and then the credits
roll and the credits it's like hey you
know what does it say it said 93 percent
or 97 percent of teenagers in this era
are coming back and
formerly rejoining the church so they
can get their yo-yos out but when they
come back then you're all the way in and
it's the highest percentage in the last
300 years is right now which is the
absolute kicker to the whole movie in
the credits I love it I love it like I
do something on I don't know where it
was I must have been on Twitter that you
know there must be something in the
Mennonites and Amish that's worth game
be looking into and it sounds like a
perfectly good example you know a way to
make sure that you don't dead-end your
kids into some weird cult make it clear
from the beginning that they have the
right to opt out and in fact are
essentially kicked out temporarily and
have to opt back in reducing valve yeah
yeah it's a great way to keep the thing
from becoming a cult because that's you
know this spiritual bypass thingy that
we talked about it's one known bad
attractor for the alternative committee
the other ones cults right every goddamn
time you find these dime-store cult
leaders right and make it my job to move
them down the road every time they show
their ugly faces you are a hoot yeah so
so that is that is absolutely a tendency
of anytime you get peak States and some
form of deep healing you know and or
catharsis then you get Celtic tendencies
and that feels to be at the love way
down the stack at like tribal primate
level of identifying the silverback of
out of deference a pretty much the
antithesis of your big man cavemen book
that you were describing all right there
is the notion of the Hierophant right
that that is the minister of the sacred
and it does feel that when anybody is up
front and by hook or by crook managed it
to close that circuit and boot folks up
into either a preconventional or a blues
conventional sense of the collective
right either erosion and loss of self
right or you know deepening connecting
and amplifying itself it depends but
anytime you do either of those you get
all the other tribal monkeys in the
circuit you to imprint on that
Hierophant like little ducklings there
like that is the source of it all and
then how many of those folks because
they could be idiot savants they can be
hucksters in shysters they could think
and they could be quick studies they can
be you know uh Naturals but how many of
them
give it all back you know it's a little
bit like winning the lottery like if
anybody wins the lottery like do they
rat do they say hey man there but for
the grace of God you know let it pass
through my life let me distribute it to
everybody I don't I was fine yesterday I
won the lottery today do I need to keep
any of it you know and so those gurus
with feet of clay it feels like they
probably hold on to some of the light
that's actually the butt you know the
metabolic output of the collective and
in doing so right it corrupts them
slowly over time but inevitably or maybe
not so slowly some of them as you say or
you know probably even if they were into
it explicitly as con men they quickly
fall into it right see that's the thing
I I think that that is a category for
sure at the basest least discerning
level like like cut rate you know
megachurch ministers you know but the
reality is is that the more interesting
cases are ones of people who had
absolutely absolute juice otherwise they
couldn't have possibly done what they
did or gathered the people they gathered
all right so the question is is how do
you get these basically you know it's
that old Tolkien thing of you know no
doubt you know or every Dark Wizard
started out in the pursuit of knowledge
that is true yep and I would put it in
the category of another immune system
the game be has to build for itself you
know we have to have an immune system
against spiritual bypass we have an
immune system about trapping our
children in a you know an impossible
situation from which they can't get out
and can't move forward and we have to
have an immune system against the Guru's
quacks and Swami's right yeah yeah yeah
yeah but of course I mean that's the
trick right I mean that's baked into the
Book of Revelations and the Antichrist
is gonna walk like a Christ he's gonna
talk like a Christ but he's gonna be the
Antichrist all right so we always have
the ability to vilify the other in the
name of the you know upholding that
ourselves described standards of purity
you know so like so that's the trick I
mean a I think even just naming
something like game be pretty is
presumptive it's like it's like we're
gonna keep evolving culture and it's
happening in real time whether we're
discussing it on a podcast or whether
it's just happening all around us in a
million tiny ways folks are trying to
navigate the wreckage of all this and
there's not gonna be another flag
planted on a city on a hill
that has militarization tax resources
protection sovereign land etc etc so
we're integrating into existing systems
and isolationism is probably has never
been less possible than it is right now
that's a very good point well I think
we're gonna wrap it up here this has
been a remarkably interesting
freewheeling conversation a little
different than I intended but I think
people are gonna love it
so you know thanks a lot Jamie and we
will put links up to your book and your
website on the episode page and it'll be
out a couple of weeks so awesome and
thank you so much that was that that was
a blast
to chat with you and thank you so much
for the you know thorough preparation
and and great questions production
services and audio editing by Jared
Jaynes consulting music by Tom Muller at
modern space music.com
[Music]