hey folks welcome to another episode of
the dark horse podcast I'm your host
Brett Weinstein and with me today via
remote link is my good friend Douglas
Murray welcome Douglas great to be with
you Bret well I'm really glad you agreed
to join me for this and I'm really
looking forward to the conversation I
should confess upfront that I have not
read your book but let me tell you
something I did something better I had
you read your book to me now in this
case the audiobook is read by you and
while that's a lovely option in many
cases your voice is so resonant and your
choice of wording and diction is so
precise and careful that having you read
it is even more delightful than reading
it on the page so for those of you who
enjoy that sort of thing I would highly
recommend the audio version of this book
which Douglass reads and I would suggest
at least go through a few chapters at
regular speed so you can hear just how
carefully put together this lovely book
is I also want to say a couple things
about this book and maybe set the
discussion in a particular direction in
some ways I didn't need this book
because my life its trajectory has put
me in a circumstance
I'm obviously thoroughly steeped in the
various contradictions of
intersectionality and the result of what
happens when they're deployed into the
world however I do think that your book
is potentially revolutionary from the
point of view of steering our way out of
the mess that we find ourselves in it
was really so brilliantly argued and so
thorough and so careful I mean you
really bend over backwards to look into
these matters and let them indict
themselves rather than caricaturing the
arguments on the other side for example
so thank you for writing and for one
thing
and it has my strongest recommendation
for people to pick it up whatever sides
of these issues they find themselves on
it is it is well worth us engaging well
thank you very much for that I'm
delighted you say that and delighted
that the audio book comes across well I
did it myself but you won't be surprised
to learn I haven't actually listened to
it myself no that does not surprise me
at all as you as you've guessed but yes
it does come across wonderfully I don't
know if other people have this
experience but I find that if I know
somebody's voice well then if I'm
reading I actually hear their voice so
in some sense this was a little bit like
the experience of of reading it but it
was just easier you know I could turn it
on and relax but you yeah yep
it's been four days in a studio in South
London locked up to do it but I'd she
had I had a whale of a time doing it
funnily enough and I'm just delighted
that readers have been enjoying it or
listeners have been enjoying it but and
I have to say a number of times in the
recording process I did what we call
corpse as an Americanism when you corpse
on stage it's when you just can't stop
laughing and the performance has to stop
and I corpse several times whilst doing
the audio version of this book and I had
to explain to the sound engineer I'm not
laughing at my own jokes I'm laughing at
the unbelievable ridiculousness of some
of the things I'm having to read out
here yes that's one of the one of the
delights in the book is that you read
other people's words as they present
their own argument and the glaring
contradictions and the total lack of
self-awareness for some of these people
is just utterly evident yes yes you just
have to sort of show it you know you
don't have to tell particularly with it
do you yes and I and I love the approach
it's very easy because the argument
against the intersectional portrayal of
the world and the plan is so absurd
there's a temptation
to really you know really bring the
point home and you can oversell it very
easily but you've gone the other
direction by very carefully stating the
case letting them present it in their
own words and then interpreting what the
meaning must be it's very effective at
well a number of of jobs so I said
something about trying to set the the
interview in motion you've done a lot of
podcasts and other interviews of late
and I don't want to duplicate them I
don't think there's any need to but I
think there's something else that we can
do here so interesting in the book you
use a particular analogy in multiple
places and it's one that I was surprised
and delighted to find you using because
I use the exact analogy and in fact the
I reference the same weapon system with
respect to the position I've been in and
the the analogy has to do with mine
clearing mine as in military mines and
there is this weapon system which
effectively a tank launches a missile
that drags a cable behind it over a
minefield the cable hits the ground
explodes and detonates all the mines
adjacent to it creating a path through
the minefield right so some of us for
whatever reason have the ability to
endure certain challenges that come back
when we engage certain topics talking
about trans rights for example or race
has been fatal to careers and it has
caused people to retreat into private
life and things like that but some of us
are able to explode these mines and the
hope you know the reason to use in mines
as an analogy is that once exploded it
creates the opportunity for others to to
come through so I sort of see us as
strangely in the same business and that
business is exploding mines that have
been placed there to manipulate and
Corral
so that others can more boldly explore
the landscaping so anyway what I'm
hoping is that in this discussion we can
utilize that instinct towards mind
clearing to explore some of this space
in a way that might be productive I like
the sound of it already right awesome
all right so by the way awesome is an
American expression meaning quite good
[Music]
right right sorry I I will I will
attempt to resist making very good
Americanism could be worse could be
right exactly
all right so let's see where where to
begin
there is something curious about the
portrayal of you in the media and then
the actual experience of you as a person
in informal context and the experience
of reading your writing mm-hmm do you
consider yourself a conservative yes in
lots of ways I'm not that wild about
political labels and the older I get the
less wild I am about them my experience
is that when you're young or younger you
need labels because you need to orient
yourself in the world and you want to
try to orient the world towards yourself
and how you should view it and it should
view you and that the older you get and
generally I think that becomes less
important
yes I mean there's lots of things about
me that I would regard as being
conservative probably broadly speaking I
prefer things that are good to remain
the same than to change I don't like
change for changes sake but I suppose
that and also these things change across
borders don't they I mean lots of things
about my type of politics such as they
are wouldn't be conservative especially
in an American context for instance so
so all of these all these terms become
slightly difficult to use
yes I mean I'd certainly sound more
conservative than I am a leftist yeah
interesting so the description that you
give of a conservative somebody who
doesn't like change for changes sake and
you want things that work to stay the
same that sounds to me a little bit like
being an adult not being a conservative
well but to maybe the same thing well
here's the question though and this is
this is why I raised the topic is I
would describe myself as a radical and I
would also if I go further would say I
am a reluctant radical because I'm
terrified of change the only reason I'm
a radical is because I believe radical
change is required by our circumstance
but I am frightened by the tendency on
the left to see only the upside of
proposals and to get caught off guard by
the unintended consequences yeah so and
I've also said that I am a radical who
hopes to live in a world so good that I
get to be a conservative now my guess is
you can translate all these things
they're all effectively rephrasing zuv
at the same point and just as I can say
well I want I want to be a conservative
but the world has to be in a position
that change would be a bad idea before
that makes sense in the same way that
that hints at the the adult portrayal of
conservatism that you paint when I read
your book or when I have you read your
book to me what I detect is the heart of
a liberal ah
yes I think it's very clearly there the
main conservative newspaper here The
Telegraph in reviewing the madness of
crowds said you know actually it's
perfectly plain from this book that
Douglas Meier is an old-fashioned
liberal at heart well but I don't even
want to say old-fashioned because you
know the classical liberal label has
become a bit of a shield for you but I
here
a bold a liberal vision right not just a
desire for tolerance but you embrace in
this book and in fact you make a very
powerful argument for you know for love
you mentioned it several times
explicitly in terms of how we should be
dealing with each other and not only do
I resonate with the portrayal but I do
find it very much outside of what most
people would view as conservative so I
see you trying to conserve structures
that work but I see you embracing a
vision and in fact much of your defense
is predicated on the fact that it's not
that things are great but that we are
getting better we have been getting
better at them and that that trajectory
you'd be foolish to upend it willy-nilly
yes I think I think that's that's a fair
summary of what I think is that on all
of the rights issues I'm describing it's
it's unarguable that they've got better
it's arguable as well that that at some
stage each of them for most of along the
way quite quite a while have been
opposed by people who didn't want
anything much to change so there's
obviously an inherent question there
which is always a question about that
the battle that goes on between you know
progressivism and conservatism which is
that broadly speaking conservatives
fight the next battle they're about to
lose and and then then move on and
change the ground accordingly and and
indeed the progressives change the
ground according in and actually one of
the only ways I think I understand why
our societies tend to be almost 50/50
torn between these two instincts is
because it is exactly the difficult
question to work out when it when is it
a good time to fundamentally alter an
institution and when when is staying
with what you have a better choice or
when can a very soft form of that change
be allowed to occur
yes I mean I don't believe in in
progress as a teeny illogical force or
anything like that but obviously it's
demonstra Belov things get better for
certain groups at certain times certain
people at certain time but of course the
corollary of that is that they also can
get worse which is the bit I think in
the progressive vision which which is
always missing is that the assumption is
that if if you get through certain
barriers it's inevitably going to get
better whereas whereas many things that
I think progressives and others see as
being forces that are holding people
back are doing that and they're doing it
for a good reason so I find this so
interesting I agree with what you said
about the decreasing utility of labels
as you grow up effectively and I think
the reason for it is fairly obvious
which is that as a young person you may
very well sign up for a slate of ideas
and so that label correctly points to a
bunch of positions you will likely hold
as you grow more nuanced your tendency
to depart from parts of a slate even if
you embrace other parts goes up and so
the label is let it's more noisy with
respect to what you actually believe
yeah
but when I I mean the nice thing about a
book like the one you've written here
and your last one is that it sort of
allows a person to Tromp around in your
mind right to get to see how your your
mental process works you you sort of
provide a window into various quadrants
of your thinking and it's a it's a
pretty interesting tour what I find so
fascinating is that you and I are
supposed to be miles apart I'm a radical
and you're more conservative than you
are progressive yeah I find we disagree
on very little in this exploration now
why would that be well you do with us or
something to do with everyone else so we
should get to the root of that let's get
to the root of that and let's blow up
some mines along the
if we can I think one of the reasons is
because what we actually differ on has
almost nothing to do with values I would
say in terms of what a desirable world
would accomplish right I think you and I
agree to a great degree where we differ
is on questions of how to get to a
better place with respect to those
values we might differ on where we are
currently although I suspect we don't
differ all that much on that question
and we may differ on our sensitivity to
the particular hazards of change but in
a sense I think it's both something to
do with you and me and to do with other
people and the you and me part would be
to the extent that you are serious about
understanding these issues rather than
posturing and in an attempt to bring
about something that you want you will
discover a a world of nuance and you
will recognize it's a complex system
you'll have self skepticism you know
with the particular toolkit one ends up
able to have this conversation and that
the deal-breaker is if the values don't
align but once they do the rest is a
question of where are we and where might
we go and how good an idea is well if I
mean it's it's that but it's also and I
think we've talked about this before
we've met is that one of the things that
seems to me to be holding back all
public conversation and an awful lot of
private conversation now is that is the
level of distrust which which may not be
unjustified on occasion but the level of
distrust that you can allow yourself to
go through a set of ideas with a person
of different political views because the
fear is that that person when you're at
the edge of your own competency is going
to do something nasty on you you know so
in
case we might discuss something which
you are far more knowledgeable about
than me I we can we could find an awful
lot of cases where that can occur and
vice versa but anyhow but the point is
is that is that we could get on to a
whole set of things which you know more
about than me and if if I think that
when I'm not looking you're going to
smuggle some communism into me and you
know or vice versa when we're on some
competency of mine and you're not
looking I suddenly like make you do
Hitler salutes and things and you know
we're not it's not possible to have any
of this and and one of the reasons why
all the trips the traps rather are laid
at the moment is that there is some
there does seem to be in society a
genuine relief that when you're not
looking the other side are going to turn
out to be Nazis or communists and you
can have almost no discussion in that
situation because nobody wants either of
those things and and so nothing happens
I'm fairly confident that if we get on
to a particular issue of evolutionary
biology that you can trounce me on that
you know you're not doing it in order to
you know reopen a gulag and send me into
it I'm confident of that so I don't I
don't I don't mind the discussion but
but that's that that's the great problem
at the moment and I don't know how much
of it is sincere and how much of it is
opportunistic and how much of it is just
deluded but it is that it is that that
fear of what happens in the gaps I I
totally agree I have said elsewhere one
of the places Erik quotes me sometimes
is bad faith changes everything and to
the extent that you detect bad faith or
even fear bad faith the whole set of
moves that are necessary for nuance are
off the table but one of the fears oh go
ahead no I mean I just noticed this in I
noticed it in television studios all the
time I have certain radius to use in
public discussions that that's what's
going on is this horrible
and and and and and that's one of the
reasons why we plainly strange language
games at the moment you know where
people want to read into what the
meaning of words is other than their
overt meaning you know that the search
for dog whistles and the identification
of special sounds in the stratosphere
you know all of this and yeah that's
everywhere that's our public discussion
so I was going to say my fear in reading
your book something that just lurked for
me every chapter really was that I had
the sense that the argument was so well
presented and so thorough you know it's
really a very up-to-date exploration of
this entire landscape and done by
somebody I mean you know it's not
written as a PhD dissertation it's
written in a very accessible form but it
has the kind of encyclopedic thorough
nature of a PhD dissertation and my
concern is that there is one move to
disarm it okay go on
well it's unfortunately an uninteresting
move but it will be deployed
automatically which is that this book is
so preposterous that no person who
understands the arguments on the liberal
side would dare engage right and so the
point that many arguments many strategic
arguments in the modern landscape come
down to this which is that which you
cannot actually defeat on its merits you
have to defeat by driving up the cost of
engaging it right so driving up the cost
of engaging with Douglas Murray is the
go-to move because Douglas Murray
presents a very compelling case even if
you have a radical view of what needs to
happen on earth you can still hear this
book loud and clear
right I mean I don't know that somebody
who wasn't aware of your reputation as a
conservative would necessarily if this
book fell in their lap and they weren't
sort of aware of the argument that it
it's it's in that they would detect that
you're a conservative at all from what
you say here yeah I think that's
possible so I I hope that doesn't happen
and I I guess I would say maybe
maybe we have to invent a countermove
you know an honorable one but I dare you
to read this book if you if you think
that this is a simple question I dare
you to read Douglass's book yeah I mean
I'm
there has been some engagement there's
been less than uncie ation so far
famous last words of course but less
denunciation than I was fearing but then
that was the case my last book too so I
don't know I mean one possibility is
that the people who ought to read it
don't I was in a radio studio in London
the other day with a writer for the main
left-wing paper here who we were
discussing her latest book and my latest
book and it became clear before he went
on air that she hadn't actually read my
latest book and at the end of about an
hour together on the radio our
interviewer asked if we'd learnt
anything more about each other in the
time we spent together and she said no
because I've read Douglas and I know
what he thinks you actually told me you
hadn't read this book and I know for a
fact that you have not read any of my
books before this one so but I just love
that again no he can't tell me anything
that's new cos I've not read his stuff I
know what he thinks right I know that it
that is that is the exact object in
question is I was so annoyed by the way
I actually went to the bookshop the day
before got the staff to get her wretched
butt off the trolley in the back whereas
cific I bought it with my own cash my
owner hard-earned cash and then I read
her book yeah that is by the way that is
something I find I find an awful lot but
I mean I read a lot of I don't need
everything sadly but I mean I read a lot
of what you know people write that I
disagree with but I rarely find the
favor is returned yes and there's a lot
of covering for the fact that people I
mean at least in that case she
acknowledged that she hadn't read your
book and feet yeah oh well right so but
people will often not even do that but
the amazing thing is that the the the
argument is its own indictment right I
mean and you know you you made it very
clear the idea that you know what
Douglas Murray thinks and therefore
don't need
to discover what he thinks is it's
hermetically sealed I've got to tell you
by the way sorry I was on my mind I was
in Sweden last year and there's a
Swedish translation on my last book
strange south of Europe and I had this
very unnerving experience of Sid being
interviewed on Swedish national radio
that wasn't that nervous that was
absolutely fine but the infamy for about
10 minutes and then because it needs me
they need a discussion about me
afterwards and so I'm still sitting in
the studio and two Swedes are brought on
to have a discussion about me in Swedish
by the way really unnerving because they
say Lukas Murray I just and if my fake
Swedish should go out anyhow but the
point is it's pretty compelling and I'm
American so I wouldn't know but it was a
summary anyhow but the point is is that
I discovered after I sit to the side
when do I leave because I don't really
want to sit here listening to an
argument about me and Swedish anyhow I
sidled out but I learned after and said
apparently the left-wing journalist and
a journalist from quility we're having
the discussion and the left-wing
journalist said there's nothing in this
book that's new
we could and I've read and heard all
this for years and and the journalist
from Colette said have you read the book
and he said no there's nothing in the
book that's new that's why I didn't read
it
I mean it's like look I I just I'm gonna
give you a microphone and I will let you
indict yourself it's it's the obvious
answer yeah so alright you you raised
the the strange death of Europe I will
confess upfront I read a good fraction
of the strange death of Europe I did not
read the whole thing it doesn't mean I
won't pick it back up
so are you looking askance at me down
your nose possibly that wasn't a scant
look okay askance all right your your
subtle with the facial expression so I
have to it would have killed you if we'd
been in the same room well naturally but
let me ask you a question just to
explore further down this particular
minefield you make a very strong case in
the strange death of Europe that Europe
has succeeded in producing many things
of great value that we ought to guard
carefully against that which threatens
them that fair yeah and I think it's
also as much as that must be a
controversial statement at some level
there's no analytical reason it should
be a controversial statement it's
obvious that it's true you make a very
strong case for it in a a thorough
exploration but nonetheless let's just
say for a second that it is true and you
discuss in that book in fact the focus
of the book has a lot to do with
immigration and the threat that
immigration may pose to the achievements
of Europe if it comes too fast and yeah
this so two questions I want to engage
with you one is the question of too fast
is at some level it's an empirical
question is there a border of a rate of
immigration that is too fast for
something that has existed prior to that
wave of immigration to persist through
it right either there is or there isn't
it may not be a simple number maybe a
function but nonetheless we could find a
rate and we could say above this rate
something happens and below this rate it
doesn't happen and so maybe we want to
stick below that rate but then the other
question is how let's say for example
let's just take the Enlightenment itself
as a major European achievement the
Enlightenment produces tools of great
value right ways of thinking that are
simply disproportionately useful it's
not to say that there are not
conceivable alternatives that would
achieve the same ends but in some sense
they are a discovery rather than an
invention yeah
does it
matter it clearly matters to you that
those tools are defended and preserved
alright that they not be washed over by
all by the view that you know that
European culture is dirty and therefore
let's wash it clean with other cultures
does it matter to you who's operating
those tools in other words if the
population of Europe through some normal
process simply transitioned to a
different population but the culture
that the achievements of the
Enlightenment were preserved and honored
would that matter to you I would say
would matter especially to me if the
Enlightenment and more was preserved I
mean in that it's not just about are we
still carrying the Enlightenment through
this period because Europe is more than
just the enlighted sure but yes I mean
if I mean we know all all societies
change over very long periods of time
the Greeks today are not what the Greeks
were 2,000 years ago but yes I mean it's
the three things that I would say always
matter in the immigration debate
none of which are properly discussed one
is speed one is volume and third is
identity and I mean in a way the thing
that were links this new book and the
last book is I want to be able to think
aloud about these things because I think
we're incredibly bad at doing so and
being bad at doing so brings a terrible
cost you see if we in Europe for
instance had been able to have
reasonable discussions in recent decades
about this whole question we wouldn't
have got into the state we're in in 2015
when when when Germany busy presses the
panic button and and I think that's the
case on a range of these things and I'm
just struck by the fact that that you
know after years of what should have
been a realization that we weren't
having a proper discussion we continued
to not have the discussion and
you know all that you get time for bits
that I mean you talk you'd ask about the
the issue of numbers for instance and I
thought about this a lot you know and I
was doing firsthand traveling around and
reporting from the migrant camps in 2015
and after and you know there were some
answers for instance in the UK was
pretty much agreed by by governments of
the last decade that they were trying to
get net migration to the UK down to the
tens of thousands rather than the
hundreds of thousands
is there any meaningful difference
between having a net migration of ninety
nine thousand a year versus one hundred
and one thousand no but it was
recognized there was something in that
shift from the five to a six-figure
change that did had definitely in recent
years been one of the catalysts for an
increasing public concern about the
whole area and I think that with all the
landmines I'm trying to clear in the
madness of crowds is that for instance
we all know that the term transphobia
can to be accused of transphobia can do
serious damage to somebody's career but
we also know that we should not
medically experiment on children
and yet we are stuck in like in that
question that we've had with migration
in recent years if well we know there
are two things we come we can't do both
we don't know how to do better and
that's what I mean that's why one of the
things I wrote about in the strange
death of Europe which I told by quite a
lot of politicians across Europe and
elsewhere they found very useful after
the book was out to consider it this way
was I said look I think you might have
heard me say this before I said look how
about considering there are competing
virtues you know taking Aristotelian
approaches so there are competing
virtues here it's not the case that it's
you know nice generous migrants versus
European Nazis that it might be more
complex and that it is more complex and
that specifically in the issue of
migration and mass migration that it was
a I said it was a it was a competition
between the virtues of justice and the
virtue of mercy and that if you
understood that or approached it like
that you could start to approach it from
a more reasonable position and one which
you were more likely to arrive at some
kind of not just answer but consensus
over and I think then that's what I'm
trying to do with all of these landmine
issues and the manners of crowds with
with gay with with with with sex with
race and with trans is to say we all
know it's all of these things are much
more complex than our current public
discussion allows us to concede so what
would for instance on the transient what
would it look like to be taking this
seriously to be looking in a humane
manner at the claims that are being made
and to try and to try to hive off the
the decent and reasonable humane case
from the absolutely batshit crazy no way
we're going to do that Brigade and I'm
just stunned as I say on issue after
issue with this that that we're still
finding it this hard because it
shouldn't be this hard so if I can
rephrase it just slightly it it's not
that it shouldn't be this hard it
actually isn't this hard it's being made
difficult strategically yeah and this is
very confusing because not everybody on
the other
side is doing this but we are all caught
up in it and so you know you do a very
good job in the book for example of
parsing the border between queer and gay
mmm god that was a fun border I tell you
well it's a very dangerous border but
really dangerous border but years I was
so pleased to finally say it yeah it's
it's it's beautiful I I don't know if
you saw it it was some time ago I
Unleashed a tweet at one point I
survived it apparently but the tweet was
something like if we were to eliminate
the cue from LGBTQ who would be excluded
right my thought being that the other
letters surely cover whatever it is that
Q is unless Q is a political ideology
and if in which case why is it in this
in this set of of letters so in any case
the the problem is that if you took and
I'm speaking from experience now at
Evergreen we did have a pretty high
percentage of the population was trans
and so I knew quite a number of trans
students I never had an issue people
would tell me you know I never asked
about pronouns but if somebody wanted me
to call them she they would tell me that
and I would abide by it never once did
anybody ever ask me to say they it just
didn't come up and nor did I find the
the trans folks I was interacting with
strident or trying to corral my behavior
they were navigating a relatively
difficult puzzle but in any case if you
took the folks who are not on a
political mission who are really
fighting a kind of Human Rights battle
they could have a perfectly reasonable
discussion I have the sense with those
of us who are not in that community who
are trying to figure out what to do with
a complex issue how to become
at the same time that we don't disrupt
the ability to teach biology for example
so if you in other words if you took all
the people who are ready to acknowledge
that there are trade-offs and that there
is nuance and that they are necessary to
navigate this topic we could have a
discussion and it wouldn't necessarily
be easy but it wouldn't be a bloodbath
but the bloodbath arises when you are
forced to choose sides between
artificially pure perspectives and you
are penalized for evidencing a
commitment to nuance yes I am there are
categories of problem by the way it
seems to me that we don't have words for
at the moment and I mean which we should
try to find words for quite fast and
I've trying to find out there's not even
a German word for the concept I'm about
to suggest but um the for instance there
is a type of problem which an
interlocutor cannot solve with you
because to address it in a particular
manner and get to what may well be the
truth would be so disturbing to the
foundations of their character that they
wouldn't in some way be able to
psychologically survive the experience
and an example it's not a perfect one
but would be whatever one's views on
abortion matters it's highly unlikely
that that a woman who has had an
abortion and who feels even a an ounce
of regret about it
is going to be able to be persuaded by
some male anti-abortion activist that
abortion is always wrong because it's
going to open up something bigger than
she wants to open up and so so the thing
it's not a perfect example but it's sort
of one of the nearest I can get you I
think that least this manner of problem
actually exists in our societies far
more than we recognize and we've got to
find a way of recognizing it so that and
I realized this when I was writing about
migration was that the the level of
which for some people rightly or wrongly
I think quite a lot of people wrongly
when they heard any criticism of any
form of migration including you know
mass illegal migration they thought you
would talk
them or their mother or their friend or
the nice man who works and you know the
shop and and so they would never get
beyond it and I think that there are
there are within all of these rights
movements elements of that where people
are miss hearing what the critique is
and burn and are being led by other
people to believe that it is the
fundamental attack on their person that
they can't survive it's a personal
existential threat it has heard as one
and that makes it impossible to have a
proper discussion and I know by the way
I should say I do recognize you know the
problem of that for people I mean I
since the massive crowds came out and a
few gay friends have said to me I can't
believe you said that and I know what it
is that they are worried about they're
worried about me asking whether the
hardware conclusion of recent years over
the gay question is I mean somebody
actually said to me it's just so
unhelpful at this moment yeah now my
thing was it may be unhelpful but you
know for you or for other some other
people but it's it's also what I think
is true and what the evidence is
pointing to and but I mentioned that
only to save that to each of the gay
friends who said that since this book
came out I've said the same thing which
is I happen to be gay myself and I don't
know how that comes about but if I was
told tomorrow there was a gay gene I
wouldn't feel anything very much and if
I was told tomorrow that more recent
studies had found there was more of a an
issue with you know I know environment a
bit of a particular age I I wouldn't
feel all that much but why is that
it's because the gay bit is really not
very central if at all central to my
sense of myself or my worth or place in
the world I don't I don't find that it's
the source of any real sort of meaning
for me but I recognize that some people
aren't in that position that maybe I
didn't
they don't have a loving family or or
others and and and and it is it is an
absolutely foundational thing and Anna I
don't know how one can I don't I don't
think we should just dismiss that but at
the same time I don't think that facts
can be elasticated to fit around them
no and it's very dangerous to try
because later when it's discovered that
you have gild the lily as it were the
whole thing comes toppling down and it's
far worse than if you had just
acknowledged the nuance in the first
place I will say this is I think why
biologists and in particular
evolutionary biologists find themselves
in a funny predicament at the moment is
that in a sense there is a toolkit for
this and if I can just give you an
anecdote when I got to graduate school I
was already very much interested in
evolutionary biology but at some point I
found the people who were discussing it
with respect to humans it was a
particular group of about fifteen or
sixteen people some of them quite famous
actually and I remember as a young
graduate student first year I walked
into my first seminar with these folks
and I may have been four minutes late or
something I walked in in the middle of a
discussion and the discussion was this
brutally honest exploration of what
human beings are up to in which it was
quite clear that the entire room had
either explicitly or not agreed that
nobody was to be held to account
personally for what they acknowledged
about human experience in this
discussion in other words nobody was
posturing to portray themselves as
particularly altruistic or whatever else
I walked in this room and I heard this
discussion in which there was just only
a dispassionate analysis of people by a
group who was clearly compassionate and
my thought was oh thank God you know and
if I had said it out loud they would
have said who but but in any case the I
think my point is
that what you are talking about is
difficult because it is a skill that
most people have not been they have not
acquired it either through training or
through their own discovery and that if
there is hope for taking the lessons of
your book and exporting them so that
more people can engage the argument at
this level of sophistication then it
depends on people becoming comfortable
with the tool which it means putting
aside you know the the story you tell
about your your gay friends being
concerned about you poking at the
question of whether or not being gay is
a hardware or a software issue by the
way in analogy I also use and really
really like it's it's so useful to think
it just it's a clean divide and
everybody into its it but here's the
thing there won't be a gaijin if the
data we have already is for real and you
know one can always discover that
there's a problem at the level of the
data that you're not in a position no
but assuming that the data is what we
think it is there won't be a gauging can
there be gay genetic influences sure
that could be but there are patterns
that are simply inconsistent with a gay
gene and what's more I don't think the
questions are insurmountable as to
whether or not a gay gene could
propagate evolutionarily but it's not a
simple question of how they would but in
any case the to build the protection of
homosexuals on the idea that there is
simply no environmental influence and
therefore as you argue in the book that
effectively it would be immoral to hold
people responsible for something over
which they had no control that's not a
sound foundation now it may be that
people have very little choice
especially here we're gonna step on a
big landmine okay or I am you go first
okay
at least four males there is likely to
be not very much choice because the
switch will have been flipped very early
right so in any case we don't need a
gaijin in order to fully support the
argument for compassion and
understanding but it was a useful crutch
before we had enough information to know
what was going on and people are
understandably reluctant to give it up
yeah but by the way the landmine you
just deftly deftly tripped over it
without least one once the fastenings me
because I say to everyone who complains
about what I'm saying about the gay bit
that when I say look it maybe it's a bit
more maybes a bit more
mellifluous even after a certain stage
than we pretend and that a gay isn't
necessarily as I say a one-way street
even the people who object to that
deeply concede I might be on to
something in the case of female
lesbianism right well cuz it's
definitely more there's definitely more
adaptability there than there is among
male homosexuals but I mean for instance
I mean you do sometimes there are some
lesbians who have had horrible
experiences with men or had a terrible
husband or worse and they end up falling
in love with a woman I do not know of
any case with a man who's married to the
most horrible woman and as a result
starts to screw around with men I just
yeah as a straight guy it's hard for me
to imagine a woman that horrible but
that's it I'm leaving you I'm gonna be a
local gay bar
as a result yep but I mean if you think
about it look the reason that this
should be more flexible on the lesbian
side is staring us in the face it's just
obvious as you said it's not that hard
gay men have a really and you know
again among the many amazing points that
you make in this book that I've never
heard anybody else say but you know
we're begging for an exploration gay men
have a problem producing babies the
mythology of the moment may be that they
don't but you know Monty Python
correctly nailed the fact that a pair of
men don't have a uterus you know and
therefore that invites questions about
how it's going to be done women don't
have this problem in fact a lesbian
couple has a couple of uterus right what
that means is that there is an
opportunity here let's just do this
straightforwardly in an evolutionary
sense human babies are extremely
expensive to raise and they are much
better raised when people team up right
so a straight partnership is a team and
its primary objective is the successful
raising a baby is the production of
resources the nurturing the delivery of
information on how to be a successful
human a single individual has a problem
raising a baby there's just not enough
labor it's too labor-intensive a pair of
lesbians has the labor and the uterus is
what they lack is a single cell right
all they need is a single cell to
trigger a baby and then everything else
they've got right now there are plenty
of ways that history can deliver a
circumstance in which there aren't
enough men around for example
warfare warfare will eliminate men from
the map are we really to imagine that
evolution will take a bunch of people
who are perfectly capable of raising
offspring and sideline them from that
most fundamentally Darwinian objective
because there aren't enough men around
for people to pair off oh no that's not
how it's going to work surely people who
have everything necessary to produce
offspring of their own will team up and
do so especially if all they need in
order to trigger the process is a single
cell they'll find one
right and so the point is lesbian
couples make perfect evolutionary sense
in many circumstances and that would
mean that the ability to facultative Li
go in that direction at the point that
it becomes a viable path forward should
be there as a contingency plan built-in
to women we can't make the same argument
for men at some point I will make an
argument for the evolutionary nature of
male homosexuality but I'm not ready to
deploy it in public just yet I have to
say I do want you to do that bread all
right well you know I lay down that
Chinese slightly in the book I say that
the evolutionary biologists have been
ducking this one for a long time now yes
ducking notice there's plenty of room
under the table here for me to to duck
if I must all right so where were we we
were talking about the understandable
desire amongst people who feel that they
have something personal at stake to
avoid certain kinds of exploration and
then others of us find those
explorations are necessary even to the
very protection at the focus of that
concern right I would say gay people are
far safer if we explore this carefully
than if we pretend the issue is simpler
than it is absolutely I mean I mean I
give the example of actually why gay
activists who want the gay gene to be
discovered should be careful of what
they wish for because even if they did
suddenly rather unlikely though both you
and I think it is even if they did find
such a gay gene
uh what we would do about that we've
already had a couple of little glimpses
of it I give the example that Alice
Drago gives in Galileo's middle finger
of the unbelievable stampede that
occurred when one scientist was rumored
to have found a gay gene in sheep and as
a result was experimenting on sheep and
the gay rights groups were got up
bye-bye Pete I think the animal people
and and they whipped up the animal
people whipped up the gay people to go
for the guy who allegedly found the gay
sheep
and and he hadn't but they were so
enraged that this man might have done
and might be doing something terrible
with it that might for instance be
taking homosexuality out of the sheep
pool and you know so when it were
clearly not gonna be any good with
dealing with this if it was what they
wanted either
and that's that's sort of by the way I
should say that's sort of why I started
with the chapter on gay because I wanted
to demonstrate in a way the sort of
subliminal thing what I wanted to
demonstrate to readers that I could do
this with the one minority interest
group that I've got any alleged
involvement in to say well not alleged
but have any involvement in to say look
and then we should also be able to do
that on these other issues so it
shouldn't be this hard for men and women
to talk about each other specifically
for men to talk about women and we're
making it much harder than it should be
and you know I I sort of hoped that that
becomes a cross so that's why I've done
it that way let alone then I get on the
race and trans but just to say look we
it sees a different manner of
approaching these things we have to try
to find and it has to take our purported
characteristics it has we have to lean
on them less I think what you do in the
book with gay actually I think the book
would stand without it frankly I think
it's good enough but I think the fact of
watching you explore this in a place
where you do have a dog in the fight is
it is exactly the necessary thing to
demonstrate that the bad faith isn't
there so in other words this is again
why I say the defense against your book
has to involve people not reading it
alright because watching you do this in
a place where obviously you have a great
deal at stake in how society views gay
men and you know doing it in a way
frankly that as I was a little surprised
as a straight man that you dealt so
carefully and effectively and
insightfully
with the way a a straight man views male
homosexuality which is right I am
perfectly accepting I believe it that
male homosexuals are deserving of
protection but there is a way that I
find I find the idea of being a gay man
a bit distant I can't I can't relate to
it very easily now that's why I say it's
it there is something there is something
that's a problematic to use one of the
terms of the era I mean I noticed it a
long time ago because there is a certain
type of woman who for instance with gay
men wants to talk dirty like they want
to talk sex with you and equally there's
a type of straight man who has a lot of
questions but not even just about what
is like have sex with a guy but
questions about sex in general like with
people and what I realized was this was
a long time ago this came to me that
both parties thought that gay men was
some kind of translation device yes I'm
not even not highly wrong on it's not
entirely wrong right and and that's why
and you see one of the things that I
find fascinating about this is actually
if you open up the gay bit a bit you
also get to some of the truths about
male-female relations I
I loved that exploration I thought you
slam dunk tip well very kind I you know
a bit with the women chapter was in some
ways the most fun bit to write because I
knew that you know I think I've said
before but I all the problems in this
book I sort of boiled down to the fact
that we're pretending to know about
things we don't know about trans and
we're pretending not to know about
things everyone you till yesterday
relations between the sexes and that
although it is complex it's not as
complex as we've been been pretending it
is but you know some of the things of
recent years I did feel for instance in
the in the post me to a period that
there was something that gay male
relations illuminated
the truth of what we weren't able to
talk about in the whole male-female when
a men taking advantage of women question
which was to return the questions they
are there occasions when women are
taking advantage of men and because you
can do exactly that play in the gay
world you can and I sort of carefully
laid-out it
everybody knows the situation in which
if you want to reduce relationships to
power dynamics that the person who the
sort of intersection lists would regard
as being the powerless figure in a
particular dance is actually the one
commanding the whole dance and that the
person whose society claims to be the
person with unbelievable amount of power
is a pathetic vulnerable manipulatable
person in the wrong or right hands yeah
it's it's it's a marvelous description
it matches perfectly what I've seen so
many times now including at Evergreen
very personally where this naked
exercise of power is described as
basically a cry of powerless people that
is and always will be unheated or
something like that and it's it's you
know it is one of a thousand ironies in
this area but but you you demonstrate
exactly the thing that I saw in that
seminar which is the ability to take
yourself not to pretend that you're a
particular way of being in the world
isn't who you are
but putting it aside with respect to
what you conclude right you do a very
good job of that in the gay chapter and
then it does allow you to explore the
same to use the same analytical tools
with respect to race with respect to
trans which is in some sense the hardest
of these my guess is that's why you left
it to last in the book and then you know
trans kids being the sort of gold
standard of really heart wrenching
difficult issues but
you know I said something to chloe
valerie the other day well i had a
discussion with her and i said you know
the irony at Evergreen was that we were
watching the breakdown of a college and
it was breaking down over the beliefs of
a group of people who more than anything
else desperately needed a good college
education and you know I can't quite
make it I can't put flesh on the bones
enough but imagine standing in a college
watching a microcosm of civilization
break down when every tool that you
should need to solve the issue was like
right there rendered in you know
concrete and steel right we had the
buildings we had the library in theory
we had a faculty why don't we just take
the perspective that is being advanced
and take it as a premise put it on the
board and then explore if we extrapolate
from this where does it actually lead
and I have the sense that your book is
in it is like I don't want to say it's a
textbook that's not fair to it but it is
like the curriculum for such a
discussion that I think so
I'd like to think so I'm like it if it
became so but I I'm terribly conscious
of what we're throwing out I mean as you
know I write about the Evergreen thing a
couple of pages in the book because it
did seem to me to be one of the most
emblematic examples of this breakdown of
our our our day and one of the things
that fascinates me again in this is that
people who wish to read the world in
these rather ugly power dynamic terms
and keep missing out the fact that again
in that sort of situation the power is
exactly the opposite opposite way around
the students have the power the
authorities have none and and there's
all sorts of fascinating things that one
can trace that to I think and you
experience it firsthand but
um there's an awful lot of cases of the
some of the madnesses I write about in
the book where something similar is
happening where the grown-ups appear to
have in significant chunks lost faith in
the process that had got them where they
had got to and they had decided at some
level to hand over the keys to the kids
and the thing that's so disturbing about
that is not just the loss of knowledge
the loss of opportunity
unbelievable loss of opportunity for
those students and others but that but
that anybody who's been through an
education knows that there are always
times when you wonder if you could do
that and if you could pull that move
Ivan I remember it very distinctly for
my student days if I try to use an
insincere tool will it get me through
and the job partly of Education or not
is education being made into a citizen
and the person in the world is is the
adults
turn around you at that point say Sonny
there is no way around this you have to
go through it you have to just do what
you need to do you need to do the work
and there is no there's no cheap way
through and I'm just amazed that in
subject after subject and discipline
after discipline and institution after
institution the implication is given and
sometimes stated boldly there are other
ways around this for instance you don't
actually need to do the work you could
call an insincere a card on a person in
a more senior position and that will get
you to the same place
right and the jaw-dropping conclusion
from this is that these students are
learning but this is what they are
learning is how to get by through this
mechanism they're becoming expert at it
and the question is what world will we
live-in as these tools are refined
they're going to be wielded by people in
ever more powerful positions and I think
this is this is one of the harder points
to make lots of people say well yes okay
the Evergreen thing was very dramatic
Yael this that but it's a small number
of people you're exaggerating I hear it
all the time I think it's hard to compel
people at you know it's like well okay
smallpox is terrible but you know the
release was only a few cells it's only
in one part of the country and it's like
no no it's smallpox do you realize how
dangerous this is right so yes it's a
small number of people wielding a
tremendous amount of power
learning to wield it better teaching
others to do it
distributing the toolkit through the
internet this could hardly be more
dangerous yeah I mean and and and the
though I just read this week about the
case of the Seattle School Boards maths
teaching curriculum where where they
decide to do identity politics stuff in
maths and you just go you know for those
of us who were who educated in the
humanities you know our only hope always
is that at least there are still some
hard sciences or a hat and this this
crap isn't going to roll through that
and whenever you see it rolling through
that and you realize that the
mathematics is gonna be you know how is
powder power structures rely on blah
blah blah but you think you know if you
do that the bridges are gonna fall down
at some point you know just nothing is
going to be able to stand up and that
that's that's sort of the bit that
that's one of the bits that worries me
but by the way I just wanted to say one
one way through this or at least one way
I started to think about this is how
about how about we we try to work out
like the the unpleasant questions which
everybody knows are legitimate I get
I gave you one early about male-female
thing you know you know the obvious
thing it says is there other forms of
female power that men don't have but
there's one that struck me in recent
days which is well just to let me line
up because I'm gonna point I'm gonna
make it's gonna be a problem but if I
don't give one more yet for it in the in
the book as you know I I raise assured
what could be regarded as gay privilege
which is the studies show that across
the only life male and female
homosexuals again dis and dis
fortunately more in their career than
their heterosexual counterparts and
there's a number of very interesting
reasons where that might be from that
rather a mundane well you know they
don't have children so my second to stay
in the office later and last get
promotions and so on to to more
psychological explanations do with
pneumatic issues in child and much more
but you might call this a gay advant
egde and if you were interested and one
of the things of years you know that the
books trying to do is to say look this
stuff is not just in the humanities and
it's not just in the social sciences of
arms it has spilt out got across the
entire working environment of corporate
America or Britain and other other other
developed Western economies and that
it's a deranged in game because it's an
unwinnable game but I say okay if you're
going to do that game is this gay
privilege and if you're trying to even
things out which is it is what it's
supposed to do why don't you know why
don't we look at taking some of the
money from the gays and giving it to
their heterosexual counterparts but tell
ya I knew I'd get you and that's why I'm
writing a check this evening but it's
reparations yeah for your suffering for
being heterosexual right your untold
suffering but no but the meatman was
okay so there's loads of advantages that
we know of there I mean one of the nice
things about you know people now reading
this book is the number of people have
written me do I had spoken me who I know
and strangers who say no
things like oh my god this is a
conversation my wife and I have dinner
and you know something senator this
accomplished my wife and I have ever
didn't have my wife setting it on I
never say this outside like I like those
sort of you know anyhow but then there
must be forms of piss taking we'd call
it in the UK but let's say just
advantage taking to sort of D load
language of it there must be lots of
advantages that do exist in society in
which we pretend don't here is one which
is just so alarming but and I'm they're
bound to get in trouble even sis for
voicing it but like are there on
occasions and this isn't to deny the
history of racism this is not to deny
that there are inequalities including
racial inequalities and racial injustice
it goes on today in America and around
the world but are there situations where
there is an advantage to being black are
there situations where there is an
advantage to being a woman or being gay
or being trans okay yes yes very
definitely
I had one incident in the other day in
the television studio it's not exactly
the worst oppression anyone suffered but
I had a female black model former model
discussing some of the issues in my new
book with me she was very nice and she
just wouldn't stop talking and it's
possibly because she was brought up in
Scotland Glasgow and they just don't
shut up in Glasgow and but but the
reason I mention this is because she
just wouldn't stop and she was and I
knew at the moment I saw her she was
uninterruptible and she knew it
and chanyeol and she did is what she
said the host Piers Morgan I see at one
point said I just want to get dog as him
because because he hasn't had a chance
to speak and I said well you know and I
tried to come in and she said no I think
he's spoken a lot I've had to listen to
him already and and I just thought okay
I can't do anything about this in this
studio this morning yep we've got a
black advantage and you've got a female
advantage already and the reason I
mentioned this is because I think that a
lot of people know this stuff I think
she knew and I and I definitely knew and
I know the hosts knew
and there's a lot of those things going
around in the sious in the society and
and we we don't have any of it out ever
because we have all fallen for the
social justice interpretation which says
there's only one type of power and it's
elderly white heterosexual cisnormative
power and and it means that there are
these very mean the example I give of my
turbine experiences a very minor one and
unimportant but but there are major
weaponization zuv this power happening
at major institutions all the time which
everybody can see and no one can
identify beautiful now I want to take
your last two points because I think it
gets even more dire if we extrapolate no
doubt you will have seen this coming but
all right so you've got these ideas that
create a kind of power an unacknowledged
sort of power that schedules what can be
said and who can say it and you know who
gets to take up space in a conversation
there's something like that and you have
these ideas that become unexplored
right so we can study genetics but it
becomes difficult to study genetics
anywhere around race or gender or sexual
orientation and as you say the bridges
will fall down well they will but
something worse will happen also you
have a competition between those who can
figure out how not to succumb to this
nonsense and those who can't and those
who can figure out how not to have their
engineering school deranged by these
ideas will have a superior engineering
school their bridges will be much less
likely to fall down and so what I am
concerned about is an evolutionist is
that what we are producing is a recipe
where those people who find they find no
reason to engage the question of
oppression come out on top because those
who are obsessed with oppression will
self hobble and so I don't want to live
in the world on the other end of
were the people who may suffer from a
total compassion deficit come out on top
because they figured out a way to shut
this stuff down maybe for the wrong
reasons even I don't I don't know what
I'm about to say alls it could be
misinterpreted but look I mean there's a
chance that even if the intersection
lists and the identity politics people
got what they wanted the likelihood I
mean I think that they can't ever get
what they wanted for reasons I
demonstrate that it all runs against
each other it's a horrible great big
bloody mess I can I just keep making you
know my favorite all well quote when he
wasn't spared to a communist in the
forties in here nor well says this
communist you know well you know uh what
have you got to show this wretched stuff
and then the and the communist says well
you know he admits the show trials he
admits the the the famine and and so on
and all well says you know what
spider-man and the communist says you
know well you can't make an omelet
without breaking eggs and all well says
well where's your omelet and you know
there is a sort of even if the
intersection it's got what they wanted
it would be horrible but let if they did
if they ever actually managed to create
the exact perfect system which allowed
everyone to work out their place in the
hierarchy all the time and the working
place in corporate America was exactly
along the lines of what they wanted they
do it just in time for China right it
won't hold truck there and so suddenly
they will be opening the door to a
competition from they will be opening
the door to a superior competitor that
just simply won't be playing this game
yeah yeah and I've I've very little
doubt that that's that's that's what
what happens by the way there's also
there's a there's a sort of more mundane
but more painful day to day thing that I
notice which is I mean we hear a lot of
talk about you know disenfranchisement
and much more and but let me give one
example of that is that it seems to me
that emerging is that slightly more
privileged if you wanted to play that
game slightly more privileged say young
white men are able to work out the game
and are able to adapt play around it do
this
stupid stuff everyone's got to do to
perform it but actually get what they
want and the problem is that less
advantaged including less intellectually
advantage less economically advantaged
people are going to get stuck in the
game and I see this all the time with
what I would you know the cuttlefish and
I give I know I know exactly the type of
rich Western man who has worked out how
to how to feminized themselves
sufficiently around women to get to shag
the women and I know exactly the type of
man who is failing at that because they
just haven't worked out the game yeah
and I think there's just it's a horrible
horrible thing secret knowledge yes
secret knowledge right and again it goes
to your point about whether gay men know
something that both straight men and
straight women are fascinated by and
need to know something about I should
tell you that cuttlefish analogy you
know is is a fascinating one it is not
the only version of this it's actually a
strategy that involves many times across
the animal kingdom right it's called a
female strategy maybe it's not called
that anymore because it's tobacco
ladyboys right but anyway the the
evolutionary dynamics around it are
fascinating but you're right what we've
effectively created is a niche for
people who can figure out how to game
the system in a particular way and
anytime you set up a system that can be
gamed and won by those who do it that's
what you're going to see and so we are
creating a a very dangerous environment
in which even those who are well
intentioned in setting this up do not
understand that okay you may advance the
interests of black people for example
but which black people are going to end
up at advantage in the end of this game
it's going to be the bad actors in that
group not the people who are most
deserving so anyway we are we
are in a terrible pickle in this in this
regard and the question I guess I feel
like we are in an arms race right there
is an attempt to take over society and
restructure the rules around these very
naive syllogisms and and the like and
then those of us who are fighting back
and blowing up landmines are trying to
spread the instinct towards applying
nuance and extrapolating carefully and
these things and the question is which
of these two instincts will will win one
thing that is maybe going to act in our
favor is that the point you make about
even if the intersection list could have
what they wanted it would be horrible I
don't even think it's horrible it's
unstable that this conclusion about you
know the left eating itself I do think
there's a way that doesn't have to be
true but it is often true did you see
just this morning about the other
Guardian in the UK reports that
apparently Greta Thun Berg has now got
it in the neck for being white the was a
terrible choice on her part
criticized by the I think it's extreme
reaction what's it called
anyhow one the other sort of got a
shutdown all the cities now people and
then they're all going for their saying
she's only got the attention because
she's white and people aren't
highlighting enough black women who are
also in the belief that we're all gonna
burn to death in the next 48 hours and I
just you know I just yeah that's it is
always eating itself either oh it so
it's always eating itself because of a
basic game theoretic instability right
these coalition's function when they're
pointed in the same direction and at the
point that they have spoil
to divide they turn on each other and so
one of the things that struck me I've
been saying that for a long time but in
in reading your book it struck me that
the question of trans women that is
people born male who transitioned to
female competing in women's sports is
the first wave of the turning on itself
because at this point trans is now
backing women against the wall in a way
that will destroy the hard-won access to
sports that women have enjoyed for the
last several decades yeah as you know I
think that I think the trans one is
important because it reveals some of
what is actually going on and because it
runs fundamentally against the other
groups of distillation to have so much
in common with so it obviously runs
against women runs against men as well
but people less bothered about that but
it runs against women in a very
fundamental way which I tried to show
and it also runs against gay which is
one which I mean almost nobody has
bothered to point out and it's been
presumed that trans is just the next
stage in gay but actually it runs
totally counter to it
so that the female tomboy and her teams
actually might be told now actually you
are a boy and we'll make you one
and so I yeah I'm very concerned about
that I just by the way you started to
say something there which led me to
remember that that of course when we
talk about how to get out of this I'm
very struck that there are there are
several ways what I tried to do in this
book obviously is to undo the
intersectional thing to accept that it
came down to show that it how it's woven
to unweave it and then to redirect
people until I think and I don't I'm not
as you know I'm not dogmatic about what
it is I think they should do but
redirect people onto better paths and of
the various options open to us those of
us who think that people are wasting
their time it does seem to me that a
very important thing must be addressed
which is okay let's say we can get lots
of people out of this horrible
retributive zero-sum game
what ought they to be doing and and and
I think that that we you know it's it's
that we can't get out of this unless
that is also in in the frame and I'm
very concerned about this and I give
some hints in the book of what I think
might be an answer I I'm concerned about
the opportunity cost in this generation
of doing this stuff of this intense
navel-gazing with the idea that if we
gaze at it enough we will we will sort
out the navel and but but but in a way I
think one of the faster ways out of this
is to say why don't why don't why don't
people for many disciplines start to
talk about what we should be doing
instead
you know because rather like setting up
a prize you know it's always a good way
if you say you know it's ten million
dollars if you solve this problem you
you know it's quite a good way to solve
a problem is why don't some people just
start to work out what actually we would
like to be doing and now it might be I'm
not a great I don't think the purpose of
life will simply be longevity and that
if we all live to 150 we've won because
it's all got all the same problems we've
always had but but there should be
attempts I think and it's not like I'm
not saying we need to fabricate them I
just think we need to identify them
accurately what as accurately as we can
manage across many disciplines and say
wouldn't it be wonderful you know it
because the thing that the thing that
just amazes me at the moment I've said
it's full but you know everywhere I go
and I travel all the time I'm in a
different country every week and I I
speak to so many people from so many
different backgrounds and disciplines
always the thing I want the greatest
things one thing is just excites me
Moses made me most optimistic in recent
years has beamed the fact that a young
person anywhere in the world who's smart
and who has access to the Internet is
now right at the cusp of the
conversations of their time in a way
which never before in human history as
possible you know one of my great you
know heroes in the 19th century
aiexander Hetson those people had to
leave Russia and go to Paris and Berlin
to pick up the latest critical ideas and
and
just took such a long time and it was
such a small class of person that was
able to do it
now we're not in that world where as I
say when this extraordinary situation
where anyone in any country access to
the Internet and enough enough you know
oomph can just can be right at the edge
of this so so why would we not be trying
to work out what we can do in not it's
not harnessing but like unleashing that
potential so I completely agree with you
and I think the the irony of attacking
not only the Enlightenment but the idea
of enlightenment as if it was a con is
the irony is just gargantuan and you're
right we are on the verge almost
accidentally of being able to
democratize access to all of the highest
quality thinking and we are fumbling the
ball but you do you know what course I
was teaching at the point that evergreen
blew up golf
go on now now there's no reason you
should I just you mentioning that go on
oh it's gonna break your heart I think I
was teaching something called hacking
human nature this was a full time 16
credit course so I had these students
full-time it was my only job their only
job and we were studying basically the
premise of the course was it's very hard
to get the power to change civilization
nobody knows how to solve that problem
so let's skip it if we had the power to
change civilization given what we
understand about what works and what
doesn't work what would the rules of a
good civilization look like and the core
tool was really the trade-offs between
competing values so at the so a I should
tell you my students were entirely loyal
the students that you saw were ones I
had never met my students and I were
exploring this question and we were
deeply into that exploration at the
point that evergreen boiled over such
that at the very end I had to hold my
evaluation conferences off campus in my
backyard in fact so I met with every
student after after the fiasco had
disrupted our ability to meet on campus
and a number of them asked me if I had
somehow created the entire catastrophe
to illustrate the principles in the
program and that you know it wasn't like
they thought that had happened but they
couldn't shake the idea because it fit
so perfectly with what we had been
studying very good of you to lay that on
yeah yeah well it was you know the
ultimate teachable moment I guess but
but anyway I agree with you completely
what we should be doing is agreeing on
the values as this conversation started
there you and I seem to agree on at
least a great many of the values maybe
all of them and then the question is
well if you were serious about those
values
you're not gonna achieve perfection on
any of them but what would an optimal
balance look like and what rules would
stabilize it would achieve it and
stabilize it it's it's a fair question
and we really we ought to be having a
broad explanation for it much as even
then and then what ought we to be doing
you know that that is a the most
enormous gap in our society is the fact
that the adults have become distracted
or lacking in confidence and have
decided as I say hand over the keys I
mean never before have we seen phenomena
where what he's not not not for a very
long time where the adults are willing
to tell the children what to believe and
then say we must listen to the children
because only the children know and you
know for whatever the reasons are I'm
just struck that there is this vacuum
and I wrote about this in my last book a
bit more but it's all she touches on it
in this one but that this vacuum of
purpose and meaning and I know that that
is it's what it's what everybody hopes
for in their adolescence in particular
that at some point somebody's going to
stand across their lives and say let me
tell you what we're doing
and what you should be doing and what
would be a life that would be worth
living and and it was it not everyone
ever got it
but to have a society in which no one
gets it and no one is expected to get it
and we all just i know save up for the
next holiday is is not it's not not fit
for the enormous lack of the situation
we find ourselves in i think
unfortunately the reason that we are in
this predicament is that very few people
actually reach meaningful adulthood that
the adults are incompetent and part of
why they are turning the reins over to
the kids is not only do they not know
what to do they wouldn't have the first
clue how to figure it out and maybe it
dovetails with what you were saying
about anybody anywhere with the access
to the internet can be at the forefront
of the most important conversations the
small number of people who have some
idea what to do next are emerging in the
strangest quadrants and participating in
these conversations and that as much as
this is a very perilous moment for
various reasons it is also it's a horse
race it's it's it's a hopeful moment in
the sense that some curious force is
causing people to stand up who otherwise
might never be heard from and to
participate in really bold discussions
about well what is true of our situation
and what what would be a reasonable
objective how do we get there and maybe
i hope i don't think we can paint a well
rendered picture of a good future but I
think we can essentially figure out the
path toward a a good future and if those
of us who are inclined towards that
mission who have some of the tools
necessary to do it can participate
together and not be driven off the map
or caricatured into a
vivianne or whatever it is that might
happen maybe this perilous moment could
end well yes I think yeah well that
didn't sound very convincing Douglas all
right this has been a marvelous
conversation I've really enjoyed it is
there anything that you would like to to
say in closing I'm sitting in front of
one of my bookshelves as you can
probably see and just as you were
talking there was something it's a it's
from Arcadia and it's it's it's later on
in the play than I remember yeah Handler
and Valentine er talking and he's
talking about relativity and quantum and
he has a great description he says I
just it was on my mind it was at he says
at one point about the drip of a tap he
says we're betting better at predicting
events at the edge of the galaxy or
inside the nucleus of an atom than
whether it'll rain on auntie's garden
party three Sundays from now because the
problem turns out to be different we
can't even predict the next drip from a
dripping tap when it gets irregular each
drip sets up the conditions for the next
the smallest variation blows prediction
apart and the weather is unpredictable
the same way we'll always be
unpredictable when you push the numbers
through the computer you can see it on
the screen the future is disorder a door
like this is cracked open five or six
times since we got up on our hind legs
it's the best possible time to be alive
when almost everything you thought you
knew is wrong that's delightful and it
does it goes to a point I forgot to make
at the beginning of the conversation
there is I think a single switch that is
flipped differently in people who are
participating well in this conversation
and people who are doing something
perhaps more destructive and it is
whether or not there is delight in
discovering that you had something wrong
or is there horror if you delight in
discovering that you had something wrong
then the room for growth is tremendous
if you recoil then you don't grow and
it's a it's a very sad predicament to be
in so I feel that you are one of these
people who smiles when you discover you
had something a bit off even if it's
embarrassing and I join you in that and
I hope others will join us as well it's
been an enormous pleasure Brett thank
you
all right be well Douglas
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]