everybody it is Jack Murphy you are back
on the Jack Murphy left podcasts the
flagship podcast of the limo order you
can find me on Twitter at Jack Murphy
live at the website Jack Murphy live.com
all over the internet at Jack Murphy
live come by the website check out what
we're doing sign up for the mailing list
get involved but enough about all that
I'm very excited about my guest today is
somebody that I have been aware of and a
fan of for a long time going back man
almost 10 15 years at this point you and
I are both getting on a little bit these
days somebody who is also from the same
hometown
I am from Fort Wayne Indiana yeah man
Carroll High School I would have gone to
Northrup I think from the North Side
Fort Wayne but he is an MMA legend a
superstar in the sport a one-time UFC
title contender had won the best runs
I'd ever seen when most exciting things
that I'd seen in UFC the one and only
John Fitch how you doing John Fitch
doing great man my absolute pleasure so
there's a ton of things that I want to
talk about today but let's start off
just first with the book so John John
has written a book called failing
upwards and death by ego and that's
actually how John and I started getting
getting in touch was he was writing a
book and I was writing my book and we
started talking about editors and just
how we could help and we ended up having
the same editor on the book so tell us a
little bit about your book cuz that's
like a good framework for us to give the
guys listen in a little bit of
background as to who you are yeah
what you're about so yeah well you're
downplaying you're all a little bit
because I really know what what I was
doing or how to do it and you just come
out with Democrats explorable and you
were self-published and I reached out to
you just to kind of pick your brain and
see if I could get some direction
because I had you know all these
journals that I wanted to kind of share
with people a lot of life experience
types of stuff a lot of learning and I
didn't know how to go about putting it
together and you
recommended work in an editor and he
would use create help me expand and put
a lot more depth into my book and made a
lot more interesting I think yeah well
you know it's interesting when people
start out writing they think I'm just
gonna write editing that sounds kind of
dumb but it turns out to like it I think
it's one of the most important parts
yeah and every writer every writer every
single writer has a great editor behind
them I have the redhead she added in my
book she did a wonderful job and I sent
it on to our mutual guy and he did it
even better but the book is about your
experience going from Indiana all the
way out to California and leading into
leading to MMA but but first so you were
journaling this whole entire time right
so how is that something that you had
always done or did you how did you get
into journaling no I I had a really bad
season right so you know successful in
junior high high school I was wrestling
wrestling yeah my redshirt year which is
like a non take a practice year right
there wasn't one year yeah totally right
so I well I gave him four so I did okay
that and my first year I moved up away
classes wouldn't have a guy and that was
kind of mixed record but it wasn't
badass not a winning record and I was
just a freshman competing against bigger
guys so and then the next year is the
first time I was the starter at a weight
class and I just was cutting away wrong
I was doing everything wrong and I got
destroyed all year long and kind of woke
me up
I went eight and thirty one a year boof
yeah Big Ten school I mean I wrestled
like 15 guys ranked in the top 20
so and wrestling good guys but haha so
according to the book man you didn't
even show up to a Purdue this is a d1
Big Ten big time wrestling program in
the Midwest men like big old farm boys
corn-fed the whole thing but you
literally just showed up one day like
how does that work how do you walk on -
well one program well that's the thing
is there's not really money
and wrestling most guys are walk-ons
joining as a walk-on so we had like 17
guys that came out with the freshmen
team that year we had like two guys on
scholarship three guys on scholarship
because it's not morning you can
rustling so you know but after the first
two weeks like more than 50% of those
guys quit right no so nobody's in
wrestling that's sort of like the story
of the UFC fight or two is now kind of I
think it's a little different things are
changing now with the internet I believe
in social media because people people
are following along with wrestling more
now it's easier to know who people are
and see matches across the world so I
think I think there's slowly money
coming into wrestling right because I
remember in the early days like half the
guys who ended up in the UFC really yeah
I wrestled and then there was no money
in that so what was I gonna do next
gonna start fighting people yep kind of
what kind of what I did yeah
so I saw after that after that bad
season I got a our coach came out with a
workout journals so we keep ourselves
accountable so he's talking about
accountability and some of the guys took
him some didn't I took one I said I'll
try it and you know I started training
hard like the week after the season
ended so I was already working out and
getting ready for the next year and I
was like we're gonna redo these things
I'm gonna I'm gonna recommit myself
III think I read an article about Cael
Sanderson who went undefeated through
college wrestling and it talked about
his life and his life structure was
school girlfriend wrestling that was in
those in there was no partying there's
no socializing and and the girlfriend
had to you know make time to be around
him because those were the priorities
was a school in the wrestling so I was
like man I was like that's why these
guys are so good because they just fully
immerse themselves into what they're
doing that's everything they do and for
me I worked my butt off during the
season but in the offseason I had to
fight party and I'd like to have a good
time all right so you know in a book I
talked about in the book like you know
chasing big girls around Indiana
right yeah so then I started to really
commit myself and doing things the right
way and I spent that whole summer and
keeping a journal level summer at the
end of the summer I kind of put the
journal down because I developed good
habits and I was doing things the right
way and then I started winning matches I
started getting a lot better and I
picked a journal back up again when I
was in grad school and I had started
fighting and I was getting ready to move
to California and I was like you know
what this does journal helped me a lot
before and keeping myself accountable
and this is probably gonna be a really
great story so if I write more about
what I'm doing is probably pretty cool
so I started you know putting a lot more
detail in that stuff right so what was
the like coming off that that first year
getting here and getting new husband's
are getting your ass kicked a bunch but
I'm talking to John fish getting me it
was I got having about losses a bunch of
losses I got my ass kicked it was so it
was demoralizing right so how do you
recover from something like that how do
you how to get your mind right like just
double triple down you refocus and Monk
mode and you put yourself a hundred
percent into it or you or you or you
move on all the way in all the way out
and that's that was the choice was like
do I quit and I'm just done or do we say
you know if that and double-triple down
right I chose to double down and that's
usually what I've chosen to do most of
times when things get tough I end up
doubling down it's paid off okay so far
yeah well I mean that's that's the mark
of people that win is being able to
double down and refocus even in the face
of the face of adversity and then with
combat sports it's like one of those
things where you know you really really
have to be focused because the
consequences are much worse than just
failing right yeah so keep going through
your college career things finally turn
around your your your journal and you're
working out you're focused and what what
happened then through the rest of the
time there at Purdue oh well you know I
stopped I stopped journaling after that
summer because you know schoolwork
started up all those up started up I was
busy
and I already developed a good habits
you know I probably should have looking
back if I could force myself I would
kept doing it but I put it away because
I think I wasn't going I got this and I
kept with that and then my junior year I
was much more successful but halfway
through I blew my knee out so I got a
wrestle half that year and then senior
year was was fairly competitive I did
good that year I was I was an overtime a
point away from going to see doublea's I
lost to a two or three time all-american
so I had I finished strong but it was
still like I wasn't done I was like man
that's like I'm just starting to figure
this out I just started to figure out
how to wrestle and win and now I got so
many how many years into it uh yeah
exactly my last two was like my last two
years I actually figured out how to
wrestle on how to do it right but how
long have you been wrestling but I man I
started when I was like nine so at that
time I was like you know I'm like 21 20
years old I finally started I'm like I
got it typed finally because in high
school and junior high mostly it was
hard work conditioning that beat the
guys you know I had nice you know
doubling single egg and then one pinning
combination that's all it took right you
know because you just drive it down
their throats but different you know
college wrestlers are a different animal
and it took took me a while to catch up
and gets up get on the speed well that's
that's something that people need to to
take note of is that you can do
something for 9 10 11 12 years and then
only only start to really being able to
figure it out again
I just America just starting to figure
it out it you know like ah the light
bulbs are clicking
yeah but so then I was like okay so am I
am I going to try to make a national or
Olympic team or do I defy this fighting
things I'm an assistant coach Tom
Erickson who was fighting already and I
came in at him and Mike Coleman and Gary
Goodridge these guys they'd come to town
and then they tell the stories and yeah
you know tell us about Yakuza guys
gangsters in Brazil Russia and off via
you know hookers strippers like crazy
stories I'm like hmm
this sounds interesting and you get paid
25 to 75 thousand per fight hmm that's
interesting - then one of my buddies who
was an all-american came home from
trying to make a national team he plays
six he had faced just destroyed look
like he'd been in a bad fighter get
jumped he just got married and he was
living in his mom's basement because he
had no money right and he plays six
which is really good but right I was
like hmm like which which side should I
go I'll try the fighting thing what what
year was this that you were listening to
Mark Coleman could Rick psyche tell
stories cuz for guys who don't know like
it was probably wrong in years man yeah
like mm - mm I graduate pretty 2200 it
right here grad school but it was it was
before that time so like my junior year
wherever like they had started to come
around I think I think I met I had
Freeman first right after he had beaten
Frank Mir in England well I mean I
remember I was in high school like in
the 90s and we would we would watch the
early you have season on VHS and my
friend's basement and I swear to God I
saw Gary Goodrich like kill a dude yeah
he got him
reversed crucifixes in the elbow yeah
yeah and he just pounded him in the head
with that elbow over and over and over
again and back then you just never knew
what was gonna happen it just was like
so tense and scary and like crazy no one
had ever seen anything like it and
you're talking about Brazilian gangsters
and Yakuza and whatever so those are
like the back back back back back like
some of the early valley - no scoops
with rides bound really silva with the
Oh bare knuckles yeah yeah and so you
know it was a it was like a very
underground sort of dark smoky I think
there was a thing was mark Kerr was
fighting somewhere in Brazil and he
head-butted the guy on the ground and
had a big gash over his eye and he was
sticking his thumb in the gash trying to
make it bigger to stop the fight like
this insanity do anything is my favorite
story from UFC one is like there were
some potential producers in the audience
watching the event and that Dutch
kickboxer guys max the
the Hawaiian dude in the mouth with a
kick and the tooth literally went flying
into the stands he like went by the
producers and they were just like
this we're out of here
barbaric but it came it come a long way
it comes obviously come a long way to
the point now and we're gonna talk about
this later we're talking about unions
and contracts and you know revenue
sharing TV you know revenue and gate
revenue and all this stuff but how is it
that you go from Purdue like who was
like hey dude come on out to California
come come nobody knows nobody the
majority of people thought that was
crazy and just there's just get a job
what are you talking about I think my
best friend the kind of best man at my
wedding was like what are you doing
because I was finding already in dude in
grad school so I wanted a scholarship
that paid for a year of grad school so I
had that was a big factor in me going
pro because or me starting to fight
because I didn't have to do anything for
a year I took us six six credits a
semester so I took the minimum and then
they paid me three thousand dollars at
each semester that was for room and
board so I was rich right and I only had
to go to 200 I had to go to like four
classes a week so although that was
great and that give me time to like
train and travel and fight and kind of
figure out what I wanted to do are we
doing like underground shows like
independent shows and the DNR's no we
called it we used to call it the farmer
circuit because it was like we would
just hear about a fight somewhere I was
like Brian never saw I met him at my
very first fight and he had been
fighting since he was like 19 so I had
two years of fighting it so he knew all
these promoters so he would hear about
fights in another state in Iowa or
Minnesota or whatever and we would just
drive there hoping that they would have
somebody around our way to pair us up
with all right that's crazy that is man
that's like book and ice i i thought
maybe 14 fights without signing a
contract no waivers no nothing no
insurance who knows burns I thought
twice in one night once in Minnesota we
went out there that had a guy
we wait we first up we go into a hotel
hotel room and there's a bathroom scale
in their bathroom and we step on that
he's like yeah I got somebody for you
all right I guess I guess a lot of
somebody to fight yeah so then we go the
next day I fight I fight I beat the sky
choke them and in a minute and a half or
something and I go back I'm getting
ready take my gloves off the promoter
runs over to me and says oh don't take
those off so yeah another fight for you
oh my god
come on but but at this point have you
had you been introduced to jiu-jitsu at
that point or um how are Mark Coleman
was my jujitsu instructor so we were in
yeah we were in a Lafayette my buddy Moe
is actually outfitted in here right now
he was a bouncer and was famous bar
they're called Harry's and he would
always get the tough guys coming through
watch UFC or whatever and he talked to
anybody who liked fighting or was
interested in it we're trying to get
them to come and work out with us so I
was training for my first fight and we
had it was body guys I think lined up on
the wall they came in and I was gonna do
five-minute rounds grappling with them
and as I submitted them a new guy would
come in so they would get a rest after
about three and a half minutes of the
first round they were all done they all
questioned they all quit that was that's
why I had to do the rest of time on a
bike cuz I didn't have any bells to
train with but it was but they just
bugged out or yeah they just don't know
like no I can't go again
yeah and I didn't know I didn't know
anything about submissions like Coleman
Mark Coleman and Tom Erickson were
showing me submissions right so you're
laughing why because Mark Coleman was
their heavyweight slick - yes exactly
Coleman's only submission is the can
opener yeah oh right where you just on
top and you just pull the head and Troy
Erickson has a rape joke add a
submission oh I thought that was the one
where you put both their hands right
around the knee he's 300 pounds they
made that illegal after he hated that
right man
I remember the Marcus woman
can openers and the head but Senor the
cur and the headbutts and oh my god the
old days so so one day you're just like
I finally I'm gonna go out to
California whoa a carny drive out there
I stuck I started fighting and it wasn't
annoying I lost my first fight and I
want a cup why I still can't wasn't
figuring out I still was hungry to do it
and you know I started driving to
Eastern Illinois to train a little bit
with Brian Ebersole because he had more
experience but you know it wasn't until
I got I went out for a month vacation
like during Thanksgiving you never saw
it flew out and stay with crazy Bob and
Josh Thompson slept on the floor and
trained for a week and I fell in love
with the place out again I have to I had
to be training with these people I have
to get with these people and there's a K
or a K yeah but I was a little bit I was
a little stubborn so I knew like I
needed some reason I needed I didn't
disappoint my mom I think I didn't want
to not finish Strad school I didn't want
to disrespect her that year at least I
didn't want to disrespect the
scholarship because it could have went
to somebody else right and I was still a
little bit of a you think yeah I
give you know and then well and then
what cassava is like you know that crabs
I but people pull you down not even on
purpose like they they want to hang out
they want to go to the bar they smoke
they want a drink they want to do
degenerate things my sleeping and I was
getting into that habit because like I
wasn't hanging around the younger guys
really because I needed a separation
because I was a volunteer coach so I
couldn't be like hanging out really with
them so I had other people and it just
was a situation where I was like I need
to immerse myself in MMA and get away
from every distraction I was like sighs
I have no friends no family around
nobody can bother me and expect me to do
anything other than train so I moved to
California also to kind of create this
situation is just isolated myself it was
just me and jiu-jitsu and MMA and
fighting right yeah I mean I don't think
people appreciate the required solitude
in some way is that a fire has to have I
mean look I'm gonna just be straight
like my combat sports experience or
to Muay Thai and like for amateur fights
I want all of them by the way and I won
a wk a North American amateur Muay Thai
Championship got the medals but you know
and even even for those men like the
training camps that we would put
ourselves through you're just you're
there every day you're there four hours
a day the only thing you can think of
you're thinking about it constantly
because you're not eating and you're
trying to lose weight and you're trying
to recover there's there's no time in
the day you're around you're on
call you're you're at work for the eight
ten weeks or 12 weeks that you're on in
camp it's not really even your day
office should be structured in a way to
benefit and push you forward for the
fight right I don't think people give
fighters and MMA fighters enough credit
for that type of sort of discipline
mental fortitude I mean it's easy and
especially in the old days it was easy
to disregard people as she's being sort
of brutes and stuff oh yeah as you were
getting into the game things were really
starting to it well off right like
jiu-jitsu became much more prominent
everybody was starting to learn how to
box out a Russell how to do jiu-jitsu
yeah do more time what not completely
yeah exactly like and real athletes yeah
and training like real athletes I mean
you know I can imagine some of those
plans he did the farm circuit you know
some of those early UFC looked like they
were doing you know some of the same
things too like guys coming in all fat
now - she gave me gas and in 30 seconds
I had what I fought in Iowa extreme
challenges ever this guy Jeremy horn I'm
not the horse man he grinder he was the
ref but like he he had on like a wife
beater and like baggy cargo shorts and
you know he looked like he looked like a
homeless guy right you look like almost
a my friends I showed the tape - it was
an amateur tournament whatever yeah
they're like why is a homeless guy I'm
fired - you're fired like why is he in
the cage it's like that guy is like one
of the best ground fighters around like
whatever whatever I think my first
introduction to him was he fought Chuck
Liddell also and sometime around the
like Randy and Tito sagas and such was a
second one I keep choking second second
yeah yeah yeah so like I lost touch with
the UFC at the same time everybody else
did like after ten or twelve or fourteen
or something like that and then one day
just came back it was like 37 or 38 and
I was like oh man it was totally
repackaged and I got back into it but uh
sorry let's go here in California you go
out there you get hooked up with aka and
then all of a sudden what happened you
just all of a sudden someone just hands
you a big fat contractor you know I mean
you uh you really have to yeah you see
in the book like how much of a wild west
it was and there's a lot of that's one
of the things I really like about the
book it's a time capsule of like us
building the methods of how people train
and do things in the sport there's
there's a lot of things not it wasn't
just sergeant but there's a lot of gyms
that for big gyms that created things
that other people bit off of no because
they worked so right you know the
training strategies the styles you know
not just the techniques but the way of
training and conditioning and getting
ready for fights at all that all was
being developed in those early 2000
years and he was a little bit about that
like what
what would you how would you
characterize like the training meso or
they counted one of the things that is
in the book is you know I I'm a big
advocate of lifting weights it's really
important you know but lifting weights
the way I did in high school and college
was kind of geared for bodybuilding and
football okay right so short term
explosive it wasn't built for you know
endurance type stuff so there's much
more recovery needed for those types of
lifts so when I went out to California
I'm doing those types of lifts in trying
to do jujitsu than I have am a trained
in jiu-jitsu again and then some kind of
mid trainers like three or four workouts
in that day plus them weight training
like I couldn't do it body couldn't
handle it your body doesn't have any
time to recover so I stopped lifting and
then that transferred into we started
doing Crossfit just like 2003 it's like
there's only a few CrossFit's around we
had to drive to Santa Cruz to go do it
and drive half hour
do it so we really like some of the
training stuff that was done in the
CrossFit but the cost fits like its own
sport you do that and you wiped out the
rest of the day right so we had to stop
doing that I've done CrossFit a long
time I would do the twelve o'clock and I
come back at 1:30 I'd be like no I'm
done I just want to get yeah so I you
know we would do that and then jiu-jitsu
and then training it's fine it's just we
were done there's nothing so that we
stop that but we started taking things
from those workouts and putting them
together and like I didn't get back to
lifting weights again and finding a good
way to do it into like 2013 I think is
why I finally I finally figured out the
way to do it right for MMA in my opinion
but yeah so like there's things like
that that were developed our cardio we
had this bike workout that were there
were that I think everybody does now
it's a circuit training bike workout and
that kind of came stemming from a K and
it's taking some stuff from CrossFit and
putting it together so you guys do spin
classes oh I'm hearing no there's I have
a video on my youtube official John
Fitch YouTube page and uh it's it's a
it's a sample of a bike workout and it's
only 15 minutes but it's one-minute
sprint on the bike one minute like box
jumps limited of some other thing and
then go back to the bike and do that and
it'll it'll it'll kill you it'll kill
you and it'll lead to more and better
body composition
they're not just thing that grow in a
mile right yeah well the Sprint finisher
so MMA is interesting because you also
you have to have that explosive power
but you'll need that grinding endurance
too so it must be hard to really balance
that out yes and a lot of guys are just
way too lazy to condition themselves to
handle it and that's why I like to fight
inside yeah 99.9% of the guys out there
will get exhausted in a thirty second
arm hand fight with me right I think
they're just not used to it right much
less you on top of them on the ground
pounding them in the face oh that's
that's when they start getting really
tired then I start taking them down and
when when you get a guy down on the
ground can you tell can you tell when
they like they give up um I mean yes
yeah you can tell them the guys kind
given up but things have changed like
sometime around 2008 the UFC started
pushing commissions and referees to
start standing fights up faster right it
used to be if you got taken down the
only way to get up was if you submitted
the guy you swept the guy or you fought
up and got to your feet right now they
started changing things so that if you
can hold on to the guys you keep your
guard closed and you can hold on to his
arms long enough and stop all action the
ref will stop you up and reward you all
right so it used to be guys time would
give up a submission to give to get out
of the fight because they couldn't get
away all right then stick an arm up in
the air they stick their neck out stick
an arm out yeah basically that's the
easy you want to just make put your head
out in a bad position right you're not
getting punched anymore but that
outsider's perspective that looks like
the most terrifying position in the
whole world to billon but when you get
guys who get rewarded for not fighting
for stopping the fight and it slows
things down so now I can feel when I've
broken the guy but he's not giving me
the submissions that's to get his neck
out he's holding on and he's just trying
to shut me down until the ref stands me
up got it that must be frustrating for
it's very frustrating because I'm the
one he gets blamed for it right right
you you look like you're slowing down
the action but I saw I get criticized
for being a boring fighter but I am
still currently number two all-time
strikes in the UFC
since UFC 28 when they started recording
this yes sir like just quantity of
strength number of strikes landed number
two and that was long and that was only
18 fights seven years only you guys guys
right now we're fighting 33 times
they're not beating me right it's GSP is
number one and Frankie Edgar I think is
number three
oh right just at the work rate yeah okay
so like how can you land that many
punches or strikes if you're holding
someone
right oh man all right well let's get
into it man let's talk about let's talk
about the run like let's talk about
those fights I think the first time that
I really saw you fight was that the Agua
all of us fight on a UFC Fight Night
like maybe number five or six or
something like that
yeah and that was back when those UFC
fight nights were like a big event yeah
I called my friends we would like come
you know the party
was I mean it was yeah it was free TV
yeah yeah so there's tons of tons of
viewership yeah and that the Argo Silva
man that dude was huge oh that's right
sorry Havas he was like really top-heavy
if I remember yeah and so let's talk
about that I mean talk about your run
through there you were you were just
killing people what did you win my five
six seven fights in a row something like
that together I won eight UFC fights in
a row in order to get the tile shower
just fee it was like my fourteenth win
in a row though yeah yeah so how're you
how're you feeling through that run man
good like I was on mission I knew that
you know it was my destiny to win it's
my destiny to be champ than these guys I
knew I was gonna win I put it in time
and the effort the work you know I
didn't I didn't go out I didn't party
like 20 like I've been in San Jose for
16 years I'm just starting to learn my
way around right you because gym Oh yep
that's all I ever did was go to the gym
go to the store like I didn't go out and
go downtown I didn't I didn't do
anything I didn't do anything social
like I don't have that many local
friends outside of the gym because I
just don't I'm just starting to do that
now this last past year I'm just
starting to make friends that aren't
fighters right so I worked in San Jose
it was my workplace I partied and did
stuff with friends and whatever when I
was traveling at events or fights or
whatever but yeah it's kind of you know
I was so obsessed at how it was obsessed
it was the only word you could you can
use for it obsession
pure obsession I mean look that's the
only way to get any I know that when yes
I have like fits of work where I'll work
like 80 90 hours a week just for like
weeks to get stuff done get up at 3:30
in the morning and write and write and
write and write and write and they did
the only way to get anything real done
is to just put your head down and block
everything else out which isn't really
good for socializing isn't good for your
relationships isn't good yeah mark mode
is important but it's dangerous to get
locked away too long yeah so what at
what point in your view or have did you
ever I don't know like does the does the
stress do the nurses anxiety ever go
away you know when you come out of the
the dressing room is it still there
again this is the best way I can I can
explain it right even though I've never
gone skydiving I would say it's probably
something similar right because you're
you go through this process of putting
on the chute and getting anything
ready you get into the plane you hear
fire up here start to move you go up in
me yeah right all the way to like
standing at the edge like it's basically
what it is and I think you're in the
tunnel getting ready to be announced and
it's like when they announce you you
just step out into the into the end of
the air and you're free falling except
it's different because there's like
branches on your way down and there's a
good chance you're gonna hit one if not
all of them right so it's gonna hurt
it's gonna be scary and it's gonna hurt
because even even in a one punch
knockout like just get chance over your
hand or your wrist right like so you
know you know what's gonna happen but
you just have to step out into the abyss
anyways do you have like a pre-flight
ritual do you have mantras do you do you
meditate you so pull the trigger on the
wall pull the trigger yeah that's your
mantra trigger yep I mean he's it simple
for me so yeah I pull the trigger always
be moving those are good ones and then
what I like to do for a fight is I like
to break strategies or things down
like threes right so I'll have three on
the feed three on the ground that way
I'm not overwhelmed with techniques that
way my strategy is generalized so like
one thing I can focus on is don't get
hit right hands up yeah hand illegal
don't get it so that's you move it
that's a conscious thing goes right
don't get no you don't get hit that way
it hit him with the right maybe I know
think I successful two right hands
around he's right gonna set up chakra
myself in position solid move don't get
hit hit him with right don't do it right
so I got two things going through my
head I make a miss spoon there's the
right okay and then three to be close a
distance
I said I'm you know so I have three
things and that's all I'm trying to do
in that round is don't get hit hit him
with the right and close the distance a
lot of other stuff will happen off of
that but I don't I don't really need to
be overwhelming myself with a hundred
things I could be doing okay maybe that
parry the jab moved left until this like
it's too much
you can't process that fast right so I
try to keep those things simple and then
the same thing will be on the ground
right if I'm on if I put on my back get
away right you know go III program into
my body so I don't have to think about
that more actually if I lay on my back
my first motion is do I get out of it
away or get on top right but then you
know it's okay go to this position look
look for damage aware of this I'll do
the same thing it keeps things really
simple and it keeps you on task and it
keeps you from being overwhelmed I like
that man and guys who are listening you
can take that same advice and apply it
to whatever you're doing like for me I'm
just thinking about like right daily you
know like I got to keep things simple I
got I gotta write daily got a generate
content daily I got it sweet daily so
these are things these are monsters that
I have to that I haven't like I've got a
white board up here and I just got a
written all over the board like these
are the yeah every single day but I mean
I I'm trying to switch gears to from the
fighting mindset of a I try to switch it
into some of these other stuff so no
social media stuff some of this you know
podcasting stuff right oh wow I want to
I want to get all that now
I want to I just want to wrap up this
conversation about like how to how to
manage the nerves and stuff so and then
the biggest thing I can say about
manners is being prepared and I do the
work if you did the work you know you
did the work it makes things a lot
easier to be ready and then you know I
can use this advice for myself with like
public speaking every time I have a
public speaking event I'm like oh you
know what I know what I want to say I'll
just I'll just wing it and then like a
day and a half before I'm like oh god no
no I can't do that and then I start
preparing and preparing preparing and
then afterwards I'm like if I only
just would have prepared longer it would
have gone that much better I would have
been a lot less nervous right if you do
the work and you're prepared the nerves
the nerves tend to go away and I guess
that's a little across the board for
anything but it's also hard like
programming your programming your minds
the computer your bodies the machine
we've got a program so being prepared is
the machines ready to go I've got all
the code written I just press the button
and it goes right yeah I mean for people
who don't know I mean boxers and and
kick boxers and Bobby you sure I mean
any even ground guys - you just drill
drill and drill and drill and drill and
drill over and over and over and over
and over and over and over again and
over over again the hour so that you
don't even ever have to think about yeah
right 30 years later you're still
drilling the same thing right still
drill my double eggs 1 2 3 1 2 3 so and
then and then another part is the
visualization and that's part of the
that's part of the doing the work
sometimes I protect I mention it because
I consider that part of the work do tell
me tell me about that man this is really
important yeah it's it's mental drilling
you have to be able to put yourself
there you need to transport yourself to
the fight to the situation you need to
feel it smell it hear it like you should
get the goosebumps when you imagine
yourself getting to the tunnel and all
that stuff you want to mimic the
physiological response in your
as you're visualizing it that you're
gonna have when you actually compete
that way you're by its normal that way
everything you're feeling is normal and
you've already been through it and we
tend to have more fear when we're facing
something that's unknown well if you
visualized yourself through it
over and over and over again yes it
becomes known even though even though
it's just you know in your memory how do
you how do you do that practice I don't
know where I learned to do that but I've
always I've always been able to
transport myself I don't know if I was a
little kid and I could daydream really
well but it made it came from that but
that it started turning into more
specific controlled daydreaming and
really transporting myself to a new
location that was them in there and you
like sit down in a chair close your eyes
or something and just like literally
like it was a problem sometimes because
there would be times I was driving I had
to gain control over it after a while
because every times I'd be driving all
sudden my grip would tighten and mmm
speeding up you know they've grown width
it's like are you okay what's going on
oh yeah like I'm getting into like a
guilty and I'm like mmhmm I'm trying to
finish and I'm you know my whole body's
flexing am i oh yeah wait not I'm not
actually there so there's times that I
have to like put time away you know when
I'm laying down for bed or if I'm when I
just want to rest maybe I'm in between
workouts and I want to get arrested I
can lay down you know cross my arms over
a chest and just breathe focus on
breathing in and just start to visualize
myself through the processes put myself
in you know a leglock position I have to
fight out of and and make myself feel it
that myself feel that myself smell the
sweat in the gym and whatever is going
on yeah man guys if guys are losing this
is really super important it's I think
it's something that people dismiss
oftentimes it seems sort of hocus-pocus
or whatever but there really is
something to be said for for really
trying hard to imagine what it's like to
be in those situations and to really
feel it and to visualize your success I
heard a I heard a famous pitcher once
say that someone asked him he's like how
how do you throw strikes
strike everybody out all the time he's
like well I just every night before I go
to bed I just close my eyes and dream
about striking everybody out on the
whole time like and you know that's
that's what I told me twelve-year-old
son to do is to just lay him go ahead
and think about throwing strikes man I
mean I think there's been research that
showed it something like mirror mirror
neurons but there's neurons that will
fire the same way if you're thinking
about doing something what even if
you're not physically doing it so you
can it's like you can train your motor
neurons on that level through through
your thoughts right well it's super
important and all these things do the
preparation put in the work
keep it simple have clear and concise
directions for yourself visualize and
just practice practice practice practice
and then maybe maybe after 10 years or
12 years you too can do my 8 you can be
world-class you might get to break oh
yeah I mean that that is something else
to be said which is there like showing
up every day half the half the way to
win nobody wins without without showing
up yeah and you know when the biggest
things I've learned and had to deal with
the last year I think the most talked a
lot is being outcome independent mmm
that's my part that phrase before really
hard yeah because you don't tell me what
you mean by okay so okay I'm fighting my
last fight was for Voltaire against Rory
MacDonald right it was important to me
to train my ass off to win that's how I
wanted that title I wanted to win it one
of the money and one of the
opportunities to have that okay well I
put everything I had to into the
training camp I put everything I had to
into the fight into my diet and the
preparation everything I did the best I
could
I fought the hardest I could I think I
want to fight the judges said it was a
draw alright well if I'm outcome
dependent I'm crushed absolutely crushed
that I put in all this work and I didn't
get my outcome maybe even suicidal
because I didn't get
I put my life into if you can be outcome
independent if you cannot care well I
gave my best effort and then move along
that's powerful and that's that's where
I'm at now so compare compare your
reaction to the Rory fight and the GSP
fight like how how did you I went and
you feel different after that just
people I went to a deep depression and I
had to go to I'd escape to Thailand to
get my together mm-hmm I had to
immerse myself to put myself in a place
to be mentally ready to make the run
again you know I was laughing after the
Rory fight I was making jokes really
yeah that's amazing went to the
after-party had a great time
those are like that that's like 10 years
apart these fights right based on pretty
much telomeres bark yeah so after you we
just passed the 11 year anniversary of
the GSB fight actually is the knife I
think jeez Louise and we're both getting
old so what do you what do you attribute
so the outcome independence but like how
do you foster how do you foster that
difference because guys listen
everybody's gonna try hard and fail in
life happens too if you're not failing
you're not trying if you're not trying
you're not winning so like failure
learning how to deal with failure is and
I've written about this too it's like
how to make a comeback it's like you
have to learn how to make a comeback
otherwise you're never gonna be
successful and it's like something that
people don't talk about a whole lot you
know you said after the GSP which people
don't know George st. Pierre he was a
champ at the same weight class trying to
have one senator or arguably the
greatest enemy fighter yeah arguably you
could you could easily make a case for
being the number one power phone guy
ever ever I mean I would agree with that
I found him to be super exciting and
totally super weird did you by the way
did you catch that
Joe Rogan podcast he did where he thinks
that he's being abducted by aliens but I
didn't I heard about it and I didn't
watch it that's weird that was weird
but uh so you go from one reaction
to losing something like you know you're
on this long run you're training for
years you get to the championship fight
you lose that you like totally crushed
and like have to go all the way around
the world to Thailand which I've
actually done the exact same thing
myself after my divorce did the same
thing went to Thailand trained muy Thai
for a few weeks and did free diving and
it really worked to clear my mind and to
refocus things good too and I hate but
be productive kind of put yourself into
something that you're doing I guess I
don't isolate and shut everybody off and
stay at your house right yeah that just
steam rolls into something bad and then
ten ten years later you have a similar
experience but instead you're just
laughing and you attributing this to
mindset right it's just about
controlling you all look mindset I mean
and I I kind of was on a great path and
they kind of lost my way feel about
because I one of them one of the things
that set me on the path to California is
finding stuff was a book called zen and
the art of motorcycle maintenance right
and the basic thing on that book was be
in the moment right it's about the path
and the journey has nothing to do with
the a with the destination right and I
was on that for a while but then I I got
a taste of that belt in that belt
swagger and and what it could do and the
power gave you and the money and
whatever I got a little bit of that and
then that became a little bit ego driven
that's why that book is failing upward
or death by Y Yoho there's been you know
the mistakes and downfalls a lot along
the way I think we're heavily attributed
to ego and yeah you know so it's this
book supposed to be one of a series so
we still don't know how it's gonna end
we don't know we don't know if it's
gonna be triumphant me failing upward or
I'm gonna kill myself with you go home
well continue to fail upward please sir
the you know you talk about the ego and
the power and the stuff I imagine it
must be very alluring I mean not only
with the fame get invited to
special events with special investors
and money people get to go to the
special topless bar get invited to a
special meal
everything's catered taken care of
famous people come over and talk to you
like they they make sure you get a taste
of what its gonna be like because they
want to rope you in they want to control
you and my mindset switched from I just
want to be the greatest martial artist I
can be to right I've gotta be the usage
and precious precious do you really did
you really feel like that I I know my
mind says swish from that I bet I'll be
able to pick it up through the book so I
only went through one journal I've got a
few more I've got more to go through so
I'm willing to bet that because I
haven't read any of these since I wrote
them down like at the time I look
through them so there's at least 5 to 7
years time at all that I've looked there
any it is well so like some of the stuff
that I'm reading through is like you
know bringing me back to call me and
then I'm wondering when the attitudes
gonna change but it's gonna be an hour
thing well so you you journaled all
through the run and the UFC and the
problem I went you know mm that summer
and then I started again in 2003 before
I moved to California so 2003 all the
way through
probably 2013 thousand fourteen was
pretty much almost daily uh and then I
started having issues and personal
issues and stuff and I just noticed that
a lot of stuff I was writing in my
journal was negative and I didn't want
to face it so I think I just stopped
writing I'm still I'm guessing because I
wanted this stuff to come to me as I
read the journal ya know but I kinda
have a feeling that I I didn't because
the journals keep you accountable really
keep you accountable and I think at that
time I was not feeling it because I
don't want to hold myself accountable
some of the things that were going wrong
all right that's an interesting thing
about it man when you most need it it's
probably the time you're least likely
yeah
I've got a change of diaper yeah right
about home yeah and I'm so dumb I get
the same way about like meditating to
him like dude it's just ten minutes bro
so just like ten minutes why why can't
you just take ten minutes to sit there
and close your eyes and just chill out
for a little bit cuz it seems like I
don't know I'm him
maybe there's a certain like fear of
success or like fear being happy or fear
being chilled out why why I'm having my
own therapy session you know why
wouldn't I take those ten minutes to
meditate some days you know it's like
why wouldn't I take that time to journal
when it really has such a huge impact it
does yeah
well I imagine the allure of the fame of
the UFC title was huge the purse
differential between the champion - yeah
pay-per-view points yeah right that's
like almost having equity and the thing
and some delays and its really what
fighter purses are they even the most
well paid guys are being robbed lately
robbed
yes let's talk about that a little bit I
mean later later on an ear in your UFC
and MMA career you not only you know got
your mind right but then you started
thinking about the sport in general
right and you've gotten involved now in
lawsuits I believe and sort of general
advocacy for for fighters and fighters
benefits and rights and stuff so why
don't you tell us a little bit about
that yeah man so right from the
beginning I can tell there was something
off with you know seeing how they did
business didn't make any sense why this
sporting organization treated its
athletes this way and no one else did
and it wasn't until you know Carlos
Newton former UFC champ started doing
the groundwork to get some lawyers and
people involved he found this guy Rob
Macy who helped start the mixed martial
arts fighters Association has been
around over a decade a member of the
board but we can tell if there's
something wrong carlos started he's a
smart guy I started studying so to
figure it out and you know price
fighting has been around you
for over 100 years and there's laws
about promised price fighting but
they're not enforced in MMA there's some
reason but a clear distinction made
between boxing and MMA even though
they're both combat sports they try to
say that the same sport but that's
interesting because they're also
generally regulated and sanctioned by
the same bodies - right
and so like the disparity what you're
talking about here is that like this no
sport no sport worldwide has this
because it's illegal because it prevents
competition right and that is the event
organiser or promoter is not allowed to
own exclusive contracts and control the
title right job because they have too
much leverage they have all the leverage
they get to decide who fights for the
championships they get to decide
rankings it doesn't have to do anything
to do with the skill has to do with how
much money that promoter or event person
is making if you look at every sport
they all have you know the NFL NHL those
are all NBA those distinction bodies the
sanctioning body controls the title the
team owner is the promoter he doesn't so
you have each team is a promotion and
you have a saint-jean body this is
different because it's not common sports
so the sanctioning body is also the
regulator they regulate the sport we
have a Athletic Commission which
regulates a sport and it's a conflict of
interest for them to control the title
also that's what happened basically in
the late 18-hundreds the US government
said nope promoters can't control titles
anymore so the athletic commissions to
come over the New York State Athletic
boxing title became the biggest one
because it was the biggest day to add
the most money they're like well this
this eliminates competition because all
the boxers have to go to New York to
fight in order to win real money because
it's the biggest title and all the
promotions and all promoters have to
promote in New York because if they want
to make money they have to fight for the
highest belt so they're like I was it's
not fair it's not it's not a free market
so in 1925 the New York State Athletic
Commission created a sanction body
license that's what the WBC WBO all
those boxing titles popped up well that
that's a huge advantage for those
athletes to be able to fight for a
promoter have a title it would be like I
don't want to work with you anymore
leave or hand keep his title and keep
the title we don't have that you just
you just sort of experience this very
same thing just like with in the recent
past and to where you were a title
holder and and then there was like a new
promoter came again no I was stripped of
a title yeah I would go with the BB has
they changed the name they changed your
name so I no longer i yeah i went from
world series of fighting champion - just
another pfl contender overnight right
well you know I think Wikipedia or maybe
ESPN has that says you vacated that I
thank you it's work admit it used
to like they even said they said that on
the phone like we you still are the
world series of fighting will be forever
forever gonna be bored everything well I
think this is something that most casual
UFC fans have no idea of that you know
they they have everything in-house and
they control everything and men well
dude I mean some of those guys on the
undercard last time I checked and I
don't know what it is now but I remember
they were getting like 2 K to show and
to kata way well now they since the
lawsuit started it made changes to make
themselves look better so now what they
do is they they do pay I think it's like
10 and 10 or 20 20 for these 10 10 for
the start I play but the low pay so
they're low paid is higher but they're
mid and top tier guys you know I'll talk
to your guys are a very small amount of
them so the mid tier guys make a lot
less but they they puff up the numbers
by paying the entry level people more
right and even so man that's not even
well this well they don't they yeah you
fight for 20 it's funny but join fight
once
right it's not enough you you pay 10%
probably to manage me to 10% probably to
the gym and then you have all your
training expenses in taxes so you know
20 20 is 40,000 turns into like 15
17,000 real quick right that's why
you've got guys who are passionate if I
remember I haven't been like detail up
on the UFC for a few years now but I
remember guys were like fire fighters
and Rich Franklin was like a middle
school math teacher yeah Chris Lytle he
was fired
you know that's right yeah and so I you
couldn't even you're supposed to be a
full-time professional fighter but he
really really can to me and then I was
washing dishes up until I bought Diego
Sanchez okay yeah and that was a crazy
fight by the way I was I was making 200
bucks did I wash the dishes Diego
Sanchez I guess uh that guy fought like
a nutter we'll see one is fighting off
stage fighting yeah it's not really will
see you know as crazy off offline as he
appears easy easy new guy he's a
character sure so what do you see is the
future for these lawsuits and like a
true like separation of the time well we
are in our fifth year of our one point I
think four billion dollar anti-trust
lawsuit if they lose because it is an
antitrust case they will a be forced to
pay treble so it's three times one point
I think 1.2 or 1.3 yeah so we start
evidentiary hearings at the end of this
month I think it's only sound I've been
going to Nevada to do that so they're
going to take the experts from both
sides and have a little mini trial there
and then from that the judge will decide
on class and you will decide whether or
not we were equally damaged together as
a class if he doesn't we can do a
majority suit which we need like a few
hundred guys to step forward and put
their name down are you finding that
crime fighters are willing to put their
name
um man I don't know man there's so much
Stockholm Syndrome and fear from a lot
of these guys there's a lot so some
there's a lot of these guys that just
they just want daddy to pat him on the
head and tell him good job you know they
would do anything for Dana to pat him on
the head and tell them they did good for
free easy fight for free and get
brain-damaged for it just for a pat on
the head
Dana said I did a good job what's your
really since I like with Dana Wyatt I
don't have one I've never really spoken
with him hmm
like I don't take it yeah I want you to
get close to snakes like I can you can
I'm a pretty good read a character I
don't I'm and I imagine if if he has
that scent of that bit to him it's only
gotten worse since the days where they
were making no money to know exactly so
it's one of the one of the big things
that define my opinion of him was when I
was fighting Diego it was the first time
they did a like a feature thing on Spike
I can't say a feat pre-fight video
whatever yeah you know so like we each
got you know ten minutes or whatever and
I walk up in and they announce me and
the weigh-ins and the crowd you know
yells and Danny leans over to me says
you see we can make you a star see what
a little that was just one whatever it
was just that was just one whatever
preview we see we can do for you like
literally straight-up just telling me
like play ball it will make you famous
it doesn't matter how good you are it
doesn't matter how well you can fire
just do the right things and we'll make
your rice cushy all right to me that was
insulting and distasteful that's why I
understand it's like I don't want your
help
I want you to push me forward I just
wanna fight right that must be very
frustrating to feel like your destiny
sort of out of your own hands at that
point you know that yeah there was
horrible feeling like the second time I
fought Thiago I was supposed to be a
title for a title fight a condition the
winner was supposed to go fight GSP next
well I fought the fight I dominated I
thought I'd performed well to one of my
it's on my list of one of my best
performances
and afterwards at the press conference
they took the shot away they took away
and they started pushing this that's
when they really started pushing hard on
the excitement over winning oh is that
when the boring John four yep that's
when I started was leading up to that
fight was well he maybe he wins fights
but he's boring so he doesn't deserve a
title shot I think that was the argument
and they started pushing that that some
reason that you know entertainment is
way more important than skill what how
do you think that the there's obviously
just the super casual UFC fan who
doesn't really know anything just wants
to see dudes get beat up yep but I think
that there's a pretty solid class of
guys out there and fans that understand
understand the sport yeah and I would
say that your style what may have not
been as flashy as others but it wasn't
ever safe he had some of those you know
karate I had a couple Rio I have a few
good case here and there one of the
things I also started to realize was
especially after the juice P fight was
that like know like what is it before
that but no matter what you did you
weren't gonna get any real money out of
sacrificing yourself like I was one of
the big things why he lost the title shy
or whatever after that thing was they
wanted to try to make me fight Josh
Koscheck it was my training partner roof
right and I was like it's like why I'm
gonna train about finite training
partner if he wins the bell okay like
we're fighting for a bell but like
you're not gonna pay us anything that
makes it worth losing a training partner
over like over a long period of time
like we'll make more money training
together than you know destroy our
friendship our training bond whatever by
fighting so I see you're thrown an extra
hundred thousand or half a million down
on it doesn't really do for me say
if you gave me pay-per-view points
okay we'll fight we'll sell the out
of it give me a pay-per-view points
you're not gonna do that
alright you still trained what time was
he still he's retired and he's in North
Carolina
he's doing his company check defense so
he's done some
to contract work Oh interesting well one
of our sponsors is or growth
technologies and they're a big
government contractor one of the things
I never really liked about that critique
of you is like I was saying your style
is not flashy but it's not a safe like
there's a lot of guys that fight safe
mm-hmm
you seem like you were always going for
it yeah I mean it's not a secret I'm
gonna go forward close the distance put
you in the in the corner of the fence
and the mat beat the crap out of you
that's what I'm going to do like don't
get don't get hit close the distance
yeah oh yeah this is I want to put you
in the worst spot impossible and I'm
gonna hit you and elbow you and that's
what I want to do it you can stop it
good for you but most guys don't well I
like I like what I've learned about you
here today I mean you're a very
thoughtful guy you spend a lot as I'm
writing you've written your own book you
spent time journaling you focus on the
mindset and the visualization aspects
you've done a lot of training of your
own mentality in order to overcome
adversity and then you've gotten
involved in advocacy and lawsuits and
thinking about the big picture and stuff
and and you know I think that to me that
that really rounds out the image that I
had of you which was you know just
terrifying and scary and fun to watch
but what does this what where is all
this going for you what is a what does a
post-fight John Fitch world look like
for you trying to figure it out I'm
trying to fix my body up a little bit
this month I moved into a new place
that's been spending some time working
on this and then this month I'm doing a
lot of yoga and stretch it and feeling
some stuff out and then after this month
I want to see how I feel and then
there's a good chance I'll fight again
yeah but I'm also working towards more
of an online presence you know
interacting or writing or more books I'm
working on a you know I have more of the
journal book to come out with and I'm
working on a weight cutting book
actually to I wanna sell cheap just cuz
so we people have no idea what they're
doing with cutting late actually we
cutting or just not in fact the week I
actually like my aids is what we process
like what I do to make sure that I'm you
know in shape look great and feel great
so so - uh I'm an advocate for yoga I
like to do ashtanga yoga I'm happy to
hear you mention it when we're doing the
high benefit weeks I just want to see if
it can like I can't straight my elbows
out anymore I have stuff to my elbows
they hurt and I just want to see it
something like that and some rehab and
some lifting can can put myself on
position to do another training camp if
not I might have to get surgery I might
get some things removed from my joints
and I don't want to do that because I'm
41 and recovering from the incision
sometimes it's worse than the injury
right right what is what is a regular
day-to-day John Fitch workout look like
I mean like when I'm when I'm training
for a fight no no nothing oh now I can't
just like regulate I've been getting I
usually get up in the morning I lift I
have a mighty Amish net I have a blog
about my lifting I say you should lift
like it's a part of your hygiene right
right so I'm not worried about going to
failure I just want to do a steady
amount of weight for my size explosively
consistently over a number of years when
you say explosive what does that mean is
it me like snack I don't want to go I
want to present I wanted to come out
like a punch I want I had a straight
Vista coach 40 words for those San Jose
Sharks my credenza
he had an accelerometer on his tire and
accelerometer onto the bars he'd measure
how fast and he wanted to measure to
make sure that you were increasing in
speed through the press so it would have
to be like you first wanted it would
measure like 90% whatever so as long as
you're in a certain range it would be
clear but it would beep your beep and
shame you when you you weren't explosive
about down so focus on is this bike that
does that fight specific training or is
that somewhat advocate just for general
fitness I think it's I think it's for me
it's it's just the martial arts way of
training because you usually have so
much other stuff to do throughout the
day
you can't go to failure how can you go
to failure in squats and then do more
workouts or even if you what if you work
construction
you're gonna go to failure at 5:30 in
the morning and you're gonna go to a job
site get out of there
I think right it's just not reasonable
and unless you're a competitive lifter
out see a reason to do it so I think
something that's basic easy to do every
day so I'll get up in the morning at
5:30 bust out my left you breakfast I'm
gonna try to I'm gonna try to come up
with like a 15 minute yoga routine that
warm-up before the lift at night but
that's the big thing I do now and then
I'm gonna get an assault biker Aerodyne
so I can I can do my weekly meditation
your spin class yeah so you mentioned
you mentioned online so like the glory
of Twitter brought us together you know
there's no way that I would ever have
met you otherwise and I've seen you sort
of up in the mix with a lot of the guys
on our side of Twitter and whatnot and
rational rational thinkers rational
thinkers who believe in biology and they
live in evidence yes I'm gonna make some
make mega shirts make evidence great
again oh that's perfect so did you get
started with social media back I
remember UFC made a huge push to like
get everybody yeah I got on it pretty
quick and I I think that's why I have a
big following on swears because I was
out early and I was I was tweeting
political stuff early like I I kind of
was a sjw at one point but there was a
point I was like wait a minute this just
didn't weird tell me about that job I
think it was around the time of man the
shooting was it where was this thing
that kid he got shot in Missouri or the
Missouri oh right yeah Brown that time
and then stuff started getting really
weird around and I started going
downhill I think cuz I was up to date on
the Occupy stuff and I was you know
Edward Snowden Bitcoin all these things
I was in you know I was always reading
on my phone right and so would you
consider yourself in the past a Democrat
I'm born and raised no I was a I was a
life without not raised I was my parents
Republican but I was a lifelong Democrat
yes I remember being in Catholic school
and we had spirit buddies all right so
you're like second grade and you got a
spirit buddy who was like you know years
ahead of you
yeah so I hang out with and he asked me
he's kind of dorky ask me what my my
politics were I was like same grade I
was like I'm a Democrat I go he's like I
bet I don't think you with the IQ but I
don't think I know what it man but yeah
yeah so I was I was a big deal Bill
Clinton fan thought he was great
hated bush thought it was terrible
account pulled away from politics
altogether because of that but I also
started to realize that all mainstream
news media and a lot of media was fake
because of because of the Iraq war and
all those things surrounding that so
that made me distrust anything you know
I would take everything with a grain of
salt if the media was saying something I
was like eh maybe maybe the stories has
something to do with that but it's
probably not true and then I was a
supporter of Obama until about three
months into his presidency when he just
didn't do anything he said he was no
they got they got us again yeah you got
to see yet another guy no more I'm not
gonna let that happen again and started
becoming a big bran Paul fan guy up yeah
that's sort of the Gateway happened yeah
and libertarians then you had the
Snowden and all that other stuff popping
up yeah well you know you and I you did
a very thoughtful review as I watched it
the video review of a Democrat to the
pourable and I really appreciate it
it's interesting how our lives have
we're basically the same age we become
from the same city and we had similar
experiences in terms of the politics and
the away these are raised to believe
that man we can do whatever they want
that your skin color doesn't matter is
gender that your genitals and what you
do with them don't matter like at all
like that's what we were taught and then
now we're bad
if we don't think they matter like you
have to put weight on those things it's
bizarre and hundreds in backwards to
what we were taught and brought up as
right yeah I had a tweet the other day
do pretty well that was like Gen X the
only generation ever raised to believe
neo does not think about gender and race
yes right you know like everybody before
us was thinking about it and sort of in
in the negative ways and sort of like
trying to get people rights which is a
good thing and then afterwards after us
now they're all just talking about it
constantly harping on it constantly and
it's been such a a whipsaw at least from
my perspective I mean I I don't know
what it's like for prior generations but
it really seems like everything changed
really fast
and it changed like starting to me it
seemed like around 2000 I became aware
like 2014 or so and then everything just
sort of whipped around yeah and then and
then here we are and it's been a it's
been really challenging for a lot of
people do you find which way do you and
maybe I know the answer to this question
but you don't know but which way do you
find like your fellow and then make eyes
martial arts I feel like most martial
artists the most of many guys that I'm
around and she's just you guys around
are more Center or they're more rational
thinking type of people they may not
speak up about stuff but yeah anybody I
feel like who routinely goes through
adversity I think it doesn't bite into
into that mmm right that's fast
when you're polluters to adversity on a
daily basis you accept a lot more things
like your you build resilience it's what
I did it was a yes you're talking before
about being you know getting people
tougher to take it like resilience
resilience doesn't talk anymore
especially the boys and young man
because they're they're taught to be
women they're taught to behave and do
with their emotions like women sorry
like women do not have these levels of
testosterone that men have like to me
positive masculinity is learning how to
deal with testosterone interesting
learning how to deal with it learning
how to challenge champ how how the
challenge of how to how to use it in a
positive way because unbridled
testosterone ends you up in prison
right it ends up you get in killing
somebody or committee you know so I'm
doing some taking a risk that's way too
large and didn't kill it I think that's
that's I think why you see you know
seventy percent of the convicted rapists
are you know boys who are raised by
women and no male influence because they
have testosterone but they don't know
how to deal with and it comes on native
ways positive masculine idea how to
effectively manage your testosterone no
that's interesting way of putting it
you're absolutely right because
basically it's like it we've all we
learn you know I'm six for 250 if this
was in the old days I would just go out
and like bomb people on the head and
take what I want I had women things land
whatever and and everything that we
learned is like how to how to like pull
that how to pull that back in but we
can't eradicate it I think you're
looking at the past more rough than
maybe it was but cuz I just I'm talking
along yeah oh yeah yeah
but even then like people still had to
be social around each other so like
right I even though even a million years
ago or caveman I think if you bought
somebody in the head
there's a good chance that you'd have
negative repercussions come back for
that yeah that's true you know true
that's true so I like the fact that you
you reached out to me a little bit
talking about like wanna and to engage
some more and like produce some more and
man you've been really pushing out a ton
of content you you're sort of up in in a
common network with some of the guys I
run with online yeah I got to meet any
of the empty dream Johnson was it was
there too just happened to be there and
Goldman does on confused
really he's gonna make a West Coast trip
I think come out hopefully he comes
through yeah he's a good dude I've had
him on the podcast also and he and I
have hung out a bunch of times we met at
the 21 convention for the first time and
since then we've just we've stayed in
touch and been really close he's he's
one of the true artists and true
characters that I've met and this whole
experience who is exactly what he says
he is online like I guess I
yeah
hang out with them watch them work
question do some camera pick up like
yeah I love yeah it's what her Twitter
can bring all these different worlds
together it's really amazing and we can
coalesce around ideas and and worldviews
rather than just by happenstance or
geography or who happened to be in your
dorm or live on your cold sac or
whatever which is really one of the
founding concepts of the liminal order
my men's organization that's all about
self-improvement and positive
masculinity and so understanding the
world today and being equipped to handle
the future of these sort of online
conflicts and and the the culture
conflicts that we have is really that we
were able to come together under shared
values and shared worldview even though
we live all over the country come from
different backgrounds different
religions races that people from Europe
and Australia and New Zealand and
whatever we've got we got over 100
members worldwide on three different
continents now just after the first six
six weeks or eight weeks or so and we're
really keeping to push it and in fact I
have a question from one of the guys in
Lumina Order he wanted me to ask you
what had more impact on you your first
loss or your first win and why hmm man
probably the first loss I think because
it's it thrust you into reality because
you have this ability to imagine
yourself like indestructible or the best
and then to eat your ass handed to you
for the first time like it opens your
eyes up and yeah well my son was just in
the Little League World Series and he
had a couple of crazy experiences the
first first time first game he hits a
walk-off game-winning home run to win
the game and it goes completely viral on
ESPN gets a whole segment on
SportsCenter
doing like he's doing like a press
junket 12 years old 12 years old and
then in the next game he pitches and he
does it he does really poorly
and I told him look man there's only
winning and learning and you know you're
gonna have to take away a learning
lesson from this experience and in his
case it's still all about mindset and
controlling your anxiety and your stress
levels but you know if we can always
look for the lesson in what we're doing
then we can always continue to fail
upwards yep which would be the title of
a good book or death by ego one of the
two hopefully will go with the first one
for your for your at the path right and
so you know this really I think we've
really covered a lot of ground man and
we've gone through the whole journey and
and I'm just really grateful that I had
a chance to talk to you in school you
know a fanboy it a little bit I mean I'm
pretty psyched that I got to talk to
John Fitch cuz you know 15 years ago man
I'm watching this I'm paying for
pay-per-views and I'm watching and I'm
 rooting for you and it was just
you know we were from Indiana man Fort
Wayne boys corn corn-fed Allen counted
three robbers though my god did the
Johnny Appleseed fuzz will do it oh my
god I think about that sometimes with
that like a little maze that they had
with the straw that was like highlight
of my straw straw basis the strobe is
hopping up its river festival man that
place flooded every year too if I
remember
all right so John Fitch where can we
find you buddy
look at website John pissed on - John
Fitch Thomas it's also John Fitch Doris
Fitch smash calm but understand it it's
my stuff mr. John Fitch on YouTube John
Fitch smash Instagram John Fitch dotnet
spelled out on Twitter I'm all into
place family up or dead by ego is
available on Amazon paperback and Kindle
trying to get some more contents more
stuff out there I'm leaning towards you
know like masculinity type coach pulling
up post fight career because I'm in the
Bay Area and some of my friends - my
girls they're from friends of it they
talked to me about how these guys that
they talk to it guys they're around me
need to learn how to be men yeah they're
overly emotional
and movie and they won't make eye
contact and they don't have planned
dates and there's just a lot of basic
things that I think there's a lot of
guys out here if you have used some help
get some up with yeah and tell me the
truth the girls are like Oh John you
should really teach these boys on how to
be done isn't that right why can't they
all just be more like you John something
like that I imagine I mean I hear
the same thing and I'm not even famous
so that's a that's an interesting career
pivot I mean even that you coach now do
you train guys I mean you're by house
patreon.com backslash Tom pitch I have
technique videos of their house that I
do I put a weekly video for my five
dollar contributors and then some of
their guys pay a dollar a month to
support the blogs and the and the live
streams that I do on YouTube no but yeah
I got it I got to do a lot more work
been so busy with the move and I've got
to start reading some things and when
you're training for fights it's hard to
get in and down so I can imagine well
it's been awesome to talk to you I love
the book I'm a big fan of the Twitter
feed I read and watch a lot of the
videos I like the fact that we're
walking sort of some of the same path
gives me some hope for the future too
thank you so much for joining me here
and I know that everybody's really going
to enjoy this
John Fitch everybody thank you very much
man let's do it again sometimes man