so I don't quite know what today's video
is gonna be about I'm just gonna talk
for five minutes because there's
something coming up here I saw this book
when I was cat-sitting last week and the
person has cats eating for let me borrow
it even though she actually hasn't
started it so it's pretty Brown the
gifts of imperfection and I just wanted
to read the back blurb of what it says
and then the first part and then talk
about it in this groundbreaking New York
Times bestseller dr. Brene brown a
researcher professor and thought leader
on vulnerability courage worthiness and
shame shares ten guideposts on the power
of wholehearted living a way of engaging
with the world from a place of
worthiness and then I'm reading the
introduction wholehearted living
wholehearted living is about engaging in
our lives from a place of worthiness
it means cultivating the courage
compassion and connection to wake up in
the morning and think no matter what
gets done and how much is left undone I
am enough it's going to bed at night
thinking yes I'm imperfect and
vulnerable and sometimes afraid but that
doesn't change the truth that I am also
brave and worthy of love and belonging
I love brain Brown I love her work I
also think that the back counter dix the
front that so much of the people that we
value we value because they're in a
place of authority because they're in a
place of celebrity because they have
gotten too professional they have gotten
to success and yet they're very work
says you're worthy now and so it does
need to really say what this book is
about and that blur it more talks about
who she is like New York Times
bestseller and she's a doctor and rather
than like it truly doesn't matter you
can be a single mom on disability and
you were even if you never saved the
world even if this idea that is coming
through me never comes into the world
and it's going to
I am worthy exactly as I am I have so
much to contribute and each person has
so much to contribute you are the
perfect you and that is exactly what you
have to give the world and in a world
that says that is never enough someone
like Bernie Browns allowed to say that's
enough because she's arrived but we're
not really okay with you not you not
being enough you need to let get
somewhere and then you can then you can
coast and not be enough you need to be
like a white male tech giant before you
can not worry about fashion and wear
whatever you want to show off me called
eccentric her society and that's where
like I've known this this journey that
I'm on to create this global cooperative
it's going to change the course of
humanity is also about showcasing the
journey of getting there that I don't
have money to pay people to edit my
videos I don't have the money to have a
professional website and yet the right
people are gonna come on board at the
right time to show that it is truly
worthy right now as it is because people
we're gonna come on board and make it
look professional fix what doesn't work
because the message will reach them
I'm already worthy this idea is already
worthy it's just about allowing it to be
in the world and so I can easily
showcase that because you're gonna be
able to see the entire progression
through these videos don't let the best
to someone coming on board and creating
it so that the sound and the subtitles
and the graphics are all made much more
professional without us ever faking that
that's how it was from day one and I
already have somebody who is offered to
create my Wix website into a WordPress
website so that I'm not playing out 1015
dollars a month in order to have a
website that is SEO and people can find
it and people can sign it from email
list I've seen for a while that this
thing is coming together and yet there's
still that piece of me that pulls away
from it knowing that society doesn't
value yet what I have because I don't
have my platform I don't have the money
to make it look professional I'm not
doctor bren√© Brown
and yet you all get to watch the journey
to that the journey towards my genius
that is going to be my genius is already
being lived
I don't need outside force to tell me
that it's powerful because I can feel
how powerful it is I know how how how
we're full and amazing this global
cooperative ID it is I've had to become
enough of it enough of a person enough
of my inner work in order to live into
that role as opposed to first arriving
and then telling you how I got there
we're all gonna get to see the process
because we're all gonna do it together
isn't about me and my ego and me
becoming a well-known household name but
I have to be willing to do that in order
to step into creating the global
cooperative and I don't even know what
I'm calling this video I have no idea
accept it like that I don't even like
the gifts of imperfection Bernie Braun
and why why do we need someone to first
be on a pedestal before we can trust
them to say you don't need to be on a
pedestal take care please like and
subscribe I'll see you tomorrow we're
gonna create the global Opera together
it's gonna change everything