a lot of times we looked at all three of
Metcalfe's experiments first the feeling
of knowing in which she was using the
feeling of knowing as a metacognitive
probe that she seemed to like the
experimental evidence that a standard
memory search was not doing on an inside
problem-solving so we then have a
middling experiment which I will go to
great detail the review because what was
mattered with the third experiment where
she is feeling of warmth ratings for non
inside problems defined by that Sergey
Brin's framework and inside problems and
she doesn't even work patents were
different and the accuracy of
predictions were climbing occasion were
reliably different for the to two spoons
of problem solving is followed up by
your aerobics work others showing that
there was something physiological going
on the Hartley and differences between
the two sets of twelve years were the
state pattern and we're having two
important with the patterns for feeling
of luck or insight and on inside
problems so there seems to be something
actually physiological and kind of
possible that protists they kind of all
be different going on between these two
kinds of problem solving we get started
to take a look what we did
take a look sorry I'm sorry we took a
look at the workout you all sort of
Brooks and we took a look at the idea of
the fertilization and the idea and I
pointed out that computerization
involved with the America constructed
brutal overshadowing which I'm going to
Chris
regulators but ever less we paid
attention to some important findings in
I mean the experiment computer
brutalization interferes with inside
problem-solving and not with my name's
at problem solving this would be
additional evidence that that something
we started to investigate we looked at
responses to Weisberg Alba the insight
is much more procedural in nature than
propositional / computational in nature
and the kinds of things that were
reported by people and the material
before that predicted is exact and what
we notice is that we have argument
argumentative strategies and Breschel
strategies were predictive of success on
inside problem solving so I'm not it's a
compliment but not on inside so I'm
solving very little predicted success an
exact problem pausing and perhaps
because it seems to involve that
metacognitive stepping back and looking
at the cognitive medium looking at the
framing of the problem rather than
through the framing out the problem we
then took a look at the speeded
reasoning you the idea that although it
looks like inside problem-solving and on
except for absorbing are very different
in qualitative sense perhaps it's just
that inside problem is speeded
computation application speeded up to
speed reasoning but then we love that
correlations between the inferential
strategies within subjects for both
insight and ions at problems at zero
correlation which was pretty good
evidence against the speed of reason and
I also put it out the seemingly you have
some initial and father go to these
anywhere it's why for these heads of
problems that we speed up our processing
and why is it that when we leave machine
better style this processing they
haven't become more insightful region
we then took a look at further work by
shoulder at all using the individual
differences method all of these try and
find what are the sub skills that are
predictive of the skill in sight given
that we're not seriously considering the
fact that insight might be more skill
like in nature and we took a look at
perceptual restructuring field
independence task the world associate
task category generation and they also
get anagram so I argue that I think
there was terribly confounded and lovely
family is that perceptual restructuring
included dependents are highly
predictive in cytochrome absolving
laptops somewhat but not as much as
paradoxical they're used a lot to test
for insight and creativity okay and that
a category generation was not predictive
of insight category generation and other
influential strategies like satern m80
sort of penalties was were predicted or
not insert problem solving that not
predictive of in that console so you
have a double dissociation in terms of
what's predictive of each kind of
ability which is a pretty significant
evidence quote that the two types of
problems drawn qualitatively different
processes which is almost as bold
statement as why stroganova and in
completely the opposite direction we
enter the look at the work of a pair
centered and titi with what they call
the doublet leaping I argued that that
is a misuse of the word induction and we
should replace it in terms of cognitive
leaping and what they basically did was
task for I'm arguing the input for this
way they're testing for pattern
completion as predictive of insight
problem-solving and that turned out to
be the case the better on eager you are
remember on the test
liebherr liebherr please remember Lieber
it's very disruptive to meet on and on
in a summary answer of lepers okay okay
so right the cognitive leaders are in
fact predictive inside problem solving
and I suggested to you that that not
only addresses or it helps to give some
understanding that ability
these are talking about lapel which you
listen to multiple simultaneous
constraint aft it's something that's
resolved in parallel self-organizing
fashion it's something that can be done
better by neural networks than by
standard computational machines to
remember all about yes and that's
suggested very strongly that this might
be going on in in problem solving and
accorded up skills are also considered
dynamical simultaneous multiple sorts
dynamic multiple simultaneous constraint
problems and therefore would make sense
that insight would be more skill like in
nature than propositional in nature okay
then of course we pursue the idea that
the subject of framework was not going
to just lay back and all of this with
rolling in and we could look at the work
of Calculon and Simon in 1990 and that
is in fact assignment from the hill an
assignment searching for a foundation
and you now know why there was such a
Whitney title in search of it as a top
off okay and their basic argument is to
try and assert that the search inputs
framework is still adequate risk so they
now contract wide spirit although they
have freely admit that in fact really
did but what they want to know are you
is adequately explained by the surgeon
which frameworks do not need any
additional theoretical machinery they do
propose to solve this with something
that I have a lot of respect for and
essentially that's very prescient what
we talk about when we move
the neuroscience they talked about
shifting between two kinds of space to
power a space which is the problem space
within which you're looking for a
solution and the matter space which is
the space of all possible problem
formulations they're looking for and
added the probable relation the idea of
insight is you switch from the first
space to the second space from primary
ca√±ada applying the effective problem
elevation and then bring it down to
reshape the primary search space and
solve the problem and that's what
insight is and the idea is it's just
cajun prints at both levels the question
then became that they are in a very sort
of theoretically tight spot because what
they need to do is to say that in order
to prevent the infinite regress what's
happening at the meta level has to be in
some sense different from what's
happening at the primary level but in
order to maintain their theoretical
commitment right they have to be saying
that it's not importantly different
whether or not they succeed oh that is
an interesting question I'm suggesting
that they don't point is succeed on that
because the heuristic that they argue is
operating at the meta level is the
notice of Aryan civilization which is a
very and I invented an adjective where
you a very good salty for a very salty
here is if operating by using by the
manipulation of attention to manipulate
what is from Syria in order to
reformulate the problem which sounds
much more like what the gestalt is for
saying it's going on a big negative
thing than what Nuland Simon were rich
with talking over there
I believe that's what we got to support
that right so they took a look at some
of the things that were predictive of
people ability to notice or what to
solve the util ated chessboard problem
which is the chest which is the problem
in 1990 and they also experimentally
manipulated this just a variable the
salience of the carry cube so the more
clearly a military cue the more likely
people were to come up with some
solution again being a salient issue not
since the appointment was simply a
belief issue more importantly what it
came down to is they barreled that
flexibility in noticing this sort of
notion of flexibility and noticing
turned out to be really important for
understanding who was going to be able
to solve really just I'm so what's
interesting about that then is this is
this is also prescient I think an
important way of the increasing
consensus that what's the essential
thing that's behind insight abilities is
cognitive flexibility where cognitive
flexibility is almost always measured by
your ability to use attention to
reconfigure what you find salient in the
problem yes why did they do to make make
it more desert like certainly Hughes
once daily they were going to play for
one thing what they did is they replaced
black and white colors with the words
bread and butter
and people would notice that the two
things are both at the reporter on them
and then they would go over to the
saying that they're helped because
that's important by the way is when we
talk about as an intermediary and so
they were in what you can do is create
you can create sort of independently
measured levels of difficulty for the
mutilator chessboard you by degree to
which you interchange the scale answer
the parity cube now obviously this is
assistance the statistical point there
is still floating in the air the
question about you know what it is for
something to be as insightful can you
turn your hand up earlier yeah how would
the level communicated something that is
not discussed and that's part that's
also part of it something that I would
welcome the issue about what the
processing is between the levels I mean
this thing could really do to annoying
any psychologists when they give a
flowchart is what's happening on the
arrow but what's happening on the arrows
and so what the nature of that shifting
is because presumably there seems to be
we have to be careful to not to desert
rib you to them but it sounds like it
it's not computational process the
shifting between the level if some kind
of switching of activity and translation
of information one fall after another so
you might be sort of beginning to worry
back sounds a little bit like the very
phenomenal we're supposed to be
explained yes but what I'm arguing I
don't think that they're not the same
problem but I think they're intimately
connected that problem in the fact that
the notice in very serious things will
be a very salty problem and that what
they're relying on is by altering
salient that somehow in a
non-computational fashion reshapes the
problems list that okay yes um I think
there's something what would a theory
related just what else to encourage you
to pick the nectar to get the necklace
Oh what I was saying sorry is that the
notice and variance heuristic where
basically you're using attention to
reconfigure what you find salient it's a
kind of process that the gestalt is
we're talking about it's at work in
things like the Necker cube which is a
classic Gestalt example of how things
restructure okay that's what I meant
because you are you mention your
newly-wedded transport as well in
reference to like something okay um I
don't know did I what did I say like now
- something wrong written mutters yeah
oh and I said that was like the Necker
cube
well no but just like what would you you
said to me Oh the thing about oh so that
was how they manipulated the pair that
the salience of the parity cube they
replaced the white but they would put on
the white and black squares of the chess
board they replaced them with the words
bread and butter which maple which
helped people notice that the two corner
pieces were the same that they're
preparing and that's what you need to
notice in order to solve the mutilator
chessboard
okay so who did this Kaplan and Simon if
I want to be is our experimental
manipulations but so so they completed
it I just don't happen to understand
clear please did the pieces we get you
have to have our chessboard is laid out
right and you have like where this would
be white it's a bar okay this would be
black you see Brett oh can I give it
we've been cool though they put things
that people expect to be integrated
together like peanut butter and
chocolate in chocolate or something that
is like the same because you do put
butter on bread too I suppose
any other questions about that so far
click these questions ok so let's get
back to it now look at what's coming out
of the capital in fine print you could
make insight better in people similarly
this is something we would want to do
right by training your attentional
skills by making them increasingly
sensitive to how they are distributing
salience on to stimuli by also
increasing their awareness of their
flexibility to alter what they find
sailing and relevant by redirecting
their attention
you'd want to be doing this this
monitoring should be done in a non
inferential fashion I hesitate to say
nonverbal for reasons of a contactor but
at least did not get parental house now
while I mention that list because that
is a list of the kinds of things you
train in mindfulness practices that
means that there's a prediction
obviously this is a post fictional I
prefer much rim-116 but when I started
lecturing this in session it was a
prediction and namely that we would find
that increased training in mindfulness
practices enhance enhances people's
inside problem-solving ability and
there's increasing experimental evidence
confirming that like mindfulness
training enhances inside policy okay so
it's a post diction now but it was a
prediction then okay so one of the
topics would we'll move on to consider
is a connection between mindfulness and
insight something you should know is I
started teaching about this within 97
and taking a look at not people from the
Buddhist world but from a psychologists
he started doing work on mindfulness
independently Allen Langer in the 1980s
I believe that I was the first person to
academically teach about my friends
and it was actually because of this
funny prediction coming out of this time
so again this experiment I have a lot of
respect for even though I sort of
disagree with their final theoretical
cut because they're doing really good
science it's really theoretically fine
grained in a way that makes several
important predictions yes um if insight
is like linked to like um some measures
of like fluid intelligence
your mom could meditation like
theoretically mechanically measures of
toe to toe so there are seems to I mean
first of all those difficulties are
about distinguishing between
sort of the rational enhancement of your
abilities and their natural capacity but
there is indication that extended
mindfulness practice does alter
attentional abilities and there seems to
be some indication is alters working
memory and those things do both seem to
be highly correlated with measures of
fluid intelligence it's be careful about
this stuff because the language we have
around intelligence and distinguishing
it from rationality needs to be treated
a little bit more rigorously and
carefully within psychology okay yeah
like so I would I would prefer saying
this and for something you jumping 71
you don't like arguments for it
I was preferred to say that mindfulness
increases it makes your attentional
processes more rational rather than
saying makes them more intelligent
now if you have problem that because you
think that rational need was logical
that's a problem we should discuss
there's very good reason for not saying
that rational equals logical and
restoration objection 371 some like
intelligence would be more like
something like hardware I think the best
way to think about intelligence is
something is directly relevant to this
course
I think Stanovich is argument that
intelligence is the brain's capacity for
dealing with computational limitations
but it's basic ability to deal with
combinatorial explosion is what you're
measuring in intelligence that's not the
same thing as measuring the brain's
ability to optimally achieve its goals
which is what I think rationality is
okay yep
yeah I think that I mean I'll do
anything there's a large mallet and
concurring argument I think that
rationality is when intelligence uses
psycho technologies to alter how we best
use our tolerance
now we're getting into something what a
lot and so we're going to stop doing
that but it's tantalizingly hope this
forever
so this is we talk a lot about
rationality and wisdom increase 71 okay
now I did see why those might be
relevant to the site myself we're
talking about here now the questions
several rise naturally about these kind
of videos with Kelly analogy okay but
that's all right so we've got a couple
things to look forward to from Kaplan
and timing right
what are the things the most directly is
just shifting and also he is concerned
with what cognitive processing is going
on there and my concern my multi concern
the additive her concern is that these
two line I think that has a connection
to is a stall t nature of the notice and
very serious tip that shifting issue
though and then this other issue about
the connections between sighted - okay
what we're think about that - impressed
and to prefigure oversight I think
there's a lot of really crappy research
going on under the rubric of mindfulness
research some of you might have taken
471 evening last year where we took a
critical examination at the mindfulness
concept in psychology a lot of the
experiments are very poorly designed a
lot of the periodical debate is with a
very shoddy option and the construct is
often demolished
that being said I think the best
research on mindfulness is actually
taking place within Congress psychology
in connections between mindfulness
inside my sentence of regulation rather
than within clinical psychology where it
is perfectly normally being said there
you go just to give you some connections
again between this course and what's
going on in the mindfulness research I
think it's going to be more Molly case
by the way as no scientific or more
involved as it is in investigating
mindfulness alright so what are the
issues that were sort of floating around
in Catherine Simon in it was this issue
of you know noticing invariance picking
up information from the past and this
has been this has been part of the
debate from the beginning right and the
issues earlier and we've been sort of
talking about it sort of vaguely about
you know that the gestalt tests were
responding to or Megan others who were
asserting that learning and
problem-solving which is merely
extending or repeating the past into the
present and the gestalt is contrasted
with how sometimes the passes actually
work forts or blinds you from solving a
problem that's how we gotten to know
some fixation things like that and so
one sudden that happened was around the
same time the 80s and it might be so we
keep sort of moving in and out of this
point people were trying to investigate
more carefully the issue of transfer and
problem-solving and what I want to show
you is that very quickly converge with
the work on insight problems over and
then then how that promote another sort
of I guess it's fair to say
philosophical reflection and critique by
Weisberg
first so that the best place to start is
a classic experiment that was only to
provoke the law of work more dramatic
tale to the inside part solving some of
you probably know it
so these famous is going up by David
polio and 1980 assembly Oh to land the
arguments of a comet or explosion in a
chess game whatever that he also has as
I've mentioned before that that is the
most biking name I've ever heard in
psychology now what was impressive about
this experiment was how counterintuitive
the result was it's a really good
heuristic in your scientific practice to
pay more attention to encounter
intuitive results rather than simply
intuitive results it's counterintuitive
and results often mean that we have
structured the experiment such so that
it is confirms of about theoretical
Odyssey etc etc and that's really
important
so the heuristic is on an algorithm but
it's generally a good idea to give more
weight to counterintuitive results and
simply confirm insult now how would
counterintuitive well it has to do where
what seems like a pretty obvious and
what should be a very powerful
pedagogical type of intervention so what
they did if they're going to use a
problem is that to have experiment it
should very familiar with the doctor
radiation problem ever the vector
radiation problem
of experiment the participants were
given a story to read they were given a
story to read and so it's very easy
right for this circuit here's a fortress
and somebody once explained to me a
fortress it means it's or loyal to the
fourth
they often wondered what the difference
between a fort and a door dress
apparently this sort of loyal backing is
a fortress and you just put up sort of
anything to work so your kids can't make
a fortress blanket and cardboard boxes
become big report all right so here's
the fortress and there's a general who
wants to attack the fortress the problem
is and you can only access it to I tend
to call these cause of AIDS or they were
supposed to be certain you can only get
to reply Road we could think about it is
that they're cadres okay so you can only
get to the fortress of all the causeways
and the problem is there's a garrison
here and these guys are like the three
other Spartans like they will just
defend and defendant defect okay so the
probably general basis is like you
marched on any one cause letting the
garrison come little clouds and spend
that causeway to the death and hold you
up long enough that you will your army
will go out of supply and you will have
to repeat by the way that's one of the
most important things to notice
patience I find to make the other guy
like go home supply because morale and
effectiveness drop really rapidly when
people are hungry
just in case chef in charge of a large
army okay so what did the general do the
general defiance is army up into four
forces that then converge at the near
point and you being what will happen is
the garrison right will come out and
walk one of the four that means
three-quarters of his army will get into
the city you know within an uncontested
fashion so the idea here is the solution
to the problem involves breaking up into
multiple forces that converge on the
point where they're needed at the
requisite amount which of course is
strongly analogous to what you have to
do in the Ganga radiation problem okay
so you show people this you make sure
they understand what it is right and
then you have an intervening distractor
task right and they give them the doctor
radiation problem now most people right
so if we have a long history for people
to do in some radiation problems
encountered and so we know sort of what
the spontaneous solution rate is on
average lived on the radiation top and
what they were expecting was the
spontaneous solution rate in this
version epinephrine radiation problem
should be much higher than the
historical norm we should show evidence
of significant facilitation from this to
this what they found is exactly the
opposite there was very little
spontaneous range
are very little evidence at all that
having seen this is a tall facility for
people solving the doctor radiation
problem and you see why that's so
counterintuitive it like when I
presented to you on the board it seems
obvious right and people borrow but
that's not what happened now this is a
variation I will talk about the
variation a little bit I mean the
presumably sort of explicitly tell
people to go back and try to use the
first problem that will increase the
spontaneous solution right right but
still what's going on here this was so
counterintuitive it was also very
depressing because this was in 1980 and
then at the time the continent and
diverse ate evidence that a whole bunch
of people were running all those
experiments we'll talk about bunch of
them in the second half of this course
of the waste and selection task and all
a bunch of experiments where people's
reasoning is really shoddy really crappy
people seem to not reason well at all
and we will talk about that when we do
the waiting selection up by the end of
the course you will be sick with the way
since watching that's the one we're
going to zero in on that there's a lot
of them evidence we talk about more of
these increases that we want evidence
for belief for severance evidence for
evidence receive a diagnostician e
evidence that people will not look for
readily available information all this
and then they had this and was very
depressing and there was a lot of people
use ditch and others were writing papers
basically say look we're getting
increasing evidence that human needs are
not last long
really not rational
the number of people they're irrational
is very limited minority statistically
the lobby so we'll talk about this
resemble again we get into the failure
rate for the recent selection task is on
average 90% the people taking the test
or you guys cream of the crop of our
society yes what is the only selection
you can have the way that would some
narrative spin on this now there's going
to be going to look at all responses to
the weights and selection task at the
law I'm talking about is how it was
being appraised at any age this
experiment and all of that stuff the
waste and selection task and the beliefs
for severance or the supervisor
electricity and all that stuff the
leading people to the conclusion that
the vast majority of even highly
intelligent highly educated people
operated consistently irrational and
that was really it was really sad
because they were then arguing that you
know most of our democratic ideals and
our moral principles are based on the
presumption of rationality there is
serious discussion about whether or not
democracy is what we want this
undergraduate students in compounds with
people trying to give none of the smelly
agrees in the way that they was
reasoning is time to give what they can
deal with the correct answer based on
like the full kind of environment people
resonate but someone tells you a puzzle
for fun Yury very differently about it
than you would more for life setting so
what you do is you test it in settings
where people are given very clear
explicit encouragement like so if
they've been taught their portal homo
logic and existed and that doesn't seem
to improve their ability on these tasks
and things like that undergraduate and
if you'd like to test at mystical moment
it's an experiment isn't that already
viable
no but that's the problem when again
with all experiments so in all
experiments you're doing about whether
or not people are going to try to please
you or displease you so you do all kinds
of things to try and make sure that they
don't understand what the actual goal of
the experiment is the gold experiment is
people to be thinking creatively and
you're in kind of think creatively or
sustained like outside you can even
reward people you can even say be as
careful as logical as you can we'll pay
you more give them world and that
doesn't seem to change what would be the
way to counteract that I've done the
opposite like I've gone out of the
street into the recent selection tell
some people and people on the street
doing the course that was mine is like a
wonderful sometimes in your
undergraduate competitive clauses are
necessary stuff that you think
intuitively the right answer so
Christina and I have done that a couple
other kappablues and get people to do
the waste collection cos annihilation
they don't do that they to worse the
problems you can't get that published
because it's just it's an uncontrolled
experiment but yes so can i did that
when we were in graduate school and it's
like enough people wondering about now
there's a deeper point though then this
is by okay I don't wanna get into too
much because I'll talk about in
particular under and other people who
think that in fact those getting's
people are performing in a way that
actually makes sense
and when you take that into the lab
pamphlet looks like an error wouldn't be
an error if you played another natural
circuit had something to do is to poor
shot it with the idea that the lab
problems are often very well time and
real-world problems are very guess what
ill define and strategies that are
people are using the real world probably
good for that but not good for in the
lab you're talk about courteous your
answer it will take a look so I think
Chloe that's the best formulation of
your criticism then we'll take a look at
that okay so I think there's something
to it for reasons I don't understand he
really likes me he sends me all this
publication for free he's just kind of
doing it I don't know warming I just get
mail from curvy roads or either these
are all the things that publish a free
copies never build them maybe have
sparse pages or two lectures on your
material here's look at gas and
everything I've done I mean do you want
to be dirty things maybe but I don't
specifically mentioned mentioned
it's hard to remember your papers are
like your children you can't remember
everything okay all right
so and then so prior to what that part
of the history of is experimental for
all rationality debate which we talk a
lot about in 371 we'll talk a little bit
about that when we talk about reasoning
studies the study of inference in
response but right
I want to go there's another line of
history that came out of this very
foreshadowed in there we go which is
that this then became a branch
specifically connected to insight that
then converge with the other experiments
going on of the ages of the nineties
so there was some initial work about
some relays work by Weisberg again the
canal in Philips in 78 about the
Candlebox problem and when they didn't
facilitate solution I'm not going to go
into that it's just that that's
happening around the same time is very
similar just take it that people really
found this because of stuff that had
just happened before than this
experiment people really found this like
wow this is really needs explanation
that this was very counterintuitive now
what I think gave herself a sushi wait I
believe it was involved in some of the
initial response one of the most
important with the work by Walker ramen
and getting nineteen years and what they
did is they went back to they what they
argued is a theoretical conceptual
change was needed and that's of course
again that is the proper response for
when you get a powerful counterintuitive
results because your conceptual
theoretical formulation of your
experiment was in some sense wrong
something like there's a conceptually
formulation that is needed so they did
that and they did something they went to
a very good source when you whenever you
want to go back and sort of rethink you
consider foundations they went back to
William James Alec William James Chris
from Iowa as well as a psychologist I'm
a hobby designed it and I think of
William James as the one of the first
cognitive scientists as he was both very
important psychologists and a very
important boss so he's a good place to
go back to if you want to reflect on
your cycle
logical constructs and realizing because
you have the philosophical training in
order to before the doing that now the
problem with doing that though is you
have to take into account the his
language is the language of the 19th
century which is incredibly flowery
language it's like oh my gosh this game
is very promise to me I don't have any
interest its considered probably one of
the best documentaries ever made as Ken
Burns the Civil War anything sooner the
thing is you don't realize is that every
documentary since then uses the format
invented by Ken Burns in the Civil War
so all the documentaries you see Lars of
use his title not influential instead
what was impressive about me one of the
things he was doing is that this was an
innovation is he had actors with
dedicated voices like they would
dedicate an object to a particular
person for the past meaning letters from
the soldier esteemed American Civil War
I couldn't believe the caliber of the
letters that these private were writing
the language was complex and
sophisticated and move extremely
polythene is I couldn't write on I have
four degrees and I went to the
University or 17 years know whether
you're not these guys probably wanted
you know public school in Tennessee and
he's writing it was very humbling we
have to take that into account
language is a part of what's going on
there the land is very overflowing to
anyways
James made distinction between sagacity
and learning
[Applause]
okay now technically in terms of the
syntax sagacity is the property that
makes one a stage where being a sage is
to be an extremely wise unlikely
individual so chances are you never met
anybody with big acity and therefore it
would be a fairly fairly useless of
psychological constructors that go but
if you go in what James was talking
about is he talking about the skills of
appropriate conceptualization is he
means he's referring to the functions
people acting the people to the
functions that people use right he's
talking right so what what we would now
call in terms of what the cognitive
operations are
in that sense he's talking about a
procedural thing this is in contrast we
hope learning learning is the possession
of development knowledge like the
justified true belief and declarative
conceptual content to Succoth it's the
content so to use I think a little bit
more accurate is talking about a
cognitive procedure versus cognitive
propositions cognitively held
proposition as opposed to script on the
pages okay
now why make that distinction well let's
go back to the two things that we use
and you can all your experiments so you
have the general attacking the fortress
and you have the doctor radiation
problem now in terms of their
propositional content they are very
similar they're very similar there's a
strong analogy between the propositional
content of the two problems but
procedurally they're very different in
the first one
your primary cognitive operation is to
comprehend an existing solution that's
what you have to do get to comprehend
the story of the existing solution in
the second what you do is have to solve
a problem so although they are
propositional even if you'll allow me to
use that as a term for a whole set of
phenomena that we're talking about in an
integrated fashion although the two
problems are propositioning very similar
they are procedurally very different yes
because you can use the same
propositions to describe what you have
to do divide up your forces into smaller
forces that converge at the point where
they're needed now the thing about that
we've already known that you know came
to people think outside the box doesn't
work
so what Lockhart Ito pritam is named
right ballpark yes or no levels of
processing theory memory I got the work
of Bob Walker born here when I talked to
this way back in my teens model okay so
um what a reason is well maybe what
what's going on and think about how this
is relevant to what dominoes he said
about Castleman admire what we said
about lyra precedent in islamabad for
now but what's going on what's needed
for transfer to occur it's much more
procedural similarity propositional
similarity
now this is going to turn out to have
been a very difficult I mean I don't
think you realize that initially at the
time to visit the visit particularly
honest and waiting for Bob Walker to do
because this is going to line up the
transfer appropriate processing which
was the theory of memory transfer that
actually brought down history of levels
of processing so good on it into I
believe my other book if the universe
and I just hang on in a link more sense
in a few minutes okay so the idea is
what's going on here right might not be
propositional similarity what procedural
similarity now is that the chase right
how do we catch that and then he for
with a link this the idea that it's a
problem solving involves much more sort
of procedural processing than
propositional processing so you put the
two together and an experiment around
the problem they called the multiple
marriage
the multiple marriage problem is
designed to break really trying to make
sure that the issue is not any kind of
lack of relevant knowledge so let's
let's first of all take a look at the
problem and we'll talk about it they
will talk about the will take a look at
the problem I'll just briefly make sure
you understand it it will didn't bring
will come back at how it was using all
this experience okay okay so this is
literally from experiment a man who
lived in a small town very 20 different
women of the same town all they're still
living and you never divorce any of them
yes you broke no law can you explain it
so things you might think oh this this
is in Utah that's irrelevant by the way
to be will in Utah right alien abduction
the term trouble I not allowed answers
really yeah why should you on this and
why did you go home because it seems to
be like oh okay now I hope that this is
not a revelation to any of you it's not
like you mean clergymen can marry people
like you knew that right that's not like
Oh in fact it's kind of a prototypical
thing we associated nowadays with clergy
member 30 people what was actually going
on right is you have to shift from two
different meanings of bearing right you
have to shift from dominant and
therefore initially salient interpret
meaning to a legitimate but stopped
dominant and therefore not initially
sanlian meaning so what you have to do
is shift your attention and we can
figure what is salient to you those are
the cognitive operations that involved
in the multiple parrots problem
now that that's pretty cool because it's
such a simple process on the base right
and because people you get is not like
the $9.00 is a real big change that
people won't solve it which is it's
problematic given out of time almost
everybody solved the multiple very
problem like within an experimental
conference okay so these are all good
design features so we'll take we'll come
back at 2:45 and we'll talk about right
how they use the multiple marriage
problem to make use of this the states
in which we serve updated and not have
this overblown language to respond to
what happens in the sample radiation
okay
so the idea that the multiple marriage
problem places sort of quite a demand on
years to Cassidy to use James turn but
very little command on your on your
knowledge so that means it's fairly face
to the sitting that failure to solve
such a problem is not to a lack of
knowledge and so what luck art and did
was to try and set up a different
initial task before being driven into
the integral so the structure of
experiment and such is going to be the
thing get against people some product is
going to be distractor and then you're
going to give the inside body but
instead of it because Association
problem it is going to be the multiple
marriage problem but this is going to be
different this time
so this page dr. second here and getting
the multiple marriage problem
here meaning we're dividing the
participants into two groups right
one group is getting the leading to a
bunch of sentences sentences part of the
sentence is the target said all the
other challenges in sentences are just
there to mask what the servant attack
the target sentence is like this it made
the clergyman happy to marry several
people each week so people would
literally read the sentence they made
the clergyman happy to marry several
people each week okay so they call that
declarative
and then in contrast they had what they
called the puzzle form and this is done
this is done on really basic to the
computers of the time are not powerful
machines I get it in this world
regulator
okay and we this is what the Paulo forum
look like again this would be a mint I
missed a bunch of other sentences right
so the public forum was the merry sort
of demand married several people each
week because it made him happy then
there is a pause Oz pause and then a few
seconds later the word clergyman appears
on the screen okay the man married
several people each week because it made
him happy follows a few seconds later by
the word clergyman okay before I go on
to the results right okay so and then
what you do is you have both groups
given this unexpectedly and you're
looking to see this facilitation and one
of the other before we talked about that
a lot of points up the head because it's
going to go back to when I talk about
rollover shattering note that both of
these are verbal
both of these are verbal language itself
is is irrelevant factor both of these
are verbal why do I say that because
what happened was people who have this
showed no facilitation for that people
who have that shows significant
facilitation for that even though the
content is almost exactly the same and
presumably you already possess the
content as you know of course even being
ocean airing people this facilitate this
is different now
there's two important things here that
tends to provide evidence we're going to
see how this can complicated multiple
other experiments so not just a simple
experiment this tends to again I have an
instan virgin evidence that we're
already seeing that insight is right
perhaps more procedural than
propositional in nature and also as I
said I mean that language per se is not
the issue
it is the kind of processing that is
being triggered by the language that is
held look if you think of burbled
overshadowing is what drives or impairs
insight you're in a lot of trouble here
because we are both verbal and one
clearly facilitates insight yes why does
the second one you trigger procedure
because what's the difference between
the first one in the second one oh but
this one what's your task what's the
procedure with the cognitive operation
you have to comprehend an existing story
what you have to do is lack the hack
should do the cognitive operation of
shifting from the dominant to the
sub-dominant meaning so the idea here is
both of these are right
sexually or proposition we similar but
this one is procedurally similar than
this one isn't because in both disease
is doing the same cognitive operation
that answer your question so I should
have made that sorry intelligence issues
on that point first a little bit
confusing to me you're going through yet
so that's the key thing but they say as
if I'm putting it's just clear evidence
that there's something wrong with the
notion of brutal overshadowing because
it is not the use of language per se the
key issue I mean I have other things to
this I'm just asking you to note that
this is not something that walks out
laminin you are talking about think how
good it does the shoulder experiment is
four years down the road five years on
the road I'm going to show you other
instances where it is clear to the case
that language use per se is not the
issue
mmm
all right
so that was really interesting and then
got that never go on to talk about
memory or indexing and other things like
that we're going to come back to that
when we talk about ideas on incubation
so I'm going to put that aside for now
instead what I want to do is follow up
on from what one thing that is
relatively rare in psychology compared
to how much we talk about how important
it is which is replication
okay so I have been out same year 1988
right people were asked to rate the
truth of statements presented in
probably a more flat form so they had to
read through a bunch of statements to
represent it in problem for more fat
form and people had to evaluate whether
or not percentages which were false so
the problem for me is you can vary
several people each week if you are a
minister the delay is just literally one
clause away but you have to know what oh
right the platform is a minister marries
several people each week
people read all these unders distractor
task and then they were unexpectedly
given the multiple marriage problem and
as you may have already given it away
because it sent us replication what they
found was right that people who are
given the bubble forms of dislocation of
a multiple Derek's problem and people
who are show the fact form is not now
how did this relevant to that issue
around Bob Walker honesty or at least
integrity is so now a digression because
we haven't talked about transfer within
memory if it's a Lockhart great and
Lockhart proposed expose filling your
textbooks and probably still thought
haven't even heard of levels of
processing remember okay how was
uninterested sorry I don't need to be
creepy or anything how does it talk to
you like was it taught like this is how
memory works
how is levels of processing talk a lot
of you put up your hand some of you have
somebody I thought an answer to it yes
for an event there are other
good so that's all done now that's good
because that's what I stated quite a
while to sort of sat there so because so
levels of processing was the idea that
the more deeply or more semantically and
whether or not those are the same is
part of the theoretical issue over the
pathetic side but the more people you
process something the more likely you
are to remember it independent of your
intention to remember it was a lot of
evidence that that depth of processing
was predicted with how well you remember
Bob Walker was one of the advocates of
one of the creators of that theory and
that the depth and some of the original
experiments of levels and processing
were designed by Bob Walker and now as
was mentioned I Soviet Union Army yeah
you know how I'm getting it wrong I
don't want it you know right as well Oh
Marlina done i have death in one year so
that means it could skew how I'm hearing
things from people all right I'm sorry
apologize what is she indicated what
happened is the theory got overturned or
be significantly challenged by what in
Opera which has been more long-standing
which is the idea of transfer
appropriate processing acquisition
levels of process
the levels of processing was the depth
of the processing always predicts better
memory transfer appropriate processing
as for appropriate propagation the idea
that like how you process include visit
the more the manner of processing in the
learning context is similar to the
manner of processing and the testing
context the more likely you will
remember the material and that has
important studies that's good you should
study in a way that is and this is the
my knowledge as procedurally similar to
how they're going to be tested so for
example how do they be tested in this
precept indeed then be asked to provide
short advances you know I just practice
the material try to generate as many
short answers questions for yourself as
you can and practice writing answers to
them that is the best way to ignore the
material because you're studying in a
way it's very procedurally similar to
how you will have to produce your
answers
now part of the problem plates in your
brain is and part of the issue is and
part of the issue around is the research
professor appropriate processes are very
robust right and this has to do with the
some of you know it talked about this in
other courses that memory is not largely
about storing information and
reproducing it activity memory it is
about trying to set this up so that you
can adaptively anticipate the teacher
memory is reconstructive rather than
reproductive in you memory is not
primarily about accurate reporting on
the past it's about intelligent
prediction of the future most of your
most of your confident mountain is
interpersonal memory but many probably
know that you get some of the memory
closet like confident eyewitness
testimony is long about forty nine
percent of the time things like that
because memory is not so part of the
analytical part of the thing to notice
the difference between a lab or an
academic setting we know what you can
say to me
so you just very sharply tailor the
process in here to match with something
but you've read faces a much more
difficult problem
how should I process it now so that
it'll be relevant to the teacher because
it's not quite sure what that's going to
be how is all of this relevant because
as this was happening this was happening
in the inside literature people were
realizing oh what's going on right is
something like insight problems have to
be processed in a certain way and so the
information has to be presented in a
transfer
the Atlantic so the notion of procedural
similarity that we're seeing going on in
insight right
it's convergent with the growing
evidence for transfer appropriate
processing within memory in general
so not only is this work with Lockhart
and I remember from back of another
human being is given McGarry more on
occasion what I'm pointing out is not
only this work specifically on insight
convergent with Metcalfe's work actual
indulgences were that major senate and
CC's work about the procedural nature of
insight so it's already converging that
way it's also convergent with
independent work about the nature of
memory function now I think this is a
better way of talking about what Bert
hymen was trying to talk about is when
he's trying to talk about transfer and
you had to get sort of I don't think he
was quite right about many time without
the right structural organization of the
right fit he was struggling I think what
he's private part about it is that you
want procedural similarity within
transfer appropriate processing in order
to facilitate insight on personal
affairs you could have criticized him
about that in what sense because it's
anachronistic because none of this was
known at the front so he doesn't have an
independent established here at
construct sanity so we do okay now more
replication
yeah Greg from 1991
they did another experiment except this
time they get the content completely
constantly it not just the content
between the two participant hoops at all
content was held constant what was
changed was just the former processor
all right
and the problem is beyond the multiple
marriage problem which was also
important in today's a bunch of
different problems so in it participants
read training stories that were good
where analogous to target problems that
they were going to receive
there was two different orientations in
memory oriented processing participants
were asked to study the story so they
could remember it
and given that participants are almost
always students this is a very
ecologically valid thing to do at work
certainly valid things research another
problem oriented processors when they
were asked to try and explain why each
solution in the story was correct and
try to explain quite solution in the
story correct both groups were then
given correct explanations for the
solutions in the story okay so you read
this story about people solving the
problem either read it to remember it or
you read it and to explain it common
solution works both groups are then
given the correct explanation to placate
that both groups know why the story was
correct okay so instead of different so
the only difference between the two
groups is how they initially process the
information
Douglas Lee the story and remember other
group in destroyed exploding live works
both groups here's why work is why it
works okay
now then you give people unexpectedly
problems to solve and well what do you
predict yes facilitation much more
facilitation than people in this if you
then switch the task right and say tell
me more details from more content from
the original story these people do
better now
just to try to try and make a connection
for you you see why are you testing you
to give explanation of things because
getting you to remember stuff and
presenting it in slides and dislodges
the black work is it's more public with
formal presentations some of you might
want there's no give me multiplied with
all the answers why that's detrimental
to you being a good problem solver to be
presented this way with a heavy emphasis
on argumentation and explanation I
should periodically presenting with
puzzles and questions why is it going
this way what's or the debates
challenges that's right so you should
think about this in terms of you know
how you're studying how you're
processing information what do you want
from your education and your study you
want to be a better problem solver in
the future or do you want to remember
this material they're not completely
opposition which one you want to add
this are slow I recommend the first
rather than a second because a lot of
this material is going to be obsolete
and forgettable in ten years
okay so another like growing sort of
convergent argument of what kind of
thing is going on right inside
problem-solving
so then this all came together in
another counterintuitive experiment the
counter include experimenters and again
something we should pay more attention
is this going okay for you guys the
arguments step by staff experiment and
then this will be into because we're not
talking about the connections between
memory and inside even though we've seen
that the standard memory search is not
what's going on in the inside it's going
to lead to the issue that's very
prevalent in the media a very popular
and culture of using incubation to
improve your insect leave the problem
alone and sleep on it and your genius on
contrast will come up with an amazing
answer which will hit you like a shaft
of light accompanied by choirs of angels
in the morning now here's the startling
thing most of the evidence shows that
innovation at least the standard
romantic version of it does not exist
even though it's very popularly
portrayed in the media it doesn't exist
almost all of the claims of the
romantics have to not be welcomed
but the point do that is to this
counterintuitive thing about memory and
problem solving
so get and McGary thing getting yes
let's work like it really responds that
we should work we one thing us should be
located now this is going to take a
little bit of reasoning in your hand
because it's counterintuitive you're
going to experience that it's
counterintuitive okay let's just do it
try to do it at the level of intuition
if you get it clear before we go back to
the guards'll design okay so you're
trying to solve a problem that means
right which means you're currently not
solving it that okay that's what it is
to happen and like you oh how do I do
the nine dots or or okay now see what
this carefully but in terms of content
but in terms of procedural similarity
what kind of problems are most in your
memory was procedurally similar to this
one
other problems that you've been passed
on that you have wrought they hit an
impasse on so other in past problems are
more procedurally similar
well present that like it could be it
could be this is Rita which right issues
like cognitive flexibility that's a
popular one more I hope one was the
vehicle going on
then we clinched the area of the main
general aspects of them and agree to is
there the main specific aspects of by
the way that's a really good topic that
I don't want sixty versions of this for
and as the audience are problem solving
the degree to which we can talk about
the main general aspects of insight
versus the main specific okay therefore
they're talking about it in this
experiment in a domain general way
whether or not this experiment licenses
main conclusion for the main generality
that's another issue okay so what give
you McGarry argue is but what would
actually facilitate you solving this
problem is to have a history of failures
it's done kind of intuitive it's like
but those are failures why would I pay
attention to my pocket failures and how
could they possibly help me now what I
should do is think of my past successes
we don't like to look back at our past
others but think about it when I have
all of these failures
what can I apply to them and notice of
their interest
the idea is apply to notice
adventurously and that's what you
actually need in order to facilitate
solving a problem so this is the very
certain contour to it because what we
tend to do is we tend to look back at
our previous call solutions right the
difficulty with that is that they tend
to be similar to the wrong plate that
can be similar in being solutions and
not similarity and giving us a basis for
how to solve from the unsolved problem
so very counterintuitive proposal so how
does they view this how would they
induce failures in people and then how
do they test it well what they did would
they do variations on a mutilated
chessboard remember I said that you can
in terms of statistics you can vary how
difficult the problem is by varying how
salient you make the parity cube
and so they did it analogous problems
like that immediately analysis and what
they did was they gave people a bunch of
problems that were difficult that were
not solvable they force people well
mostly because it statistically some
people are not going to are not going to
be forced but they created a lot of
failures what they call source solution
builders and what they found is if I
give you more source solution failures
are more likely to solve the mutilating
chessboard that means you have fewer
source solution failures because if you
have more you can apply the newest
degree of variance heuristic pattern
that if you have fewer so more source
solution failures to survey the insight
the spontaneous the insight for solving
the mutilated chessboard the next comes
really counterintuitive right it's like
the hole which I mean all of my
successes should matter but it's better
it's gone in and out it's kind of now on
like a developmental psychology right so
Piaget was the first person to wonder it
whether or not the errors on
intelligence tests or systematic or not
some of you taking we probably an out
point the error the systematicity of the
errors want the points two important
constraints on top mission the same idea
here is if there's systematicity in the
errors if you have more source solution
errors then the notice invariance
heuristic can operate and that
facilitates insight now this is the kind
of a weird possible consequence which is
something that is often been very
difficult to explain and so take what
I'm saying with a grain of salt
norman greenness of several things are
salt along the slope okay but it might
be that this is part of the connection
in
many conditions cross-culturally which
comes up around this and we're striking
like they say we're starting to really
sit on the boundary between incest on
solving your members to go back to gift
and walk are reviewing some of their own
work in the work of others in 95 90 95
they talk about right
how insight relates to automaticity this
is welcome them insight is quote the
best sense of having escaped the tyranny
of automaticity which is different
beautiful sentence and that i would like
to have that all my himself john who he
escaped the tyranny of modernity tree
this was yet a mark in 1995 decision
Michele this isn't a experiment
this is them writing a review article
about all the inside stuff including
their own early over to the 80s in 1995
in 1995 so they're summarizing a lot of
this work they're all work in other
works and that insight seems to involve
having this ape the tyranny of
automaticity
I want you to remember this notion of
automaticity for two important reasons
automaticity is a way of procedurally
talking about what a constraint it's
opposed to proposition lee in terms of a
rule in fact that I just note it down
this will make the connection backward
is a connection between automaticity and
a procedural understanding of what a
constraint is rather than a proposition
will understand secondly we'll come back
to this as well but I try to Porsche out
of these connections so you can regale
it in the back later a lot of us going
on recently will work as tang and others
and mindfulness is that mindfulness but
this goes back to an old proposal by
document that mindfulness training is
basically training in the automatisation
the organization coefficient - yes so
automaticity is procedural but isn't
procedural how you get around and
gentlemen sure so so automaticity in
health Alton no no no no automaticity
the fact that insight is procedural and
automaticity is insight sort it is also
procedural just means that they both
belong to the class of things that are
procedural in nature so what law heart
is saying is that insight as something
that is procedural that helps you to
counteract the procedural constraints of
automaticity we're going to need this
when we talked about both mindfulness as
via monetization and when we talked
about what is meant by constraint
relaxation constraint relaxation a
positive way understanding with kind of
foreshadow is a positive way of
understanding what constraint relaxation
is is to understand it at the D
organization of your process alright now
I have been justified in you exclaims
I'm just foreshadowing this connection
there okay there's a connection made
between like authenticity and insight by
five eight one heart that was going to
be prescient about what we're going to
talk about later in mindfulness and when
we talk about our constraint relaxation
and in said problem solving the world is
not work and others
okay so this idea now of facilitating
transfer is now crucial and now we're
going to take another line of evidence
we're going to take a look at the
independent work done on incubation
because that seems to be a memory
facilitation of transfer for reporting
insight thing incubation is like
foreshadow what I try to do is show you
that in that many different lines of
theorizing and experimental evidence are
all converging on this idea about what
kind of processing insight is because
what I'm trying to do is do what the
result is and not done very well which
is try to build up a base of constructs
that are independently established that
will allow us to come up with an
alternative explanation for insight that
I think transcends both the gestalt this
and the computational framework well
we're at work we're only going up with
all right so incue bation so just again
in the popular notion this is like sleep
on it or stop thinking about it
and you know there's that little
analytic pathology runners that your
unconscious will work on the problem and
solve it and do things and their stories
to be there about people in dreams
having important insights to solve
problems that they couldn't solve one of
the topics I don't want safety papers on
this that people write on is the
connection to clean cleaning and it's
like goods are especially re-entering
because non REM dreams tend to be really
worked or like you're eating soup right
what are you doing I was leaving soup
rem-3
I was writing a purple dragon in the
table in a different dream so cool
okay so there's connections between that
results have been some recent research
on connections between lucid dreaming
and insight all of this is interesting
because does like credence to certain
traditional claims about certain kinds
of induced altered states of
consciousness as particularly
traditions being the kind of thing
different cancer inside capacity through
your cognitive flexibility and openness
and now these are coming to show that
probably true at least good evidence for
it alright so incubation sits within
that whole sort of idea and he goes back
to a book from 1926 right it's called I
can't remember how we as you go back
further in time to the title see for the
ideas this is the pedal move up by
wallets wal L is Wallace this is what if
this whole idea was introduced the title
of the book is the art of thought the
fact through way mental is how to
improve your problem solving and he
argue that there were four phases in
innovative problem solving and
creativity and we'll talk about the fact
that those are often overlapping with
insight problem solving here are the
four phases mental preparation is where
you're working on the problem and you
don't solve it you keep working on the
problem and keep working on it and it's
unsuccessful and then incubation putting
the problem aside and working on other
things and I like the next but the name
of the next illumination illumination
but blasted ends like unexpectedly
occurring during the incubation phase
illuminated sounds delicious right
illumination it's like Oh
I fumbled one and then the last state is
verification working of the veto
resolution and or determining your
dissolution attempt actually applause
okay so that's what is different with it
this is an old old idea and keeps
getting product out as the solution to
making me better better problem-solver
yes
1946 during the Roaring Twenties seem to
be true when you forget we stopped
anyone for a second and eventually what
rain will retreat back back what you
just said was great
we're going to come back to this right
so whatever saying is maybe it's not a
condition or the unconsciously it's
magical indiscreet workers may be what
it is right is that you forget certain
things that when you come back that just
means you bleep on delay to the problem
to selectively forgetting hypothesis I'm
going to take a look at this what do you
can do just a poor shadow we're going to
do this more vigorously by looking at
the experiment to detail but this is an
answer to Emma what are the things you
could do is incubations right that time
away should matter if what matters is
just a restructuring of attention then
very brief wait as read interventions
that cause you to restructure would be
better than lots of time away and
protected that's actually tastes so good
idea we'll come back to it okay
okay now there's sort of three views so
what sort of we're going to take a look
at the works by seaport and out in
secret at 1995 on the connections
between insight and innovation either
you are going to be to struggling to you
but they present three views as opposed
to the two and they do that because
they're doing this is interesting is
slightly manipulative rhetorically it
goes back to Aristotle that most of the
interesting but slightly manipulative
use we're all better fighters level ok
so there's three perspectives on insight
and therefore on incubation they call
the first one the business-as-usual
perspective which is already comfortable
and people who typify that of course
Weisberg evolve up and even although
they make changes Kaplan and Taemin are
trying to say it's business as usual
there's nothing importantly different
going on here the second perspective and
I don't they
this is the name they give it I don't
know how they call it the wizard Merlin
perspective so the volition the wizard
learning perspective is insight occurs
his results are absolutely spectacular
the results are produced by sort of
superhuman and strange mental powers
would operate in an unpredictable
posture this is this is Romanticism this
is you have both life powers within you
with only you could top them do you
realize you only use 10% of your brain
if you could just use all of it you
would be a guard
telekinetically flying through a tunnel
topic heaven
the fact is you use most of your brain
most of the time for most of the tasks
the one time for image using a hundred
percent of your brain in a completely
integrated fashion is during an
epileptic seizure so you know limitless
and all that stuff is really kind of
trapped in fact higher IQs are predicted
of lower cortical activation not more
let interlac we still let romanticism
for reasons that are obscure to me okay
so some people will talk about that a
person is often trotted out as an
example of this is Richard Feynman
Richard Feynman had a reputation for
revealed to do this people would present
problems Department and the other sort
of drama that you would go to and get
almost pain that he would sort of up and
then he blurted out something and people
would go oh my god that he broke my god
then reformulate their game of it with
what the colors he do this and I don't
want to take anything away from my
minute I'm not sure this but after he
died they went through like his desk in
a notebook he was working on these
problems a lot no so some of the magic
industry was but he was a Madonna of the
academic world he was really good at
marketing himself and presenting himself
as having talent that he might not
actually have fishing Idol talent so so
well propellant was - presented yourself
in such a way so that people just stick
around
which is why her material is
disappearing from the common repertoire
already really rapid what I meant
right also shouldn't be totally put
aside because and he at least foresaw
the kinds of problems that were going to
require in sight and you get a lot of
more condoms so that you're something so
that we would actually get to a game
sight stage so that when he was ready he
so people asked him he was ready and he
had the inside ready to go so that's
kind of dodgy on his part but on the
other hand it doesn't mean they know
something was going on there that was
interesting so the wizard Merlin
perspective the romantic perspective or
insight is the opposite of the business
as usual so people Danelle prevent their
view which they called the prepared mind
perspective squarely between these two
extremes which lead you to believe all
of them their position is obviously the
more reasonable and therefore the most
probable they said this is strategy you
should always pay attention to it people
use it rhetorically right it goes back
to aerosol right you present the two
extremes and then you present the
position with the goal that means
between them so take their when you take
what they say with a grain of salt I
don't really know of anybody in
cognitive psychology that has the wizard
Marlin perspective is it I mean there
seems to be an illusion that perhaps the
gestalt is for sale
not queer that they really happy with
respected but they thought salted the
chimp was capable of it and salting the
chimp is certainly not a superhuman so
I'm not sure they're being I'm not sure
who actually have in the history of
psychology or wizard wrote in
perspective it seems a bit of us was the
opposite of a strong man an Iron Man or
something that's being projected that
nobody actually took alright so they're
prepared why perspective is when it's
going to come other particular pieces
the opportunity that assimilation
hypothesis the opportunistic
assimilation hypothesis which sounds
like something from an alien abduction
with it but the opportunistic
assimilation hypothesis however for all
of my criticisms of the rhetoric there
is an important theoretical innovation
that does come out in their work in
order to make that theoretical
innovation clear we have to talk about
what are the different theories of
incubation at least in 1995 the reversal
will go forward or not
assimilation hypothesis
you
okay so what deeper an alveolus day
first of all the yearling armed why does
transfer often fail why do people often
fail to exploit relevant past
information whether they fail to
transfer it into the future and how good
incubation potentially output
now interesting we're now following up
with it but we're kind of getting a
little bit more specific is cheaper to
now understand fixation as transfer
failure fixation is transferability and
we understand the causes of transfer
failure we therefore may better
understand fixation
now let's going to be really interesting
talking about different theories of
what's going on when people are in
passing and what are some of the
standard theories as I mentioned for
inflation so that the standard theories
that secret are now consider are the
first one is what's the fetus is or
what's going on in incubation but this
one is called the conscious or
hypothesis which is the floodway saying
people are live the conscious work
hypothesis says that when people are not
playing that they're not working on the
problem they are working on the problem
which is disappointing people are lying
to that that second hypothesis is called
the fatigue dissipation hypothesis all
that happens in incubation is people are
tired or sorry can't solve the problem
they get rest because they get rest we
come back and you're able to solve the
ball and home
third which is the Selective forgetting
hypothesis forget some of the
information in the problem that causes a
reformulation of the problem and this is
what brings about the insight and forth
which is the one that is most prevalent
in the self-help industry is the
subconscious that random recombination
idea that weather subconscious dodges
randomly recombines things and this is
what is actually going on in incubation
such to produce the solution
yes it's verified the idea that what's
going on your unconscious words
according to primary processes which are
largely Association or semi random in
nature can be combined a manipulator
that we might have in the sense that is
not lost
yeah I don't think it needs rather than
the way that you want years a year I
okay metaphysically REM I think they
mean that logically or rational
government so to be in close to what we
mean by non ashen or irrational
arbitrary I think that that problem is
really did because that's that's that's
what access within you so I mean
remember when Wallace write the book is
26 white is really big in America I Boyd
is like Freud is considered the mutant
of the mind
we don't think you it's forgetting
aspects of the problem and because that
causes you to restructure how you
formulate the problem and that
restructuring is what facilitates your
insight in the last one there the lab
the last one is that recombination leads
to a reformulation of the problem so
it's the difference between the fourth
and the third is the fourth is active
constructive process rather than just a
possibly act a reaction that hops
okay so zebra did not point out and this
is somebody who's done please invoked
he's going to come back again we talked
about information they dismiss work as
in 1995 right all of the attempts to
find experimental confirmation for
incubation came to this this is what it
says in 1995 a scarcity of replicable
incubation effects so although this is
why we believe the attempt to find good
experimental confirmation for intubation
has largely failed
please remember his name is Smith we're
going to take a little more reason for
members to contradict support you notice
you dismiss notes we've talked about
early software innovation pretty good a
lot of the review now let's see for the
value is they have what you have you
have this weird inconsistency to get
some results but they don't get
replicated and you have this massive
sort of popular belief in each occasion
and it you know absolutely no part of
you should say so what we have wanted
lots of popular beliefs a lot of things
right that sort of is not be true right
absolutely science is the largest amount
of positivity trouble a lot of issues
turn out alright but there's something a
little bit more when notice Smith
language it's important language and
what he's saying is importantly he said
a scarcity of what kind of results
replicable so there would be that what
you get with innovation you get sort of
what looks like confirmation here and
then when people try to replicate it
it's not there and then people get it
here and they try to replicate a lot
here now again one response to that is
well this is the same thing with psychic
phenomena we can never get drop the
patient going and what were generally
sort of been coming to the conclusion
again against popular belief is it
probably isn't anything quite expected
right so but keeping it out there's
another alternative you can say with
you're getting inconsistent empirical
results it can sometimes need it
sometimes did evidence that your
theoretical construct is model of the
Jews or it's missing an important
component this is the option that secret
and out I helped pursue they argue they
think incubated and then they're going
to have experimental results back up the
corner they argue that incubation is
producing very inconsistent results
precisely because it is regions
understood again the misunderstanding
that people of all things of either said
it doesn't exist are not the business as
usual or they think it's a wizard Merlin
I guess the wizard Merlin here is ploy
that's a weird for you thing to say
those words million things a son did
wise old man hurry go go go right or or
gamble you're obviously a very they are
no she said what makes a good memory
she didn't say they're making it too
but there is a new book that's based on
a play but it never loved pocket
Pacifica look is not a good book playing
right here but her name is on the wall
we know she wrote that story she wrote
the story that the play is based on
force of woman right she did right why
don't you why don't they just publish
her story that she did right writing out
like probably the pelvis in a progress
ever dated oh I misunderstood I see so
there wasn't actually a drop in
existence she just said things and then
people with blue and wrote it down as a
play real quick ooh we could sell it to
the book and put her name on okay
that's almost as dark and twisted as one
of her stories
all right so don't fill the width they
say what keeper now is saying is like
what's going on is either it's the idea
that doesn't exist or is this completely
internal unconscious process and so the
theoretical innovation is secret and
Alan Embree hands which sounds like so
Bob when you say it is the environment
matters
this is not a completely internal
process it's a relationship between the
person and their environment that is
actually crucial for incubation
the environment matters it is not a
completely internal wizard Merlin
process but it does exist and it's not
just business as usual and this is
what's behind the opportunistic
facilitation hypothesis so the idea here
is you're processing encountered an
impasse which produces a failure index
which is an index that there's a problem
that has been unsolved by you and which
is fearful of the introducing people
like for another admission to talk about
failure induction we can't solve the
problem in some sense it is flagged in
memory as an unsolved problem which
could also help we give you the area
idea about using the most variants
heuristic so the idea is processing
encounters and impasse which produces
failure indices in long term memory
incubation involves a change of context
information of all the change of context
and this change of context produces a
fortuitous encounter with relevant
objects or events and information and
and that's okay I can pull it out yeah
okay sure so the change of context
produces or fortuitous encounter with
the relevant information the information
that you needed to solve the problem
okay so you're in passing your brain
sort of indexes that says I need to
solve this problem you can solve it well
c'mon if they are the sort of birds in
suits except in a big fight nice and
then you go to another context and
because this is in failure that you're
sensitive for the information that is
needed then that is introduced because
you've changed context so what you do
then is you notice the needed
information and that connection between
the information be present in the new
environment and you being sensitized to
what you need sensitizes you notice it
and you then assimilate it is wife and
opportunistic simulation hypothesis
noticing the needed information that has
been produced by a change of context is
what triggers the spontaneous transfer
and the restructuring of the inside and
that is how the restructuring of the
problem story to produce inside the idea
is here is that there is an interaction
between the prepared mind there's things
you have to do to the mind and external
context variation variation in the
context is also necessary for incubation
to be effective you both the prepared
mind and the contextual variation so the
idea here is that incubation is a
relational process it involves a
relation between things happening in the
MA changes occurring in the mind and
changes occurring in the environment she
that you want to ask a question
your location all over the place here so
we will get there eventually
so what you've got going on here is a
very complex interactional model of its
incubation rather than these competing
internal models so I think they're quite
right to say yes I was just wondering if
you earlier size sac PD but the
incubation experiment Smith setup they
are all in work like you to prove it
there was a scarcity of replicable
results and so wouldn't they ever we
were going to see what what gets
replicated in here so what what's going
on with Kieffer their output this what
you need Haley Haley what I only saying
is very good because that was the point
I was going to get to but thank you so
much right right so what secret is out
are proposing is the reason why you're
getting inconsistency in the previous
research is because the previous
experimenters were not controlling for
the environmental there was a missing
variable context change
if you put that variable in and then you
will get reliable results realization
that's what you're doing
so they ran a series of experiments to
demonstrate an incubation was effective
but only if relevant problem-solving
information was presented during the
interval shear time away from the
problem was not a factor or not much of
a factor there probably is a little bit
about the heat dissipation but that's
not much so the year away if you take
time away from the problem but you do
not move into an environment that
contains the relevant information value
frequently the problem there's no
incubation of that but if you did if you
didn't take time away and it involves a
change of context in which the new
contract has the relevant information
needed then you will solve you will get
the solution to your problem they looked
for you can do this by doing sort of
Association tests and things like this
they look for evidence of spreading
activation during incubation and to see
that what was going on in incubation
they couldn't find any good evidence if
that's what's going on
so shared time away and attempts to find
evidence for internal processing like
the read the recombination didn't seem
to be what mattered what mattered was
whether or not I the environment the
environmental change produced the
context of new context that has a
relevant immediate information
along with this they had some evidence
which is valid in the McGary he would
need a supplement you can McGarry that
people have better memory for the failed
problems in the plan for their
successful problems now but only if the
subject of quality yet this is not
participant in terms of subject of the
problem only if this subject actually
generates the impact you've not some to
be self-generative you're trying to
solve a problem can you get when you
pass on your own then he gets so what
they did was they probate had some
supporting evidence that failures
self-generated failures get memory index
which is their way of providing evidence
or the prepared mind part of their
hypothesis the mind is being prepared
right what the brain does is flag and
sensitize you to problem in which the
impasse was self generated if there was
another question for a summer so it's
just random if you take time away and
happen to go into environment
environment that offered the proper
information decided that's what they
seem to be saying it was not that's the
case of something where they're
conducting this is 1995 this is not the
last word of incubation but it's kind of
the first word in the sense that this
was the first time in which things were
shifted so that we could start to get
more reliable results of incubation in
the
and experimental situations I'm up
self-generated you have to let me
seriously in the wipers and a lecture
and sometimes they say you the softest
or you know they haven't actually gone
yeah you yeah you want it to be that the
person that gets to a place where they
they say I can't solve this problem but
it has to be because they have tried to
solve the problem and thought they could
if I simply ask you what's the whisper
you know what's the meaning of life and
human happiness I don't know right
that's not what we're talking about
we're not talking about I gave you some
problem use again it's all about well
we're talking about where you are trying
to solve a problem being
if that we example of that kind of thing
this could be by the way why dream
the detective presentation because you
move into alternative context bizarrely
strange up that it might contain that
idea or assumption that you normally
want the good that's what they wasn't
yes sorry can't explain how that really
to prepare time the prepared mind is the
idea that the self generated impact
causes a failure in depth at problem
gets is especially and easily remember
oh like remembered by you and that
sensitizes you to information in the
environment that is relative to that
problem because if a problem can be
easily remembered it can be easily
triggered and it means that it causes
perception and attention yes well we are
needed that you're not thinking about
the problems you're not trying to solve
the problem anymore
you put the problem aside I mean you're
keen to prepare language the prepared
mind doesn't mean holding the problem in
your working memory inside the salt
system with your long-term memory has
been sensitized so it's other your
conscious awareness in a sense but it's
like a procedure that happened like you
you tried it like if you were to look at
it in like a timeline you try to solve
the problem you step away and then
that's the incubation periods during the
incubation period your long-term memory
becomes sensitized if you moved into a
new context no it becomes a sensitize
regardless and if it's just advertised
that's necessary but not sufficient for
the inside the memory has the memory of
desensitize and then the environment has
to change in such a way that they is
fortuitous just opportunities
to gain new entry even needed
information yes the game then needed new
information for so your mind becomes
ready to gain the new information but if
you don't go into the context that has
that information you won't gain exact
words perfectly put and that's really
Lansing also your question don't believe
you're gonna let the cobweb because you
don't know what you're missing
information you can say I didn't
envision X I'm going to go to that
concept so enjoy the festival of lucky
call them students