so McKeon's up being how do we stop
negative feedback cycles everywhere and
we start propagating virtuous cycles so
we want to be able to pull the body
levers the environment lovers the
relationship levers the psyche levers
simultaneously charge up your axons
ready your receptors and shift your
lobes into upper beta phase you are
listening to smart drug smarts the
podcast dedicated to helping you
optimize your brain with the latest
breakthroughs in neuroscience Neotropics
and psychopharmacology hello and welcome
to smart drug smarts my name is Jesse
Lawler I'm your host and this is the
169th episode of this podcast dedicated
to the ongoing betterment of your brain
by any and all means at your disposal
this week we're going to be getting a
little bit into futurism philosophy
complexity science and the evolution of
the medical industry what things might
be looking like in five 15 20 years what
things should be looking like the
intersection of big data and
personalized medicine and last but not
least what all this means for your brain
we're going to be talking with the
founder of a group called the neuro
hacker collective Daniel 'shmock Timber
ger in the main interview getting pretty
geeky but also covering some really
really interesting topics it's one of
those big-picture conversations that
points out both the horrible ways in
which society seems to be running his
health off of a cliff and also the
awesome opportunities that we have to
radically improve things I had a great
time with this conversation really
appreciated Daniel's ability to kind of
shine a light on both the opportunities
and the pitfalls that we've got in front
of us so a good interview coming up in
somewhat of a longer episode this time
if you're exhausted by the end of the
interview and just need to get some
sleep hang around until the end of the
episode I'm gonna tell you what sleeping
position actually proves to be best for
your brain believe it or not the
position that you sleep in as well as
just about everything else about sleep
can make a quantitative difference in
your brain health this is true at least
if you are a rat but probably true for
people as well that'll be in the
ruthless list and a retention gimmick
but as usual let's kick things off first
with this week in neuroscience
smart drug smarts this week in
neuroscience so it's always nice to see
a smart drug smarts alumnus in the news
and I wanted to get this one in there
this is not actually a this week in
neuroscience but a late last year in
neuroscience but the lead author of this
paper that was recently published in the
journal with a cool name brain
stimulation was none other than dr.
Martin Monty of UCLA who he spoke with
on a two-fer episode where we
interviewed both him and dr. Kathleen
Bell about traumatic brain injury this
was probably 10 15 episodes ago at this
point but right around that same time
dr. Monty was also helping a 25 year old
man who was in a coma recover and break
out of that coma through a
never-before-used technique called low
intensity focused ultrasound pulsation
which in layman's terms jump-started his
brain out of the coma using sonic
stimulation to excite neurons in the
brains thalamus prior to last year the
closest thing that neurologists had been
able to accomplish to this was using a
DBS deep brain stimulation which is a
surgical procedure which is invasive but
what Monte and his group did was a
purely non-invasive technique using a
device about the size of a coffee cup
saucer which created a small sphere of
acoustical energy that could be aimed at
different regions of the brain to excite
the brain tissue there in this case they
targeted the thalamus which is a region
in which the performance is typically
vastly diminished in patients suffering
from coma the changes in the patient
according to Monte were remarkable prior
to the procedure the man showed only
minimal signs of being conscious and
understanding speech he could perform
small limited movements but by three
days after the procedure he'd regained
full consciousness and full language
comprehension he could reliably respond
to doctors by nodding yes shaking his
head no and he even made a fist bump
gesture to say goodbye to one of his
doctors who left the room
according to dr. Monte the researchers
expected a positive result with this
technique but he cautioned that the
procedure requires further study on
additional patients before this could
become a standard of care it's possible
he said that we were just very lucky and
happened to have stimulated the patient
just as he was spontaneously recovering
the device used emits only a small
amount of energy and it worked just by
turning it on in thirty-second blocks
ten times over a 10-minute period so 30
seconds on 30 seconds off for ten
minutes that was enough to stimulate the
thalamus according to Monte if things
work out this could eventually be built
into a portable device such as a helmet
that could be used to wake up coma
patients or other people in vegetative
States smart drug smarts the
cast so smart we have smart in our title
twice picked up a couple of five-star
reviews on iTunes this week although I'm
willing to give you one of them now
because I've got a couple other things I
want to go over Nick in the house 96
from the USA says the science behind
these podcasts is incredibly accurate I
wish I would have known about these
podcasts in my chemical engineering
undergrad courses probably the most
educational podcast I've ever listened
to I also heard from a listener who can
do something called mirror writing which
is the type of ambidexterity where
somebody can write with both hands
simultaneously with their right hand in
their left hand doing exact mirror
images of one another so me for example
I would be able to write my name
perfectly forward with my right hand and
simultaneously be writing a backward
version of it with my left hand she says
that she's been able to do this her
entire life in fact when she was in high
school she would take notes backward
with her left hand just because she was
able to and presumably to weird out her
friends she does however have a hard
time writing forward with her left hand
in any way she said there's very little
information available about this on the
internet and she wanted to know how
common this isn't if maybe some other
listeners were able to do this or at
least knew something about it I said
that sounded cool enough to mention on
the next episode so if there are any
other mirror writers in the audience
definitely drop me an email I will get
you guys connected finally I also heard
from a couple of people over the course
of this week about last week's episode
when there was a little bit of a
sideways jab from the guest dr. Gary
wank about running and how runners are
oftentimes physically injured as a
result of their running some people got
probably justifiably huffy about this
that normally it's bad running form and
more frequently bad running shoes that
lead to runners injuries and a couple of
people mentioned by name the book by
Christopher McDougall from a couple
years ago Born to Run which is a good
book all vouch for that very very
entertaining a read and among other
things he comes down really hard on Nike
as fomenting a style of running with
landing on your heels that is not good
for human feet but anyway this is not a
cross-training or a shoe comparison
podcast so I won't go too deeply into
that but did want to let the popular
discontent be heard not scare anybody
away from running if you might have been
thinking of doing some running in last
week's podcast talked you out of it you
might want to think about that one more
time while you're out there exerting
energy on your run making use of your
mitochondria I would be remiss if I did
not mention mitogen by axon labs six
ingredients there including a debin own
subutai amine bio pqq and more a
synergistic blend to load up your
mitochondria with precursors and
proliferate the
mitochondria that you've got very handy
for everything from running to thinking
and anything in between you can find
mitogen and its sister stack Nexus which
is a cognitive stack both of those over
at axon labs
IO on the web or if you're at the smart
drug smarts homepage we got a shop link
in our header axon Labs runs 24/7 365
days a year and every now and then
little special things go on worth
knowing about time boxed deals and such
the best way to find out about those of
course is to follow what's going on on
smart drug smarts various social media
channels or our newsletter at the brain
breakfast where we often give first
whiff when we've got something new going
on you can sign up for that over at
smarter or smarts comm slash newsletter
that's just about all so let's jump
ahead now to the main interview smart
drug smarts so I'm about to be speaking
with Daniels Martin Berger he is the
founder of something called the neuro
hacker collective the creators of a
nootropic supplement that hit the market
last year called qualia if you're a
nootropics fan you've probably seen
quality ads on some websites but quality
is just the most visible tip of a fairly
large iceberg that they've got going on
over at the neuro hacker collective an
iceberg which I'm about to ruin the
iceberg metaphor but is slowly surfacing
and revealing more and more of itself to
the world Daniels baktun Berger and his
team have a very very large scale plans
for up regulating human cognition the
human condition in general I think you'd
probably not blush to say that he is on
a mission to save the world change the
world certainly and he believes that
we've reached a point in science where
reductionism in deconstructing things is
probably reached about the end of its
usefulness in most cases and we're using
a big data whole systems approach is
probably the best way forward in a lot
of major endeavors like medicine so what
this is going to be is a bit of a hodge
podge conversation around future of
medicine system science nootropics tack
design how society should be thinking
about IP law and on and on there's one
technical term which gets dropped here
which is a ton of data which I
think has never been used on this show
before but it's a keeper lots and lots
of talk about big data and a fun little
fact about neuro hackers product qualia
if that word qualia sounds familiar it's
an old one it is actually the plural
form of quali which is defined as a
property such as whiteness which can be
considered independently of the thing
having the property so you could talk
about the quali softness of a blanket
but leave out the blanket thought that
was a pretty cool name now the
that came up with that name Daniel
smocked and Berger one of the key
distinctions between complicated systems
and complex systems is self-organization
and when you have a self-organizing
system you look at a cell that was not
designed exogenously like a computer
chip was so they had fundamentally
different processes of coming about so
complex systems are the result of self
interacting dynamics and evolutionary
processes so you have self interacting
dynamics and the things that are
effective end up getting selected for
then you keep having these increased
effectiveness selection dynamics and one
of the interesting things about
self-organizing systems is the way they
have non arbitrary boundaries the
relationship of the cell to the world
around it to plant the animal whatever
it is to the rest of the world around it
has a non arbitrary boundary mmm there
you have the agency of that system being
able to move within the environment
externalize entropy outside of the
system and have sensory input of some
kind information processing and actuator
output complicated systems are totally
different at all of those processes the
advent of what we call modern science
with Galileo Descartes really codified
with Newton England beyond started
working with small variable systems
where you had an angle and how much
gunpowder and that was really all that
was needed and in those small variable
systems classical mechanics and
specifically reductionism taking a very
complex idea like how do we win a war
finding a couple key variables bringing
it all down to those key variables was
super useful right it was so useful we
didn't need thousand rods anymore we
didn't need guesses in fact it was so
much more effective in all those systems
that it became the dominant system for
knowing how to do things and we started
being able to get into systems that had
more variables than just a couple but
then as you start to encounter the
natural world the biological world and
you start to deal with complex systems
where you have not just a slightly
larger number of but still distinct
variables but you have nearly indefinite
number of variables you have bottom-up
and top-down effects they're all
radically interacting where they Co
evolved in such a way that the variables
it studied in isolation actually do
different things than they do in synergy
and combinatoric of that context of
context ends up defining the thing very
profoundly then just looking at a small
number of variables and then putting it
back
together and not realizing that those
variables actually do different things
in isolation than they did together and
they do different things with synergies
of them than they did separately it
doesn't end up being adequate you know
our systems of medicine have done really
good where the cause of illness were
small number of variable causes like
acute illness right the issue comes from
a bullet wound or a car accident or
something where you can't trace the
causation to something really acute then
we're pretty good at being able to
reverse that and that's where Western
medicine is really proliferated but if
you have cancer or autoimmune disease or
neurodegenerative disease or any kind of
complex chronic scenarios that are
multifactorial there might be some
elements of toxicity involved some
elements of pathogenicity some elements
of deficiency some genetics some
psychoneuroimmunology like lots of
things with delayed causation over time
and then causal Cascades where many
different elements are interacting we
aren't able to trace the etiology of
them we're also looking for it to be the
same ideology that ms is one thing that
anxiety is one thing and it's not it is
a set of similar issue symptoms that can
have not only many different causes but
different sets of those causes in
different people in different contexts
we need fundamentally different
epistemology different processes of
knowing and studying to do a good job
with those kinds of things a lot of
people are gonna be nodding and
following along agreeing with that in
principle but also saying yes but
everything that we hear from
neuroscience is that the brain is still
this really complicated partially
unknown frontier and if there's maybe
one area of science where we don't know
enough of the fine minut specifics yet
to be able to move away from
reductionism the brain might be it would
you disagree with that statement would
you think that we're near some sort of
swing point or tipping point what's your
general thoughts there I would say we
need to frame up the topic differently
so in reductionism our goal is to take a
complex system and break it down into
subsystems that are simpler and break
those down into subsystems and that's
the direction of specialization so we
take health and we look at neurology and
gastroenterology and oncology and
Rheumatology right we break the body
into these kinds of anatomical tract
systems try to understand those one of
the problems ends up being here that you
can have gut issues that a
gastroenterologist should be looking at
that are affecting brain issues we had
got brain acts dynamics via microbiome
the enteric nervous system right like so
many different dynamics and so the cross
system effects it's actually reason that
there's an assumption that whole systems
effects are harder and further away
epistemologically from here then
reductionist answers and I'm actually
saying the reductionist answers are
infinitely far away because they can
never solve these things ultimately will
always be reductionist in it we will
always be looking at a subset of
everything that is involved yeah we're
never going to know that every variable
that's involved we have perfect
confidence margins on so we're reducing
the whole to some subset that the key is
that we seek to have that be not only a
growing subset but that we understand
the interconnectedness more obviously
we've been in Western health and
medicine and science in general trying
to understand more and more variables
understanding all the complex
interactions between them and how they
self organize complex not complicated
interactions applying a different kind
of thinking to how it emerge that way is
where we have a lot of room for growth
right now that's the whole systems
biology the movement so we move from
these anatomical tracks to these
similarly causal worlds looking at the
body genomics microbiome mix
transcriptomics connectomics the whole
world of things like this that are
involved at a level of self-organization
we're very far away from understanding
the human connectome or the human genome
adequately even though we've sequenced
the genome combinatorics on those genes
and then gene expression and then
recursion at the level of what's
happening in the blood to changing gene
expression is something that we're quite
far from owning a book versus being an
expert in that book and what the author
actually meant and all the various
interpretations are two very different
things very different things but the
movement to start trying to take what
seemed like very different areas of
study and understand how this one system
involved to have all of these parts
interacting is I would say one of the
frontiers of the biological sciences
right now your organization as the great
name you got neuro hacker comm but it is
named the neuro hacker collective why
did you choose the neuro well I draw
that particular circle of emphasis for
yourself
so neuro hacker collective was born out
of a think tank that was working on
complex system problem solving for all
of the major complex systems at a
civilization level so we're working on
future of economics where the incentive
of all agents is aligned with the
well-being of other agents in the common
we're working on governance to better
systems of decision-making and we're
working on infrastructure to have
closed-loop infrastructure where there
no waste or need for ongoing and
sustainable materials acquisition etc
and we're working on how do we make sure
that we have models that are really
adequate for where Humanity is going and
once it was time to start building some
of these we've done work in a number of
the areas the reason why we decided to
invest a lot in the psychoneurosis pace
early and we're still working on all of
those spaces and connectedly why the
psychoneurosis pace so important is
couple reasons one is all the problems
that we see in the world that we would
want to change whether we're talking
about overfishing of the oceans or
biodiversity loss or war or crazy
fundamentalism or crime or anything all
these problems are being caused by human
activity and human activity is being
predisposed by lots of things economics
for predisposing in but physiology is
part of what's predisposing it everyone
knows that when their hormones are
really not placed a neuro transmitters
are out of place that not only do they
feel shittier but they're likely to act
differently and different and
potentially let good ways well that ends
up going all the way to the level of
psychopathy empathise mediated over
certain neural networks and it can be up
or down regulated complex
problem-solving is mediated over certain
neural networks and can be more or less
capable so the hardware that human
consciousness and decision-making runs
on is a big deal yeah and so not only
are all the problems predisposed by
human action but all the solutions are
gonna have to come through human action
and so how do we elevate the collective
intelligence and the collective
experience and positive predisposition
of humanity is a bandwidth limiting
factor for all critical things and so
working at this level of helping to up
regulate human experience and human
capability ends up being a very highly
leveraged
thing to do for everything else because
then as you take people who want to do
positive things and empower them and a
hardware level more positive things get
to happen in a distributed decentralized
way the other reason we want to work on
is because it's very complex and the
more complex it is the degree to which
you succeed there means that those same
tools can be repurposed to other things
what is a specific problem that you
would like to solve that you're working
to solve now we are working on psycho
neuro topics and what we can share
publicly is things where we're kind of
able to offer direct to people
enhancement technologies medical
technologies obviously have to go
through a whole legal process
for what it means to clear those medical
technologies but we're working on the
research have it deeply and so when
we're talking about psycho neuro we're
talking about neurodegenerative things
and kind of psychiatric things where you
have to deal with not only the brain in
the nervous system which is more complex
in terms of orders of magnitude of total
interactions happening than any other
body system we also have doable rest of
the body system in which its embedded
and you have to deal with the interface
with the psyche we have to Cle harder
kind of science because science doesn't
deal with psyches well there's a deal
with subjective stuff so it will only
deal with the objective correlates of
the subjective stuff because that's what
science evolved to do and so having to
deal with subject object interface plus
the complexity of the objective we
started there because it was an area
both where you can alleviate the most
suffering enhance human capability the
most and if you can do well there you
can do well with things that are
relatively easy like cancer autoimmune
disease mm-hm and other aspects of human
optimization but so let's take in a
single example let's take anxiety but I
could have just as easily said
Alzheimer's or MS or sleep disorders or
anything right sure let's say we're
gonna take anxiety which is obviously
pretty ubiquitous right now and growing
Lyuba quickest then we say well how do
we fix anxiety well psychiatric cancer
has been given benzodiazepine this
obviously doesn't address underlying
cause at all but in the process of not
addressing underlying cause and just
saying there's something wrong with
their GABA circuitry let's make up much
much much stronger gaba receptor agonist
exogenously you eggs honestly externally
override an endogenous system that you
just seemed broken without understanding
what was wrong with it yeah and then in
the process of doing that create more
dependence on that exogenous thing and
then you fix the level of one in chain
chemical like what's happening at a gaba
receptor independent of the complexity
of things that's normally interacting
with which ends up meaning you throw off
a bunch of ratios you throw off a bunch
of causal chains and so you get side
effects so those kinds of single
molecule interventions not only don't
deal with causes so the underlying
pathogen assist can get worse
but they end up leading to oftentimes
increased dependence and side effects so
obviously inadequate approach to anxiety
has to understand cause and understand
all the possibilities of cause and
understand them uniquely in each person
and then have treatments that are
customized to all the different things
that can go on and for example that
would
like how much of a particular person's
anxiety is psychogenic in origin and how
much is physio genic might be a first
question is hygienic meaning at the
origin is primarily physical psychogenic
mean the origin is primarily
psychological if an ax-murderer is
chasing you you should be anxious right
and if an ax-murderer chased you and you
got acute PTSD from that that's
continuing to loop that's very different
then and so now you've got the anxiety
afterwards from that kind of acute PTSD
that's very different then if you start
having anxiety after a head trauma where
you actually damaged some neural
networks or if you've always had anxiety
it's may be related to genetic
predispositions for methylation
disorders or if you've got your anxiety
primarily after getting a parasite which
caused a gut brain access disorder so
your GABA production in your gut is
lower or etc etc so we find that there
are thousands of physiologic
contributing factors to what we call
anxiety and potentially thousands of
different kinds of psychogenic factors
and there's different kinds of
psychotherapeutic process and different
kinds of medical process and health
process that are more effective for
different sub-elements so then you have
to say well can we map the entire space
of things that correlate with anxiety
that could be causal and then can we
figure out how to do differential
diagnosis across all of them to see
exactly which things are going on for
this person which weighted subset of
which elements and then can we map our
treatments to the specific pathways not
to the in symptomology so then which
combinations of treatments and which
order of operations can all be
prioritized and personalized factoring
everything that is known which sounds
like you've got to be drinking data from
some large large streams in order to try
to have a reasonable guess based on all
those different types of data inputs
that you'd want well so you're looking
at say there was head trauma involved
you've got to have some kinds of
appropriate brain scans
is it qejy is it SPECT scan is it etc
have you get that or you might simply
look at behavioral scans cognitive
psycho affective scans that we've found
over enough time correlate well up to a
specific kind of trauma to the degree
that it's genetic in predisposition
we've got to be looking at whole genome
sequencing and maybe at the level of
gene expression transcriptomics or
proteomics er to the degree that we're
looking at mold toxicity that causes
excitotoxin City in the nervous system
in anxiety we have to be look
the kind of clinical chemistry that
gives us toxicity and pathology right
that lauded data and right now it's hard
to even get it we don't have high enough
sensitivity and specificity on
everything and it's stupidly expensive
and then you can't get it often enough
to see what's working so that's a
diagnosis issue we have to get better
and better diagnostic system so this is
something that we're very focused on
both what's happening at the cutting
edge of all different kinds of
Diagnostics that we can synthesize how
can we help Diagnostics get better
towards adequate and then once we have
this shit-ton of data the interpretation
layer is how do we actually interpret
all that data where you aren't just
looking at each biometric in
relationship to a reference range but
you're looking at each biometric and
relationship to all the other biometrics
and cycling tricks to see inter causal
effects it's ultimately a kind of AI
processing a shit-ton of diagnostic data
psychometric and physio genic data that
then leads to a process where we have to
have synthesized all of the treatments
that have been vetted as having some
efficacy and then relating those down to
the pathways over which they have
efficacy and then being able to
customize that though is a decent
baseline description of the future of
complex medicine personalized medicine
what's that going to look like are those
datasets going to be publicly available
to some extent or are these going to be
developed almost like by rival hospitals
or rival medical groups selling access
to their own particular live datasets
this is asking you to speculate
obviously nobody's got the magic wand
here let me go a little bit higher for a
minute because the question you asked
spoke to it medicine within capitalism
is broken inexorably and unavoidably
because the theory of markets should not
apply to something where people don't
actually have a viable choice for-profit
prisons are a problem right one should
not have a profit incentive that is
against the liberty of the populace
right want for-profit
military-industrial complex is a problem
let me question that for a second oh it
seems like if you actually completely
flipped the model for example paid a
doctor for every month that you are
perfectly healthy and you had no
complaints if the incentives were
different it seems like maybe the system
while not being perfect could still be
radically better than what it is now and
still be a capitalist system so this is
the key thing that is a foundationally
different system yeah is actually paying
for health rather than paying for sick
services right that's true so when you
really start to get into what it would
take to do that
there's a lot of problems right because
you get well individual responsibility
of the people being problematic you get
to have an adequate system I won't say
what it takes to actually structure
right now because we'll have to dive
down some deep economics rabbit holes
but we should do that sometime if you
want you do have to make sure that you
don't have anywhere within the research
or science or medical or regulation
process an incentive for anything less
than robust health and illness
prevention right and that's even things
like right now the IP is such that I've
got to put in a ton of money up
front in drug development sever make
that money back I've got to be able to
patent my stuff so that I can charge a
really high price as opposed to market
competition on it which means I can only
pursue patentable things so plans are
out diet exercise right they're out of
getting that level of research funding
and I've got to do single molecules
going through a clinical trial but the
clinical trial shows can never do
personalized medicine right because I
have some effect over a bell curve but
some people are on the back of the bell
curve somewhere on the front of the bell
curve I'm simply looking at does this
one molecule intervening in one part of
a very complex dynamic cause something
other than placebo and of course then
all kind of problems associated so
everything down to the level of IP law
change to where the incentives are
perfectly aligned with collective
well-being there's probably several
revolutions I was gonna say a revolution
but there's probably multiple
revolutions necessary for that yes so
you think about it our underlying IP law
is broken right we can patent single
molecules it are synthetic not complexes
of molecules that are varying for
individual people in a way that a
clinical trial could never do because
we're doing N equals one optimization
not molecules that came from natural
sources right so the IP structure is
broken the clinical trial epistemology
itself is inadequate for personalized
medicine the incentive systems where
you're maximizing the lifetime revenue
of a customer and a customer happens to
be a patient
which means start them on meds younger
and have more cross sell upsell which is
the side effects elements all that's
broken but also the underlying
epistemology of system reductionism is
broken so medicine has gotten as far as
it has and it is now more of a problem
to chronic health still great for acute
health then it is a asset and to
transcend it the Revel
our new science new understanding of
what IP means new regulation new
economics all those things have to
change that's a really interesting point
that you just made and I guess I kind of
want to go back and underscore that for
acute health medicine is still very
useful and it's probably still arguably
making significant progress year after
year decade after decade but for ongoing
health day to day how you feel what your
non-emergency medical care is like is
either flatlined or possibly getting
worse
I wonder when that shift took place what
year what decade it would have been
because you could almost kind of feel
that the average health of a random 35
year old in middle America is probably
worse now than it was 20 years ago well
we see declining sperm rates at the
industrialized world that are related to
xenoestrogens and the plastics
pesticides that are in the current
disruptors etc etc we see that the
average mother in the United States has
hundreds of petrochemical traces in her
breast milk which means what's happening
at the neuro toxic and carcinogenic
level of infants so let's go to a level
even higher than everything we talked
about so far what are the Tier one
causes of illness Tier one meaning the
initial deviation from homeostasis
because we can define health from a
cybernetic perspective a complex
regulatory system perspective we can
define health as the total resilience
and homeostatic capacity this regulatory
system across all of its regulatory axes
we didn't say the homeostasis we said
the homeostatic capacity how much
deviation from homeostasis in terms of
impulse can come that it can actually
process and stay within healthy ranges
so to put that in layman's terms if you
think of your body is a bunch of Springs
if I move the ball at the center of the
springs away from the center how quickly
and easily does it kind of shake itself
back into a center position yeah most of
time when we do labs we're looking at is
someone's glucose in range is it too
high or too low we're looking at let me
know Stace we're not doing a stress test
where we give us someone then a lot of
sugar or little sugar and we're testing
then how well does it stay in range in
proximity to stresses right so the
actual homeostatic capacity that
determines the resilience of the system
is one of the major things we need to
pay a lot more attention to so then we
can say that's health aging is the
decreased resilience of the system you
can be totally healthy and aged but
smaller deviations from homeostasis can
take you out of health like falling and
breaking head
whatever rate you don't have current
pathology but you have less resilience
to pathological inputs so we're defining
disease and aging fundamentally
differently disease is some deviation
from homeostasis input that exceeded the
homeostatic capacity of the system that
led to altered functioning
pathophysiology right so the Tier one
deviation sometimes we'll say okay this
autoimmune disease is preceded by
increased inflammatory markers so
inflammation caused it well no
inflammation was part of a causal
cascade inflammation is a signaling
molecule that responds to some tissue
being irritated by something right so
there's something higher in the causal
chain the initial deviation from
homeostasis will always be the way that
the organism interfaces with its
environment over the overarching
behavior of the organism so either the
organism takes in too much of something
it shouldn't from the environment toxins
pathogens or things that are good but in
excess amounts sugar calories etc it
doesn't take in enough of something from
the environment that it needs to
deficiency it's fundamental code is not
optimized genetics microbiome mix right
epigenetics that are passed down or the
overarching behavior of the system is
off stress I couldn't mean illogical
stress right the way the psyche affects
it or not exercising lifestyle posture
those kinds of things so you can always
trace back the hormones that are off or
the inflammation markers that are off or
the whatever to some of those Tier one
causes now let's look at toxicity for a
minute we live in houses where we spend
90% of our time indoors and the paint
has so many VOCs volatile organic
compounds and the flooring does and the
carpet does and then all of those
volatile organic compounds are either
carcinogens or neurotoxin or endocrine
disruptors or something like that
we are outside and the smog from the
cars has mercury in it has zinc and
nitric oxide and it has the food that
we're eating is grown in soil that is
both microbiome depleted and trace
mineral depleted the way that we have
affected our environment we have made an
environment that we are not genetically
adapted to and one of the interesting
things about humans is we get to evolve
one generation to the next profoundly on
the same genome because we are genome
evolved to do mimetic evolution quick
processing neuroplastic evolution
without having the chooks genome and
that leads to tools where we change our
environment
faster than we can adapt to it so when
you look at the tier 1 issues in health
it's not just an issue of like we're
less healthy because medicine was bad
before medicine we have built a world
that is not healthy for people and so
can you have optimized healthy people in
a biosphere it is environmentally toxic
on so many metrics top soil deficient
etc so ultimately when we talk about the
future of medicine one of the big things
has to be the future of how we do
infrastructure and recreating a built
world that is optimizing for the quality
of life of the beings in that world very
much agree what's your real world best
guess as how probably two steps forward
one step back at some points technology
will still be progressing in public
health will be moving forward in terms
of the things that fairly easy to
predict within current systems
technologically advancing I'll say
Diagnostics are gonna get a lot better
and so whole genome sequencing is gonna
get cheap enough that it replaces just
partial genome snip analysis and so
that'll become ubiquitous we'll have
whole genomes on everybody or the
availability to have that metabolomics
is going to get good and inexpensive and
the interpretations on metabolomics as
well as some aspects of transcriptomics
proteomics so we start understanding the
expression layer well those are all
going to become good as well as
microbial mix some of those omics let's
actually stop and try to give people the
bullet point quick definitions of those
like proteomics is a folding of proteins
what is metabolomic so we're actually
looking at metabolic byproducts of
different types of cells what we can
understand about what's happening with
the cells based on those metabolic
byproducts so we can understand
different dysfunctions of cell types and
different functions of cell types based
on the metabolites and the total amount
and relative ratio and proportions of
different metabolites one of the cool
things about metabolomic s-- is you can
assess a lot you can infer things about
toxicity because toxins change cell
processes and predictable ways pathogens
change cell process deficiency does
inflammation does oxidative stress does
so you can infer a lot of those things
from the metabolites and instead of
where most of our blood chemistry right
now requires taking blood and then
spinning at a particular way putting
particular reagents and so you have to
run a lot of vials of blood if you want
to get good insights the metabolomic
is very likely to be accessible in the
not-too-distant future via mass spec
technology which means things like home
urine units where you start getting a
lot of data every morning I think home
medical assessment you can see the
XPrize working on tricorders gene radar
from nano bio Sam gives the ability to
do PCR level Diagnostics with a drop of
blood Wow across a lot of things I think
laser interferometry where just a laser
beam goes through your skin into your
blood and then the scattering pattern
that comes back gives insights about
what's in the blood and I think there's
a very good chance that we'll get a lot
better so the ability to start getting a
tremendous amount of data very
frequently and then being able to do big
data processing across people but even
big data on the same person because you
can get so much data so frequently
you know whenever an illness comes you
do retrospectives on and see what were
the first deviations that you could see
that's gonna be one of the major things
that happens it's game-changing say
you've got like an autoimmune antibodies
merging or inflammatory markers or
immune differentiation problems but you
find that before that happened you had a
tiny little change in the ratio of
endogenous opioids you'd look at those
together but then you start
understanding oh do opioids play a
top-down relationship and immune
modulation and then you get to start
seeing this tiny little opioid change
way pre-symptomatic and being able to
help it then and then you don't develop
out immune disease that as one example
of many different kinds of pathogenesis
that will start to gain insights into
and some that people in integrative
medicine already have insights into but
it's hard to scale it because you know
if you're going to see a really good
integrative physician and they're
working across a lot of things they're
looking at vector borne illnesses and
mold stuff and toxicity stuff and
microbiome stuff you're spending a lot
of money and there's a lot of like
concierge care or it's not that good yet
and so now imagine it getting way better
than concierge air is because you get so
much more data and so much
interpretation understanding but then
scalable for everybody to a large extent
personalized medicine is really treating
us each as special little snowflakes but
then holding that up against this idea
that we have like 90% of our genes are
the same as a stock of corn and how do
we reconcile those two ideas complexity
theory chaos which is the tiniest
changes in the initial conditions of a
complex system lead to shoes
unpredictable changes later down the
chain and in results so we can be almost
the same but those tiny changes end up
making fundamental ontological
what's so beautiful about this from a
philosophic point of view is we can get
that we are almost the same as everyone
else and almost the same as all the
other animals so we get recognized as
profound interconnectedness that leads
to empathy and a sense of inter invested
miss while holding the absolute
uniqueness of every single thing which
leads to everything being irreplaceably
precious and that combination is both
true we're fundamentally interconnected
mostly the same expressions of the same
underlying stuff and utterly
irreplaceable it's an interesting
dichotomy in the fact that both are two
sides of the same coin is pretty
fascinating that specific concept
regarding dichotomy is one of the key
things that we actually would have to
get better at in medicine which is is
health based on bottom-up effects we're
understanding the genome is enough for
everything or there are a lot of
top-down effects where you got you have
to understand the neuro endocrine system
in the connectome both there's bottom-up
effects and hop down effects that lead
to very complex feedback patterns is
psychology affecting our bodies yes are
our bodies affecting our psyche yes
leading to feedback patterns it can
vicious cycle or virtuous cycle there's
a lot of what seem like competing truths
that are actually not competing they're
complementary parts of more complex
systems that we have to understand
better that's an interesting question so
given that will probably find not
necessarily just treating people that
have conditions that they'd like better
but also looking at ways of optimizing
things people that are looking for
performance enhancements there could be
either psychological or chemical
physiological sort of more
process-oriented approaches but if we've
got various handles on approaching a
change how do we decide which handle to
work from fantastic question
when we talk about the future of
medicine we usually think about going
from illness to baseline optimization is
evolving the baseline we have thought
about optimization in the past in a
zero-sum way which means the total
capacity of the system is fairly fixed
so if you evolve one thing it's usually
at the cost of something else right you
can take steroids and get buff but
you're gonna die faster you can take
adderall and enhance your focus but it's
gonna be at the cost of empathy or
irritability or something else
those announcements are not that
interesting those were the easy the
early complicated not complex approaches
where we tried to lift one variable
rather than lift the resilience and
information processing capacity of the
whole system that's the key thing you
start understanding complex systems is
can you increase the net resilience of
the entire system where you are
increasing the empathy and the focus at
the same time we are increasing the
muscle density and longevity at the same
time the answer is yes and a
fundamentally different optimization
approach and then medicine which is
preventing illness and reversing illness
to baseline enhancing baseline which is
kind of a biologic transhumanism if you
want to think about how we evolve
ourselves and develop ourselves to
further capacities those actually become
ingredients of the same system and then
the question where do you do
psychological stuff and where do you do
physiologic stuff is actually the same
as where do you do within Physiology
bottom-up stuff at the level of cell
energy versus top-down stuff at the
level of Connect tommix and brain
patterns the answer is all of them you
end up getting positive feedback loops
across all of them right you make a
healthier main at a neural hormonal
neurotransmitter level it predisposes
more positive emotions perspectives etc
you do work at a meaning-making
cognitive behavioral therapy
so everybody's experienced where you're
feeling all physiologically because you
sprained your ankle so you can't work
out or because you are hungover or
you're sick or whatever which then
because you're feeling not positive
physiologically becomes a state there's
an emotional kind of effect of that and
then you start to perceive your life
through that state and it's kind of like
 colored glasses so then as you're
perceiving life through that state you
start to have more negative thoughts
which leads to more negative emotions
which then have an actual stress effect
on the body leading towards physiology
and you get vicious cycle and that could
start on the body side or on the emotion
side either side is enough to be able to
start a propagating process you can also
propagate up where someone starts
exercising leading to better ways of
thinking leading to making new decisions
about how one is gonna think and feel
etc so McKeon's up being how do we stop
negative feedback cycles everywhere and
we start virtuous cycles propagating
virtuous cycles so we want to be able to
pull the body levers the environment
levers the relationship levers the
psyche levers simultaneously now which
ones are gonna provide the most lift for
an individual is going to be different
for different cases which is where you
need to do personalized assessment and
call it diagnosis if it's illness but we
would call it assessment of its
optimization so we're doing kind of
assessment on someone's physio metrics
and psycho metrics and we see that there
are particular biologic processes that
are significantly off that we can
actually intervene in and lift those
lifting the things where there's most
issue is going to lift the whole system
the most and so this starts to get into
how do we do advanced human development
it's a combination of everything and the
things that are gonna be the most
leveraged for that person based on
assessment this not only leads to
feature of medicine in the future of
biohacking and neuro hacking and the
future of psychotherapy and even what
you could call spirituality or personal
development but even in the future of
Education how do you optimize the
learning and evolution of a particular
child or a particular person in a way
that is both unique to their path and
optimized for what they can uptake it's
interesting because it almost seems like
this is a threat to the way that
technical professional specialization
works in our modern world because it's
moving to such a multidisciplinary
approach to almost everything I mean I
could see if I'm an orthopedic surgeon
well all of a sudden I'm gonna have
psychologists having advice on what I do
it's like well wait a minute this is my
turf it seems like to apply some of
these ideas would mean massive second
and third order changes was sort of the
way that society operates yes most
specialists will be replaced by robots
of all kinds so da Vinci is a better
surgeon than handheld surgeons and it's
gonna keep getting better doesn't shake
has more precision has optics that can
go into a much deeper level of
microscopic data than human eyes can so
whether it's being operated by humans
still or operated by algorithms
individual specialty things that are
highly specialized are going to be
automated because one of the things that
humans do well is understanding
generality and then being able to build
tools to do it better than us the hammer
bangs better than our fists right in
addition to fully specialized things
being automated which leaves humans to
more understanding how the parts
interact in the generalities to the
degree that it's a specialized task but
that still is quite complex and humans
are gonna be involved in it they will be
interfacing with other humans and other
disciplines and with AI systems that are
interfacing with the data from those
other systems so this is not what we
call AI in terms of the strong AI it's a
conscious machine but what we call
symbiotic intelligence where the
intelligence of the humans and the
intelligence of the computing
processing power together provide the
Augmented capability because as long as
we're saying my turf and we are not
wanting to understand other things that
are actually causal then we're failing
right and so the key is causal closure
how do we understand everything that is
causally affecting what we're working on
and then how do we understand everything
that is causally affected by what we're
working on so we are not missing
causation in the process or then causing
externalize harm somewhere else smart
drug smarts so thank you so very much to
Daniel 'shmock and Berger for taking the
time for that conversation really
interesting Daniel is one of the few
guests we've had on this show
who does not have either an MD or a PhD
following his name obviously a very very
smart educated guy and not without
credentials obviously something more of
an entrepreneur than an academic but
what are those guys who after talking
with him I just can't imagine him doing
his laundry or flossing or to a deity is
kind of like low-level human activities
that he inevitably everybody does from
time to time just seems to really be
walking the walk as far as big-picture
thinking and taking it upon himself to
the Atlas and push the species forward I
have a lot of respect for that and
really look forward to seeing what neo
hacker collective is doing next they are
over at Nero hacker comm we've also got
a link over there on the webpage for
this episode at smart Rex marks comma
slash 169 and should you want to try out
qualia Daniel and the neuro hacker
collective folks have given us the
discount code SDS short for smart drug
smarts which will get you some savings
off the qualia nootropic whoo which has
a jaw-dropping 42 different ingredients
but again you can see what that's all
about at smart rogue smarts comm slash
169 but now giving your brain a little
rest let's talk about the proper way to
sleep in the ruthless listener retention
gimmick smart drug smarts ruthless
listener retention gimmick so proper
sleep hygiene is becoming somewhat of a
cottage industry these days there are no
lack of studies looking at how to get a
proper night's sleep or a proper daytime
sleep if you're talking about naps but
most of the time we're talking about
light exposure and electromagnetic
shielding and making sure that the room
is absolutely silent things like that
one thing that there's not a lot of buzz
about is the actual position a person
sleeps in sometimes you hear this with
regards to snoring and sleep apnea
things like that but a pair
we sleep position can make somewhat of a
direct difference in your brain health
as well you've probably heard of amyloid
beta plaques these are some of the nasty
bad guys that are partially responsible
for Alzheimer's disease they go evil
hand and evil hand with neurofibrillary
tangles but at night time during sleep
along with other things going on within
the brain natural processes are working
to clear the brain of any amyloid beta
plaques that might have built up during
the day this is something that's easier
done during sleep than during wake
because during sleep in any period of
restfulness the brains interstitial
space volume actually expands a little
bit meaning that the glymphatic pathways
which are basically the exit route for
these plaques they widen so a little one
lane highway can become more like a
three lane highway ushering these bad
molecules out researchers used
fluorescence microscopy and radioactive
tracers to look at the brains of rodents
who slept in various positions supine
prone and lateral lateral being the side
sleeping position which is preferred by
many rodents and many humans as well and
it turned out that for wiping lymphatic
pathways in helping the amyloid beta
Smoove out of the brain the side
sleeping position was the unquestioned
winner which is kind of nice because
sleep experts also recommend side
sleeping for better posture and less
back pain so what to do a side sleeping
is not necessarily your thing some
people prefer sleeping on their back or
even sleeping on their stomach I admit
that I really like sleeping on my back
during naps but if getting in the habit
of side sleeping is difficult
researchers recommend putting a pillow
behind you or in front of you to keep
you from rolling onto your front or your
back this also works with a compliant
bed partner and over the long run this
is one of these small little lifestyle
changes that can make you a little less
likely to wind up with Alzheimer's
Parkinson's or several other
neurological conditions that stem
partially from too much sludge building
up in the brain just say no to drew
scratch that say yes to the smart drug
smarts podcast join our mailing list at
WWF art drug smarts calm okay so that's
it for episode number 169 thank you for
hanging around until the very end of the
episode if you're curious about the
links to anything that we discussed here
all of that will be online at smarter
exports dot-com / 169 if you missed last
week's episode I spoke with dr. Gary
wink about his upcoming book the brain
what everyone needs to know and also the
interesting hints that marijuana in
small amounts might be handy and
fighting off brain inflammation as a
person ages next week we're gonna be
going into the animal kingdom talking
about animal brains venturing a bit off
the human track so I
accept whatever level of hate mail
people want to send me about not talking
about something that's directly
applicable to those of you who are
listening who happen to be humans but
most of us like animals most of us are
interested in brains and of course it's
very interesting to hear both about the
contrast and the comparisons between
human brains and animal brains what
makes us alike what makes us different
so a special animal lovers episode in
number 170 coming next week and probably
between now and then if it hasn't hit
already a little overdose Edition
slipping in there something between our
regularly scheduled weekly episodes so I
will be back at you sooner than usual
different time but same podcast and with
that highly nutritious easily digestible
and always unflagging commitment to
helping you fine tune the performance of
your own brain have a great week and
stay smart you've been listening to the
smart drug smarts podcast visit us
online at www.rockymountainatvmc.com
should be considered medical advice
consult your doctor and use some damn
common sense before doing anything you
think might have a lasting impact on
your brain