the worlds are spending never stop
you're gonna need to become we met but
why do you buy what we thought and how
is our desire to spend a nickel I search
every other company on earth is trying
to get used and money and discipline all
the effort into getting you to spend
your money on stuff on time
I'm Jack Ferretti and in this series on
JT investigate the man who made us spend
I'll discover how products would
deliberately base break so we buy mare
one of the lessons as an open secret
when I'm talking to professional
management people and they all said well
we all know this I would give in
programs to dispose of our possessions
I don't think individual advertising
campaigns and change people's lives
completely why they still doing it
another not silver only later in 2012 we
run a campaign that said you should lead
ourselves on the Bible and help
technologies we use to contact consumers
making us constantly hungry for more
we want anything it's hard wearing our
brain be looking to new stuff the
marketer Sakura had taken Angela
you
you see it's like a concert and isn't
its lavish promotional video for the
launching new gaming console the Xbox
one and start the show is a small
plastic box covering 400 consumer
technologies with center stage this
footage shows how its treated with an
awestruck reverence once reserved for a
lit celebrity except now it's a console
[Music]
an Xbox learned about the orchestrated
xperia around a product launched from
the Masters Apple
for the past seven years people have
queue for hours or even days to give a
hands on latest upgrade
[Applause]
[Music]
what drives keep intimating the whole
thing nice son I come to the Apple store
in Incheon street to talk to the very
patient man and to the keys in the new
iPhone 5s was the 5sq today that the
five doesn't really look much
interference which is very good when you
tube for three days to buy a new file
that is not going to be much more than
the parking lot of the moment at the
ends of all previously been available
thousands of people are waiting in line
how long have you guys been waiting 18
hours 18 hours what if it was so special
about having a been the new aspiring the
latest home the great than the change
they change so quickly you're going to
be left behind the surgery why is it so
important to you to have the latest
filing so quickly because this time did
in in different color because it's a
different color
yes that was that was brought here is
the part of my life
at the moment it's one minute salad and
the doors of his office school about to
open and close the three thousand here
computer are going to go in and buy the
iPhone 5
[Music]
we hear the magic of only platform the
news by
[Music]
[Applause]
[Applause]
but the Hollywood time you have an old
because you can get it fired missiles
all
[Music]
the flipside of the hysteria for the new
the new becomes unwanted fast
yesterday's desired item is tomorrow's
piece of trash
this is a wife's facility in California
like thousands across the globe except
this is one with a distance there are
boxes and boxes of Charlie remain
unopened technology
[Music]
if you look around here you'll see when
a few brand-new products on their boxes
yeah that's in Princes there yeah yeah
brand-new never been opened there's a
bunch more right here and while those
are like never been here that means only
supply so those are products that for
one reason or another they decided that
they would rather destroy then trying to
sell to somebody who might need this
cycle of things becoming almost
instantaneously obsolete is at the heart
of consumerism today
after festivals sites a string Brandon's
head looks just once
many versus happy to spend and discard
this is Kermit products we support our
whole economy and the concerns with our
economic recovery is being driven once
again I consumer spending over the world
have almost limitless consumption this
didn't happen by accident the cycle will
enter spending and flying away is
engineers
[Music]
how did this happen the discovery
origins have come to Berlin
[Music]
in the 1920s manufacturers have got an
idea who becomes fundamental to the
consumer economy artificially limiting
the lifespan of a product it was known
as planned obsolescence making a product
it deliberately designed to place
[Music]
planned obsolescence began one of the
most basic consumer product of all my
table
[Music]
this is the former author and factory
Miss Berlin he the secret about
lightbulb production until fall of the
Berlin Wall in the early nineteen
nineties long-forgotten papers were
discovered in this factory they revealed
an extraordinary secret deal that would
provide a template the consumer
obsolescence we live with today in the
1920s a coordinated decision had been
taken by a global cartel of companies he
reduce the lifespan of bulbs it was
known as the Phoebus cartel
the cartels origins came from the
chairman of Asura his name is the new my
heart my heart wanted to standardize and
control the way in which light bulbs
were manufactured
[Music]
in 1924 the world biggest electrical
companies hammered out a deal in Geneva
its aim was to increase profits by
fixing prices and production crisis
it would also dictate the length of time
a light bulb could last what's
extraordinary is that the rules
governing the way to cartel with control
production were all written down in my
new detail these papers were discovered
by German researcher helmet herder
[Music]
Helmut how did you first come by these
documents well I know after the walking
down I knew the workers council people
of the light bulb factory and their
technical Stanley's same to archive
[Music]
this first point is one control the life
at general lighting service lamps shall
be controlled before they think this
cartel existed how long did a lightbulb
last that I bought lasted 2,500 hours
and after the Phoebus cartel they reduce
them down to thousand dollars well that
comes off the assembly line today as a
filament of pure metallic tungsten that
burns 100,000 hours bulbs that lasted
longer burned less brightly the
companies maintained with a thousand our
lifespan is compromised as we need some
facts it's durability and efficiency yet
the impact on sales is phenomenal
the year the agreement was signed on
lighting company executive rights all
manufacturers are committed to our
program of standardization it is
expected to double the business of all
parties within five years and any
company that burgnik hotel was taking
these signs
it's incredible because actually when
you look at movement England now misses
for basis defining it says if if he
lasts 20 hours more you'll be paying so
much money 50 hours more a higher amount
identify hapless one here Phoebus cartel
was end upon war but helmet has
uncovered hard proof of planned
obsolescence
[Music]
and the others are investigating how it
operates today
I thought to each consider in Technical
University
Stephanie studying obsolescence in
consumer goods we shop I have pervasive
it is planets are licensed as an open
secret when I'm talking to professional
management people and congresses and so
they are said wealth we all know this
Stephan has identified obsolescence in
everything from washing machines of
heating element is fail too early to
electric toothbrushes with single panels
preventing you from changing the
batteries the clearest example of all is
the printer cartridge this is from a
printer rare this from a printer
cartridge okay and there's a counter
inside what is the counter it counts the
pager
you've been trending with this average
so it is there it's like a clock
counting down to 15,000 pages and it's
say saying I'm empty let me show this
simple dial here is affected you're
counting down for the moment that it
stops working
yeah so you can reset the counter it's
as I said it in front of mine just do it
reset it put an inside again and still
planting it is putting it down zero then
you can reset it for three times and
it's still pointing all you have to do
is reset it and it would work instead
you have to buy brand new cars a drain
you want or refilling it this is planned
obsolescence and the cartridge of a
printer obviously
the open secrets of planned obsolescence
the Stefan talks about is now becoming
increasingly sophisticated when we
factors even being accused of inserting
electronic chips into princess to tell
Athenians one house when it hasn't
planned obsolescence is now being one of
them into the very fabric of our
everyday lives
we live in a world of products designs
have a limited lifespan and accepting
but why because my dear continual
spending is deeply embedded in our
collective consciousness
what is the neatest activity what is a
cutie and cutie
[Music]
this began during it hopefully the world
faced a choice between competing brands
capitalism or communism the analysts
they worked and saved to make the
biggest single purchase in their
lifetime they have a share of America's
wealth they've seen capitalism work I
come to me is the kind of Harvard
University how important was consumerism
as a way of kind of defining democracy
American democracy was viewed as really
linked deeply to mass consumption not
only that everybody could have Goods and
could live a prosperous life but that we
had choice as consumers in contrast for
to the Soviet Union where not only did
they not have the kind of material goods
that Americans had but they also had no
choice
[Music]
in the nineteen fifties cracks were
already beginning to show in the edifice
of consumers in 1951 in comedy the man
in the white suit
why is satellite the idea that the
public being teased by companies using
obsolescence set in the heart of
industrial north is imagine what was
happening for product which we created
but never Brown some full submission
indestructible course right yes there's
a lot the bottom of everything right now
the primary producers one she's part of
a hundred middlemen sawmill bosses no
workers who are unhappy mom I do you
think of him and you think you're going
over this suddenly you're not even born
yet what did he get into all the other
things the razor blade that never gets
blunt and the power that runs on water
with a pincher something in it you know
the level HL stuff on the market in a
million years the film reveals were far
from being at times consumer naivety the
fifty song akin to ends of an economy
built on obsolescence and that is debate
about whether an attack you could make
includes two break-ins acceptable
the consumerism is about to face a
bigger problem people won't buy enough
sweet things fast enough there was an
assumption for I would say at least
decade that there was no end to the
prosperity that would come with mass
consumption but at a certain point and I
would say by about the mid 1950s there
were advertising executives mark met
marketers who were realizing that it was
going to be an end to this profitability
that a certain point these markets would
get saturated and what would happen then
and they experimented with different
approaches so how do we get people to
keep buying once you have that vacuum
cleaner and that refrigerator and that
car the consumers and what to speed up
as manufacturers wanted they needed a
need and fall clever a plan the answer
lay with an idea from one man the
psychological need programming of the
consumer
his name is Hal 15 slug the head of
General Motors as measured by no place
and the American seeing the thing I am
the greatest possible optimist on the
future of America and are all session is
33 years of the helm so the company
become the biggest car manufacturer in
the world before TM and before was it
dominated the market in one beautiful
car the Model T and the slogan you can
have any color as long as it's black
[Music]
but slowly realized we could vastly
increase sales by offering a different
car for every income bracket you could
segment the market over LD even having
several wider carbon be enough to keep
the sales rolling in so I wanted
customers to buy a new car every year
like a new coat or a pair of shoes GM
called this theory continuous upgrade
it's not a nice creation of
dissatisfaction this is the car that
epitomize Sloan's new selling philosophy
the 56 Chevrolet Bel Air legendary car
designer Tom latinum began his career at
General Motors working for the Sloan
philosophy
[Music]
4-door hardtop North Avenue the Bel
Air's thoughts event that the cortisol
in lovely how often would you have to
change this elephant Harvey appearance
at that time the hype of that was every
year every year every year maintains a
sheet metal Wow
the truth on that this color that you
get this incredible shame is it was
derived from nail polish yeah can you
see the globe and again if the people
matching their dress to the cars or the
shoes it's much more fashionable life
it's important we can see on its head
instead of engine reliability the United
States is now the seemingly superficial
Adams color or tailfins
the trunk the same Chevrolet's royal
tone styling puts ever more emphasis on
exterior color a rainbow of 26 Centauri
noon solid tone and two-tone color
combinations so slowly anything foods
obsolescence in a way because they saw
that it was planned obsolescence things
done to an object he made it about of
stresses being in your head gear
yourself we choose through want than you
yeah you don't need to buy a new car in
mechanical I just still brand new year
old what make you feel like the new ones
better and I have to have one is a quite
a genius way of doing
[Music]
this idea the organized creations is 50
section spread across the Western world
[Music]
helping to drive economies during the
three years of the nineteen fifties and
sixties and suppressants came out some
spirity pass rules go on getting better
every year they can be improved
inexpensively but it's nice to have a
pivot one where money's in there one
[Music]
that's running half an hour an
affirmance of the underwater and three
decades consumers enjoy the prosperity
was previously unimaginable we should
embrace consumerism and spending it is
much enthusiasm as the Americans had
before us we enjoy redoing our homes
changing our cars on a regular basis but
this new consumer paradise is about
three things by hard economic fact at
the end of the 60s wages which had
previously kept pace if prices began to
stagnate and by the with seventies then
prices soared we had a problem people
were looking to the shop-window have a
consumer paradise but we no longer buy a
grandstander
instance
[Music]
in 1974 is double whammy of rising
prices and stagnating wages this crisis
point with a - strike love life is long
violent it's this job we've got to when
you can make it be so what just military
port that not just whatsoever this
wasn't an elevated ideological struggle
between left and right
these were angry consumers
at least pay the price for infant our
the new Labour government said no better
spectacularly failing to help afford
living standards autonomous permit done
if you ran the elected Prime Minister
Harold Wilson's policy
[Music]
I don't think the Labour government
fully understood and I know I can attend
didn't fully understand that the squeeze
in real incomes producing falling real
incomes in the second half of the 1970s
meant that the workers wouldn't put up
with it anymore do you think that the
trade unions were just really trying to
keep up living standards for their
members and in a way to see the consumer
dream the unions were reacting to the
particular situation that their members
were suffering reductions in their real
incomes a consequence of that is that
they can buy as many of the consumer
goods as they'd grown accustomed to and
their wives assumed single was a move in
the union movement towards individualism
materialism a bit of grab or you can
regardless in the impact of rest society
demands for higher incomes later
repeated strike action culminating in
the winter of discontent
in the shops the threat to food supplies
is getting larger every day at the end
of the 1970s consumerism mark one was
over that its demise attracting tomatoes
non-governmental 70s Britain feels like
another country so how did we go from
the bleakness and conflict of that
decade to a 21st century Britain
obsessed model class war like shopping
the answer lay with one man the wealthy
chicken farmer wanted to use his money
to bring about a big vision for Britain
and he fishable
the idea of bashing farms which UK
making millions from his company but
their chickens now about a quarter of
all laying hens in this country have had
like this after thousands of them all
under one roof but this whole wasn't
just a chicken farmer he cared
passionately about freedom of the
individual you see the link get his
people again penned in by the state of
my trade union and he wanted to set them
free after war planning in the ceiling
into socialism the people somehow
believing that that one was going to
solve all economies
in the late 1940s they should become
enthralled by the ideas of radical
Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek Hayek
believed that the government policies in
the post-war period reformers surfed
companies of individuals should be free
to spend what they want Fischer wasn't
about Hayek's pre-market philosophy into
action he wanted to become a politician
the Hyatt convinced that his money would
be better spent on setting up a new type
of organization called the think tank in
tell me came out of politics and making
case to the intellectuals that is a
teachers or the students and media
because they in turn influenced the
people this reform of Hayek's advice in
1955 he set up the Institute of Economic
Affairs so these years of also in Heath
he toiled away in the wilderness with
the Telamon of the 1970s the REA moment
suddenly come
it means food is one of the many young
economist to write for the organization
at the time the IEA was was was trying
to explain to people how free markets
worked and that you know the best
organisation of the economy was one
where individual consumers and producers
were empowered to produce what people
wanted market forces and the idea well
you know people would Apple produce and
better stuff that people actually wanted
to buy no longer would Britain be
divided by tribal loyalties by
communities around localized production
now we will be consumers restraining car
with changer since it belonging in free
markets the consumer sovereignty the
whole pond a free market this thing is
to give the consumer sovereignty and to
allow people ordinary people to conduct
their lives in a way they want which is
consumerism with presumed chaos but free
market ideas of Nighy a was seized upon
one conservative politicians again in
opposition football
all right
anger in develop any particular I think
you all know Jennifer they were looking
for an idea it would keep with me really
unifying identity bill Muslims last fall
but economic freedom and consumerism so
these are the ideas that were starting
to be pushed by writers for the IEA in
in the 70s and they then were taken up
by mrs. Thatcher and when she came into
the leadership and Keith Joseph to
formulate a new strategy let me give you
my vision a man's right to work as he
will to spend what he earns to own
property they have the status servant
and noted master these are the British
inheritance
they are the essence of a free economy
and on that freedom all our other
freedoms to change the seventies or
Britain within my ideological conflict
the ideas of the Institute of Economic
Affairs offered a way out a new
depoliticized
identity for ordinary people not as
workers but consumers free to spend the
politicians promises prosperity built on
the economic freedom of this new
consumerism marked too but some this
wasn't salvation
it was brainwashing just in 30 years
earlier with a man in the white suit
consumerism is attacked on film this
time it was a horror movie or one of the
Dead directly told Romero the trade
consumer society wasn't a form of
freedom it is a new type of slavery
[Music]
so Romero the consumer was not an
individual that is wrongly blindly
following the herd into the shopping
mall model becoming some kind of
industry remembering what I used to do
this is important place in their lives
[Music]
but Ramirez critique in time with the
public mood consumerism is about to lift
off like nothing ever seen before
[Music]
economist Juliette Shaw is examined had
the early 1980s lay the foundations the
almost limitless consumption we have
today in the seventies you had wages
failing to keep pace if consumerism
obviously created start with unions and
so on I'm wondering how in the eighties
you know how is it possible for
consumerism to keep on the rails
this was a period in which the nature of
this sort of consumer culture changed
from being one in which people acquired
to something ten to fifteen percent more
than what they had to be in a time when
people started aspiring to be rich and
the mechanism that where that circle if
you will is consumer credit because this
is also the time when consumer credit
becomes much more available and that's a
relatively new thing now all you need to
do is pull a little plastic square out
of your pocket it's like a sort of magic
edit and move you're able to buy things
that you didn't have the income for it
is you pretty so be the first easy gypsy
[Music]
logical innovation is the transform
choice I make good varsity what about
this man Mike riddle will invented a
computer program which you can also
catch released in 1982 it is our
designer she is computer to tweak
constraint of products in a way
previously unimaginable explosion of
choice and fill the giant need
out-of-town retail pops
what if computer-aided design it enable
designers to do it allowed us to make a
lot of variations cheaply to that the
big impact was on cost so that we could
have hundreds of different designs
instead of saying here's a one standard
toothbrush would you have hundreds they
can all be a little bit different from
now on
can't now everything from packing boxes
in luggage it's a kitchen equipment we
don't engage in booking we designed on
the computer the shape and the molding
the shaping of things that was that was
a new innovation as a result wasn't the
ability to do that before before CAD
these products all tended to come in
very very similar containers you would
buy a bottle like you look at the
shampoo or lotion models they would all
be a straight cylinder or different top
maybe a different label now everyone has
a different shape subtle curves to it
things they would never have thought of
before because it would have been too
expensive
[Music]
violently Araya his enjoys capitainesj
desirable and king miss mid-nineteen
eighties well the consumer wonder
created mom customs you consume a binge
new products become very important if
they turn over in the fashion cycle
really spring and that's part of what my
research shows which is the amount of
time between whether per that a
household or a person buy something and
when they discard it because it did no
longer socially valuable not because it
doesn't work anymore it still has
utilitarian value but because it is
passe it's no longer something that is
worth anything because there's a new law
allowed the trailblazer the
disposability is the reinvention of the
watch what is supercharged at that show
how they turn an old-fashioned business
based on quality which laughter the
lifetime into the symbol of 80s stuff
disposable consumerism these days it's
fashion that makes us tick swash the new
wave in swiss watches oh wow this is
reflection of yep Darren Claire what has
head of sales will SWAT to me UK and
hell is slot able to eternal watch and
something that you have for lifetime to
so you know basically these you know
only one of these they're wanting
another one or another one and another
one and I think really the key was
linking into fashion industry and also
having a hundred plus new watches every
single year being loss so every other
spring summer and an awesome winter I'm
collection every single year
as glamorous as you command your own
videos yeah it's rain just young fashion
conscious consumers they go eliminate
what happen it is costly to pay a visit
with a swatch and in students brand new
I mean I think it was literally market
changing authority watch wanted people
to buy for watches a year they saw that
million in 1983 at first year a my 1986
is sending twelve
[Music]
what would mean how much money can be
made by turning what had been a
long-lasting consumer item into a
frequent purchase and even other swatch
was cheap it was made desirable by being
designer the designer revolution in
eighties and nineties like a tidal wave
of key goods on to the high street that
we bought and discarded without shame
but it's one company that epitomizes the
junction of cheap throwaway goods and
design a lifestyle aspiration like no
other
IKEA the clips a personal opportunity
that will occur on October 4 the old man
shall sleep like he is totemic place and
consumer culture first highlighting
invite a person added all even a glass
dishes of tiny bubbles in Internet by
Kia was singled out as the branded with
Norton's antihero cannot escape from his
obsessive desire to finish out of their
furniture shelter consumerism taken over
his life it wasn't just Edward Norton's
character in Fight Club we're all
rushing to conform like everyone else in
Britain I thought my house top to bottom
like you
[Music]
the company is founded in the nineteen
forties of our contract from the
beginning he is single-minded in his
ambition and today the world's largest
furniture retailer but it was in the 90s
when IKEA conquered Britain if its
profits and stratospheric by 1994 IKEA
global sales of nearly 5 billion a year
they cured from the early hours for the
first glimpse into the Aladdin's Cave
alongside the m62
[Music]
your hamster nabo worked at IKEA for 30
years climbing the ladder to become
comfort right-hand man what happened in
Ikea accidentally first of all I guess
because it was long Xia strong and there
was a huge void in the market in the UK
their ads cleverly sought to destroy
because his public to buy into the new
homestyle revolution
[Music]
away there came back here with all these
colorful Scandinavian years on how to
you know furnish your home what IKEA did
was to elevate the prices I can the UK
had the highest prices because there
wasn't any competition who were blaming
they went had the highest prices in the
whole Nakia world therefore IKEA in the
UK have the highest profit so it was an
enormous success and I think people were
way up in IKEA were dumbfounded by the
sector but no longer has the highest
prices in the IKEA world but the prices
didn't stop like you're changing the way
which is people bought furniture do you
think that iclear acid in the disposable
fairway culture that we live in today
the absolute classic wiggler deathless
give the events when I clear got from us
they meet is explicit with an ad
directed by Spike Jones which mock thing
called sentimental attachment to
belongings and directly challenge them
some organize their lives
[Music]
and
many of you feel bad for Islam that is
because you crazy another feeling and
the new one is much better what I did
was extraordinary kick if you take the
idea of home furnishings or furniture
which is which was traditionally a big
ticket purchase something you bought for
life for a sofa and to make it
essentially the same as a packet of
crisps that you throw away you know
isn't everything no matter how big it is
it ultimately disposable regardless if
it's a sofa or a mug its design with the
fashion and fashion dance the deeds have
a limited lifespan you can still find
this throw away idea in our kids
marketing this print out in Canada dates
in 2012 but I care private off on its
green credentials but the programs
giveaways word for me labeled sources by
2020 Steve Howard is the global head of
sustainability I wanted to ask him how
the companies where the contradiction
with their green ambitions and their ads
if I out some of your former clearly
affected if I care had a shit in the
throwaway consumer culture his answer
was yes he definitely did but for
parents which I've actually looked at
online and it's it's a maybe we'd say
recycle your chin today if we did the
same advert today the whole idea
business idea is trying to make
beautiful affordable sustainable quality
products that live in people's homes and
the people behind the campaign to leave
land on the sidewalk they said that this
was actually a campaign to overcome the
durable goods mindset of the consumer so
this was Ikea engineering a change in
the way we look and the products we're
buying
so that we can throw them away I don't
think individual advertising campaigns
whatever the other sizing exactly
time change people's views completely
but while I run a campaign you're not
Yahoo and we wouldn't only clearly that
we wouldn't do that today how successful
are you going to be in preventing IKEA
from running campaigns advertising
campaigns that suggest we throw away our
consumer goods Jack I think we're going
to show this interview to our global
marketing team as a training video to
say let's have more sustainability
messaging on this and I think if we look
at we've not enough oh you need to
guarantee but you're not going to have
an advertising campaign that says you
should throw away these goods
because we continue in about
sustainability that's what you should be
doing I could raise the conversation
with I'm asking people around the world
on this but they've already had it and
actually we still doing it no they're
not still doing it well they needed 2012
you ran a campaign that said you should
need a social disciple which we just
last year so you can't guarantee I will
actually make sure while I'm here we do
not do i disclose the sofa all right so
I'm off to Macon started
[Music]
20 years I first came to Britain IKEA
was still providing the Styria we're
making a new story happens in North
London in 2005 such things have become
increasingly common in recent years this
is what happened when Primark opened in
Oxford Street and now we have imported
the pre-christmas madness of Black
Friday sales from the universe you're
gonna need to become on it the biggest
example of consumer friends in the last
10 years is the 2011 dryers across an
estimated 200 million pounds and
effective 48 thousand businesses
but again here determine the most
positive scores of the 2011 riots
give a good indication of the most
desirable goods in modern Britain and
more popular than clothes or trainers
with consumer technology and right at
the top of the shopping list of mobile
phone the truth of silence is a prime
target for the London rioters as
evidence of the hold these items have
inaudible and at the heart of every year
is the idea of continuous obsolescence
but the catch of never-ending upgrade
first turns up by General Motors over 60
years ago and the man who perfected it
the contemporary Sumer ISM with Steve
Jobs an iPod
[Music]
[Applause]
are you getting it
[Applause]
his hunch launched as jobs introducing
the very first iPhone 2007 since then
there have been seven generations and
the trash is what great intensifies each
new launch making us feel that our
existing Apple product is out-of-date
and obsolete I wanted to know whether
those who worked within Apple could
explain whether it was great design or
this relentless try for profit the drive
each upgrade dan crow Canyon flattens
one of the chief designers in the late
1990s working alongside Steve Jobs
I wondered and under the aegis of design
whether really wants the job is creating
an amazing perfect money-making machine
the idea of the perpetual purchase
rolling consumption of the upgrades that
will look extremely good at iterating in
a huge step of the product better and
better and better not part of that drive
upgrade like people want the latest and
greatest and I think that's what's
interesting but it's also very much
about technology about the how can we
make something better and better the
recent years at innovation slow
if you look at the places or excitons
making Google faster than the nice into
the global back
I didn't configure successful which is
great but it isn't actually that isn't
in the generation game for I think the
scenes in the natural patterns the
parties need ships
it's nearly speed cases probably about
assisted care
[Music]
appala perfected the idea of
obsolescence first revealed in the
nineteen fifties making us want
something and we can lure a little
better and you can see that there is
necessary
there are those who believe that Apple
are also guilty of making it difficult
for us to keep hold of our existing
products even if we don't want to change
them back in 2004 the chewiness was
found
if the iPod in silhouette motif of its
advertising campaign emphasized the
products Universal key because you'll
find that a really lot of making profits
in New York City starting their own
campaign which they called iPod dirty
secret and the batteries didn't last
more than 18 runs there's Robin that's
the real eager to see who our cheat on
okay so what problems would be campaign
well you know this is ten years ago now
a discount the iPod there was four
hundred dollars so a year later you're
gonna played when the battery died yet
I'm I wanted to fix it I wanted my iPod
that I called the Apple 800 number at
the Apple Care number as I explained in
my battery was dead my brother I came up
with this idea to make a movie where we
need this pencil that that iPod on
replacing the battery lasts on the 18
books
and then we spray-painted us thankful on
all of those ubiquitous iPod silhouette
advertising so we're all over the city
when we posted that movie online and
they've been crazy so you go how many
hits three different well this one seems
tough this is pre YouTube but I think we
they're on five million views in a
couple of weeks from what we got Folgers
Apple didn't really address it they did
shortly thereafter change the policy and
enact a battery replacement policy which
is built in obsolescence isn't it
absolutely is the obsolescence cases
campaign was kicked off an entire
movement dedicated to fighting built-in
obsolescence here in California and you
can see the fight back is now underway
I've come to San Luis Obispo three one
of the leaders oh I shall Williams runs
a collective Hyundai fix it they tear
apart new technology to work out how to
mending something they say big companies
like Apple actively discourage well I
thought I find here and the battery is
wearing down charges warning got gone
down 10% already and it's a year old why
is it going down so quickly the physics
of these batteries they were out after
finite amount of time it's a consumable
to site the tires on your car you have
to replace the battery in our plumbing
everyone's life the real problems are
changing the battery of the phone you
merge with your iPhone for when they
release this phone they included two new
spheres we've never seen before so these
are five pointed star shape screws that
we had never seen in all our years to
take electronics apart
Apple invented the brand-new screws
specifically for this phone to keep
people like you and me up they don't
want us in here able to replace their
own battery and I decided that that
wasn't okay and so I reverse engineer
this room we started making its own
screwdrivers for the iPhone so you
invented this may jog on it will now
Erica responded right so what dive into
this room so that's the scurry you can
see it's pretty tiny once you get inside
the phone there are actually Phillips
screws which continues to show the irony
they're only using these mental
industries on the outside that prevent
you from getting it it's actually not
developed for our fence is instead of
giving in but then once you're in the
Sun you've got recognizable skis that
you can deal with right absolutely it's
it's just a gateway there preventing it
from getting inside once you're in it's
just like any other song it's very
important
Apple told us that they work hard to
make those beautiful and size quality
products and devices in the world using
state-of-the-art technologies they say
their products last longer retain more
of their value and a better supportive
and what other products in your industry
Apple the built environment they
suggested we speak to tech analyst
venediktov honest I wanted to learn
whether up great culture must a drive to
make us spend more do you think the
iPhone is improving they think we are
still seeing we need romantic
improvements in what if and Isis do is
that really true because I spoke to Dan
Crowe who is a designer for Apple and he
said that actually what's happened with
the iPhone is that it's kind of
plateaued so specifically the new iPhone
has a 64-bit chip which is what we
doubled performance in the same battery
life it has a camera that can called
slow-motion video in near darkness it
has built an infantry hit I talk through
the people in the cube we're waiting to
be precise s and I asked them why they
were buying the 5s and they didn't say
because it's got all these amazing new
technological innovation you shouldn't
have to know that as it is only you
shouldn't have to know why um you know
it's not the same job to know that
something special it's not the consumers
job to having obtaining all things that
they haven't seen could you tell me
about the iPod when the iPod is
developed what was the thinking about
having a mom replaceable battery if you
make a battery removable you go to
key-in redesign device you then go to
put a plastic case around the battery
and then you go to create a plastic
socket inside the device and then you've
got to create a renewable case that will
come off you've added actually quite a
lot of expertise
volume to the product and anyone we
design where everything is inside they
move all of this so what you're saying
is that those are trade-offs if the
consumer wants a select product they're
going to have a battery that's
non-replaceable than that the deal and
they're choosing that well I think
that's a thing I'm not actually in a
kind of disposable culture the cultural
you upgrade that we have today it's
about relentlessly buying the newest the
quickest the sleekest and that is by
assessing the throwaway culture I think
that's an argument that says that
ankling with a lot better off we have
much lower consumption how much their
lives when 80s in our current population
peasants and the story of humanity is
move away from peasantry and the life
expectancy of 25 or 30 eating plant a
story of consumption they are two
separate change in improvement from the
improvement in people's life so you
think it's right that we have a culture
where companies are prepared to upgrade
things relentlessly and we throw these
things away well I don't think that's
really what we're looking at it um
company the continually struggling to
make better products the reason why I
can turn on the TV set and have a
reasonable expectation that it will turn
on and never failed to the next 15 or 20
years in because companies are
continually striving to improve their
products and make better ones
[Music]
consumer technology must deliver
never-ending improvement to sell to us
which means we've now reached a pinnacle
of obsolescence with a mobile device but
as technology expands to every consumer
purchase their needs what great will
become an inescapable fact of life the
destination of a journey that began back
in the nineteen twenties through the
humble cycle
manufacturers then have all seemed an
impossible dream
sujini a consumer behavior - planned
obsolescence today we live in a world of
relentless continuous spending not so
much because we were manipulated but
because we the consumer chose to be part
of the project next time our fear is
used to make a spend behind us here I
relieve anxiety our deepest emotions are
manipulators it will tell me wow I want
this one
why animal that's that good marketing
I'll meet the man who made a fortune
from exploiting our anxieties no idea
how much money about I was lucky
required an incredible organization
that's one where producer what secret
method who shops knees to make you buy
take a ride on the Open University
second carrot belt and find out what
influences you while you're shopping or
the BBC doc I love UK forward slash many
made a spend and follow the links
related University
[Music]
you