right I just got off the phone but the
phone got like cut short so they may
call back but you know you want to come
on and talk because it was a good
conversation and I don't even know how
to explain this thing and so this poor
person like no you're ridiculous of
course it's this way I totally get what
they're saying because they're right I
am like arguing the colors of the
universe to them but I'm like no this is
if there is especially in ableism there
is no good and bad it's right that
sounds horrible if just the ablest um
but know that I guess so I guess that
would be the same that this idea that
were also strive towards how is broken
that is a value some people hold and
there's a calling from within them and
they want to be the healthy as they
possibly can be even at slide and with
all the values they're fine it's just
you can't require that all of society
holds the exact same value that like
health is the pinnacle why wouldn't you
do that it's healthy how would it costs
people different amounts to do that
financially emotionally different things
cost different amounts to different
people
and what I truly believe because it's
what I've experienced is we're all here
for a very unique journey to learn very
unique things for ourselves that like
magically intertwine to do amazing
things and it's when you tap into that
magic I don't know where it comes from
I don't prescribe to a specific thing
it's just that magic without practicing
magic like it's this vein of amazingness
that runs through life it's like okay
the more you go in you discover who you
truly are and you find happiness and
it's like this shitstorm of up
this but it's beautiful I don't know
it's just it's amazing for me maybe this
doesn't resonate with anyone and then no
one ever comes on board they're like
okay but like we all have our unique
space in the universe and we my belief
systems signed up to be exactly who
we're supposed to be
and so we do have health in this weird
high category that's like okay like we
wouldn't choose someone who's unhealthy
we wouldn't choose to be in pain and I
wouldn't either if I could stop my
health issues tomorrow by taking like
one magic pill I would absolutely do
that and thank god there isn't
that pill because this is exactly where
I'm supposed to be it doesn't mean I'm
not supposed to try to heal it it
doesn't mean that like that's part of
what's going on in the world if there
are actual solutions I'm not gonna
punish myself and not take them if I
want to take them that's part of it
that's part of the weird magic dance
like everything's exactly I would
supposed to be and nothing's like it's
lost in you we have to work together to
get it better that's my world except to
share my crazy world the more I do it
the better better it will all be because
I need to find the people who they don't
know one has to agree with these things
like this person I totally get they
don't feel like that yeah like people
are allowed to have disabilities we
shouldn't want that and we shouldn't
like encourage that and we shouldn't I'm
like like I get that because I feel I
get that but there's also like not truth
there but everyone on this planet is
exactly who they're supposed to be and
just because one person wouldn't choose
that life and chooses to end it doesn't
mean all of that type of person would
and all like adds every life is valuable
and has and this is not a pro-life
stance at all because that life is
valuable in whatever the person with the
uterus decides that lesson came into the
hold your still valuable you were
exactly who you were supposed to be
thank you and then I understand that
other people and I feel like I'm like
recruiting for a cult or something like
how follow me and this is my way of the
universe everyone like everyone's
emotions but also when you up you
have to correct it
I don't feel anyone has to have come
from that space I went on board of
directors to create this thing with and
that's gonna happen simultaneously is
like doing this and sharing it but it I
can't if I hide it goes back and I get
more sick and that doesn't work and it's
the only way is to kind of express it
but anything I believe isn't something
the science bit I feel like it's a
pretty concrete but the bigger piece the
piece that's like are smaller it's a
piece that's mine the piece that is like
my experience and it's what I've learned
and nobody can take that away because
it's a deeper learning than anything I
can learn in a book but it's also not
Universal like it's not like oh this has
to be your truth to that this is why my
body has done this that this is why like
I don't think that everyone has an
acoustic neuroma the same reason I had
an acoustic neuroma or any of it like I
don't think that that's how it works
but I think I had an acoustic neuroma
for specific reasons and some of them
are beliefs like yeah this could be like
hypotheses and some of them are like no
this feels at a deep down level what it
is and whether it's true or not isn't
really it's true to me and I'm acting
from that space and that's kind of what
matters cuz I can don't I can't act from
a different space like oh let's just
change it and doesn't work does it work
I'm sharing that whole piece this is a
weird medium medium medium needy thing
because if anyone ever does come hot
it's gonna feel weird and I can't you
live ones I don't have to do it but then
I have to like do it live then put or
whatever who cares it's in the moment I
have no plans for the future I'm
recording right now the more I let go
and just let life happen the better and
I suck at that like I'm like I couldn't
roll freak but I can and I can't just
like release control cuz that's scary
and I can't handle the stress
 cosmic show can I love it like
it doesn't do this without the interwove
illness of all of the I have to
deal with health-wise and so in the
tapestry of life I chose I chose to have
whatever language you use like disease
in my body and dis health and not
because it's the lesson I had to go
through and we look at like university
education as like a good thing and not
being here educated as a bad thing and
that isn't true that's just different
everyone's educated whether you've
learned it in the classroom we spent
four years doing all you learned
something wouldn't even say you can't
learn anything in four years like
something happened
none of us for it or worse but like in
that four cigar we're like University
good with going through like survive you
don't know it like it's somebody the
illness is good but but being in it is
bad and that can absolutely be true and
it is true in a way like there's both at
the same time is simultaneously
like yes I could take the pill I would
and the appreciating what it's here to
give me that they have to coexist but
the fact that society says that this one
is what everyone has to feel and this
one isn't like makes it worse because
it's I'm never getting this this one
there is beauty there there is
and experience
it's your unique human experience the
only thing that you can't buy
you can't sell you can't do like your
experience isn't actually your bucket
list I have a bucket list there's things
I plan on checking off there's things I
want to go and enjoy and I but it's not
about really having this like huge grand
for me there is I love the grand plan
that's who I am but at the same time
it's about in the moment and having that
like listening to the inner voice that's
the angel it's like but hey do this do
this good thing for the world do this
and the more you kind of can distinguish
between the two of like the negative
self-talk one and like the one that's
like or it's not hard it's like the one
who's be nasty or like negatives with
bad one but like there's just different
feeling that starts associating and now
I'm able to more it's not even like
concrete it's like more able to
distinguish the more they're able to
take it apart and it's happening in a
lot of different areas with this thing
it's happening with the project like
feeling myself step into the person I
need to be to have this world and I
can't just like now I'm the person who
can speak out like that's never
happening I'm not going to be the only
Quinn speaker I'm not even trying to be
eloquent speaker because that's not how
this exists in the world how this exists
in the world is exactly how it is which
is I'm an individual human with my own
faults and my own things that are hard
for me and medical reasons I can't just
push through things that are hard for me
and things that are easy for me and when
I've learned to work with my body and my
mind and my rhythm I've managed to
manage my life in a way that's
meaningful and happy and I love my life
from the outside it never looks good
like I'm like yeah so I just like I
don't all the time I've been too much
Michelle owes which were losing their
appeal because I'd rather do like I sit
and plan on how to save the world I
talked to myself on camera and I like
like oh you sure you know I really love
my life my life is amazing I'm
surrounded by people who were like the
little bit of spoons I have to go out
and do things or spent very wisely and
in a way that like my community gives
yeah it's amazing I love my life but I'm
not explain it all and I'm very grateful
for the experiences that I do have from
the mundane moments because it's like
everything that comes at me is teaching
me what I need to be to be this thing to
get this thing in the world so everyone
can learn to be the thing that they are
in the world mm-hmm that's clear but
that's what it is it's like okay hey so
what I struggle with I did this just
like just me being being selfish it's
like what I want the world and they're
so much actually read it that like I
struggle with like social anxiety and
connection and feeling in the lakes you
know I'm human and I think everyone
struggles with that so I want connection
and I want to be able to be myself but
also find friends and communities and
people to do things that are meaningful
to me with in wait if I want to do those
of the communities and I want space to
do things and community about myself and
I want which is a different category so
I want connection I want connection that
meets my needs because I a lot of my
connection or a lot of you to the
outside world comes off of online and
it's not maybe as meaning like as deep
and meaningful as it could be because of
the way it's designed that it's like
typing online instead of talking to
people like it's face-to-face and I
would prefer to talk to people on camera
but all the ways to do that or either
like oh let me just call my mother and
like no I want to talk to a group of
strangers I want to like I'm a poetry
reading I want to do like things that
are like going outside but staying
inside did I want connection and I can't
think of ways that solves that apps that
help us create connection in the real
world and online that's on the point
though you know that is the point I want
I want connection so I create this in my
mind so I'm like here we go but I can't
I
can't create it I can only create it
with people so for me to have it we have
to create it and I have to make it
accessible like I can't be like and this
is just for me just the thing that's for
me and then McKay no you're not gonna
make that for me it has to be something
that's big enough it like next but it's
not about me finding someone to sing
with on Tuesday nights but anyone
finding their hobby like things that are
meaningful to them in that school if
it's close by because it works with
their life I think the algorithm and map
meets this thing of all things then
plans our life so it's all solidly
planned that's not that's what whatever
it's all connection I want knowledge I'm
like an intellectual person and I want
access to like dates and times for
history and stories and artifacts and
have it all come together in a way that
we just don't have access to right now
but the more people are able to
visualize knowledge and there's people
can visualize it and pass it on to other
people and other people who need it to
be visualized by it it's just it'll be
beautiful
knowledge is awesome and I want to
access to it I want to access to history
oh and access to science in a way that's
understandable to me I want access to
like cultural norms that like rules
written down so that it's a little more
firm because I'm just yeah we're at
least a discussion on the nuances that
those things aren't known I'd like
knowledge on my particular health and
I'm it like data but like all my data in
order to have it like oh where did I
spend my money if it's the easier it is
for me to have access to that and the
cheaper because I'm never I'm just not
gonna buy enough don't want to they're
all too expensive they're all too the
only work with this one thing they take
room on my phone all those things you
know I mean I'm not very good with
things with technology which is why I'm
the perfect person to create technology
with because your strengths and your
like disease is you're like all of it
that's why there's no good in bed there
is all in the word I got this whole
video is for someone ableism isn't it
whatever I'm talking to a nod I was
watching these things someone's gonna
find these at the head of watch you know
like I can't think the hipsters like
people who like look for weird random
things and they come obsessed with them
like one person like this is the new yep
odds legal I want abundance I want
access to stuff when I need it and not
when I don't I don't wanna have to store
things I want things to go away and come
back to me I want to be able to have
access to like a gyp Rosetti for her and
from the way like I want to be able to
like utilize our human ingenuity to make
a more sustainable system or like things
are designed to last through many many
many children and be recycled in that
way without it being recycled okay so
great so it how it goes and where we can
make things new and want to make things
new we create this materials and ability
to get those back to make that it
sustainable and we have access to things
want people to create things more we
give people access to creating things
the better it is the more but like I
want a button it's I want access to
those things and those systems and ways
to create the things that I can think of
so I gotta create it I want I have power
here but I mean like our collective
power I want to be able to coordinate
and collaborate with people and have
like yeah who are people voting for and
let's actually figure out like not who
they say like yes who they say they are
but also like who they beyond that like
who everyone says they are who having
access to actual and like bringing
together our financial power where we
want to completely voluntary you're not
like how everyone only has to like
everyone's boycotting this it's like no
give people access to information on
what they want to boycott to make it
easy for them and give them the
alternative so it's super easy to follow
their values and they will however it's
easy and cheap for people to do it
they're gonna do it and we're gonna make
the whole world easy and cheap for
people tools I want access to tools I
want access to systems to food delivery
systems and stuff
delivery systems I want access to to the
technology and the algorithms that that
like imagine how long it would take for
one person to create one anyone of you
says you mean the person to create any
one of these things that would be
ridiculous
I can't like this is the but it's the so
perfect I think it's like okay here's
the employee like most people work 40
hours a week and it's not a super
stressful job they don't like this dress
might be from the outside world I'm not
happy to have money but the stress of
the job itself you leave it if it's
alright then there's like entrepreneurs
who work like 80 hours a week and get
make sometimes less than minimum wage so
I play more but it's very risky and very
time intensive and then it's like I
can't handle this one I definitely can't
handle this one
so like I'm on disability and count
working can't can't I can't work not
like I can maybe if I was functioning at
my highest point maybe be able to work
four hours a day and that's if I was
like eating really well doing exercise
and I'm not because those things are too
much at the moment and expensive and all
of those things so that's just not the
currently it's life I'm living and I'm
creating the system so everyone has that
so I'm kind of ok thanks anyway I'm
becoming bit less okay with that I need
but that's accepting where I am and then
truly being like okay so where it can it
change and where do I want it to change
like a society says and not because of
 reasons they don't actually
backed up by anything what actually do I
want to change and I probably want to
think about starting to change my diet
because they give me feel it I need it
easy so I want to create an app that but
yeah so when I want health
I want knowledge all the tools on the
text so like I want to be able to eat
healthy without putting all my spoons
into mental energy and physical energy
to cooking clean
I want more like cozy and type where I
share labor and the financial cost with
people and get like the hue and bonus of
this amazing group of people but like
even without that even with like a ton
of talk robots for like whatever it's
just your training time and energy for
even just that is amazing it's like okay
there's like a differ
city of food delicious food that I
didn't have to make that like cost less
than I would have to make it this many
wait last time I would have to do it's
all just amazing and everyone should
have access to those type of tools so
everything I'm create even because I
want it and because then the world will
have it and this is but it's because of
my lack like it's oh I'm awkward I want
connection and I don't let more except
that I'm awkward the less awkward I get
I would like take a little bit I really
don't care except when I do and that's
more learning and more interior work
never my feelings what was that about
and for some reason and that is not
stressful in any way to me like it's
because it wasn't stressful I can't
handle it yet and he and she's the
perfect thing was I doing something else
I was like talking about whatever all
the downfalls the negative is its health
part I'm getting sidetracked my brains
off it's ten o'clock that makes sense
okay let it go I wanted to come on like
what ableism that this person sparked
this conversation that so something I'm
very much struggling with I'm working my
ass off leg oh but no but we can't let
oh no wait what is that about
like what leg and I'm going to say exist
a town that are added to it but other
things I totally will know like I'm
gonna be heard all the time well the one
thing when rules other rules you break
something human we all do that well
emotions none of us are perfect and we
like work with our human ingenuity or
like our natural human talents and in
things that we do tendencies like our
human tendencies like that 20% of people
do 80% of the work that's just what
happens instead of making the 80 percent
feel bad about the 20 percent that
they're not doing it and instead of I
don't know like it's like yeah 20
percent of people are canned 80 percent
of the work that's just how that's gonna
happen hopefully those 20 people enjoy
doing that 80 percent of the work maybe
they do maybe we all do what we enjoy
doing and where that doesn't work then
we can figure it out because then the 20
of 20 percent early
worn out and not okay that's just not
okay but whatever sir all that's a
little bit sidetracked this is how I
talk I don't care and so I'm coming on
from that one I can come on he talked
around enough know having nobody join me
that sounds fun I'm a no that's what I
was going to do you tonight I guess I'm
doing that now for brain I forgot you
forgot to remind me all right good night