[Music]
okay so here we are at the so three this
is probably the single most important
episode not only not all important time
in the matrix has many many many aspects
to it many tendrils reaching into our
lives but all of them rely on a steady
supply of money and so if you're the
person making the money obviously this
gives you a massive advantage in a money
based system now I'm not going to
attempt to go into all of the ins and
outs of how our monetary system works
this has already been done far better
than I could do it you know actual
production values so I would strongly
suggest watching one or more of the
following and the zeitgeist the addendum
the first half an hour of that is all
about the monetary system I've already
mentioned Mike Maloney's hidden secrets
of money
that's an excellent seven part thing on
it if you watch the first three or four
something like that that should give you
a pretty good understanding I saw
another documentary recently called 97%
owned which was made by the people at
posited money which is another website
well worth checking out and so yeah as I
say I'm not gonna go into all of those
details what I'm going to begin with is
an account of how commercial bank money
is created because that is about 90%
excuse me 97% of our money supply hence
the title of that documentary 97% owned
and I want to look at what the social
consequences are of this debt based
interest accumulating model that we have
for generating and circulating money
[Music]
it's kind of emerged now into the sort
of general public awareness that money
is created out of nothing and this is
true but I'm not sure that most people
fully grasp the idea or the process let
alone the implications the ramifications
of it I'm sorry if that sounds a little
bit pompous and arrogant whatever but
for me if people really did understand
it they'd be a lot angry about it and
they seem to be thanks literally used
money to steal our lives from us they
load us up with debt and then they made
us spend the rest of our lives giving
real labor real time real sweat in order
to pay off this fictitious debt that was
created out of thin air the my they'll
indices indeed created out of thin air
and they're only able to make us do that
through the coercive reinforcement the
coercive enforcement of laws and
governments it's it's a proper scam so
let's take a look at how it works
[Music]
[Music]
right at the heart of our monetary
system lies a very clever little piece
of trickery where there is nothing there
is no money you go into a bank you fill
in a loan agreement or you borrow some
money on a credit card or whatever the
process is the same whoever the lender
is and you hand that over to the bank
and they turn that loan agreement into a
form of promissory note which will be
accepted by other people so you had a
promissory note over - over to the bank
in other words the loan agreement your
promise to repay this loan and they type
some numbers into a databank and that
amount of money appears in your bank
account and because that's in your bank
account you can now spend there but they
are io u--'s you've filled an agreement
to the bank and they have provided you
with those very same IOUs in a form
which can now be exchanged for goods and
services on this diagram here time goes
from left to right so on the left hand
side there is no money there is nothing
and then as you move along from left to
right you reach a point where you have a
red line and a blue line which diverge
from each other at that point there at
that point in time that is the moment of
which you have taken out your loan and
so two things are created at that point
and they are opposites of each other so
a debt is created you owe money to the
bank and the bank creates a bank balance
in your favor which you can now go and
spend what we call money now from that
moment on as you can see the red line
the blue line go the same distance away
from the central point you move along
further in time and then they come
together again and at which point the
loan is paid off and the money
and the debt destroy one another so they
came from nothing and then when the debt
is paid off the money that pays off that
debt is destroyed there's one crucial
thing wrong with this diagram when the
loan is paid off the amount of money and
the amount of debt are exactly equal to
each other and so the money and the debt
annihilate money to one another however
in the real world of course debts come
with interest for example I've just done
a little calculation if you borrow
100,000 pounds over 25 years at an
interest rate of 5% you end up paying
back just shy of 175 thousand pounds now
it's really crucial that you understand
this point very few people do that that
money that the bank gave you in the
first place was yours it was always
yours
when you sign that loan agreement you
are giving a promissory note to the bank
and they are taking that promissory note
and giving you a bunch of their own io
u--'s but their euro uses you that's
promising to pay that money back and so
all they've done is turn that promissory
note into a bunch of numbers in a
databank or if you're lucky you get some
bits of paper in your hand and you can
exchange those bits of pay for all those
numbers in a databank for goods and
services but they are your IOUs
it is your money it always was and yet
somehow or other they feel justified in
charging you 75,000 pounds rent on those
numbers in a databank over a period of
2500 over a period of 25 years the next
important thing to be clear about is
that because the bank doesn't own the
money that it's lending to people as
property in the first place
technically every single loan agreement
is not a legal contract does not form a
legal contract because for a contract to
be legal there has to be an exchange of
property what's called the consideration
and exchange of property between the two
parties if the loan is secured then the
bank gets to take whatever property the
loan is secured against so this is a
proper illegal contract mortgages in
particular annex and the example of
illegal contracts because you are
putting up the property
the bank is putting up absolutely
nothing at all in the seconds like ghost
movie they relate the story of a chap
called Jerome Daly who contested the
repossession of his house with his local
bank in Scott County Minnesota in 1962 I
think it was and the judge found exactly
that that there was no legal exchange of
property the bank did not own the money
as property it really generated it by
bookkeeping entry and therefore mr. Daly
was allowed to keep his house now
interestingly that Court decision was
overturned the very next day there were
no appeals no hearings no waiting for a
court date it was simply quashed the
very next day because in that Court
decision lay the end of the monetary
system and of course that could not be
allowed to happen rich people are
getting much too rich from it so that
could not be allowed to happen but
nevertheless the argument is valid the
banks do not own the money as property
and so technically every single loan
contract is a fraudulent document I
imagine that right now you're feeling a
bit like Alice tumbling down the rabbit
hole you have the look of a man who
accepts what he sees because he's
expecting to wake up ironically this is
not far from the truth and the third and
most important thing to get your head
around is this that going back to my
example of the mortgage my hundred
thousand pound mortgage that I did
before the only money which is created
by the bank is the hundred thousand
pounds which they lend me the seventy
five thousand pounds which I have to pay
them in additional interest they do not
create and so an eternal and
ever-growing shortfall in the money
supply is created by the application of
interest the amounts of debt outstanding
is always greater than the amount of
money available in circulation to pay it
this creates scarcity in the money
supply and this for me is the primary
reason
we see greedy selfish ultimately rooted
in fearful behavior because people are
worried they're not going to be able to
pull enough money out of the ever
dwindling money supply in order to cover
their payments on their lives be it debt
be it bills be it whatever and so like
I've said in previous videos this sets
us in competition against each other
both on an individual level and on a
company level and even on a national
level I'm going to play a little another
little clip from one of my colonias
videos um the fourth one which is if you
can only watch one of them that's the
one to watch it out like I think he
calls it the greatest scam of all time
and he explains very clearly exactly how
the monetary system robs us I'm just
going to play one little clip from it
just to show the idea visually of
unpayable debt building if there is
interest due on every dollar in
existence let me ask you something if
you borrow the very first dollar into
existence and that's the only dollar
that exists on the planet but you
promised to pay it back plus another
dollars worth of interest where do you
get the second dollar to pay the
interest the answer is that you have to
borrow that one into existence and
promised to pay it back with interest as
well so now there are two dollars in
existence but you owe four and so on and
so on the result is there's never enough
currency to pay the debt there is always
more debt in the system than there is
currency in existence to pay the debt
therefore the whole system is impossible
it is finite it will come to an end one
day there is a payment due every month
on the principal plus the interest on
every dollar in existence and those
payments do not stop if we stop
borrowing then no new currency is
created to replace the currency that we
used to make those payments whether
you're making a payment on a loan or
paying tax to make a payment on a bond
the portion of the payment that goes to
pay off the principal extinguishes that
portion of the debt
but the debt also extinguishes the
currency currency and debt are like
matter and antimatter when they meet
they annihilate each other if we just
pay off the principal only on all the
loans and bonds that exist the entire
currency supply just vanishes so if we
don't go deeper into debt every year
look what happens the whole thing goes
into a deflationary collapse under the
weight of those payments politicians and
pundits alike talk about balancing the
budget paying down the debt and living
within our means they don't understand
that that is deflationary it is
impossible to do under our current
monetary system without collapsing the
whole economy in the u.s. right now
they're talking about raising the debt
ceiling again they do this every year
and it makes me laugh because increasing
debt as I think I've shown pretty
clearly is inevitable under this
monetary system you know with interest
being applied to the debt and not the
money to pay the interest you know the
debt growing faster the money is is
absolutely inevitable and so in order to
reduce debt you have to destroy money if
you destroy money you bring on recession
and deflation and so you know it is it's
an impossibility for nations for
individuals ultimately to get out of
debt leave at some point this is going
to lead to complete collapse of the
financial system unless of course we
find the wisdom to change it to
something else before it does so on the
screen now is a graph which shows the
difference over the last 50 years
between the money supply and the debt
and you can see there's an exponential
divergence of money supply and debt and
so four laps is not very far away I
don't see how this can go on for much
longer
[Music]
so to summarize two main areas firstly
the money that banks lend you is not
theirs
technically first of all is yours not
theirs is your promissory note
it's your io u--'s that you're spreading
around they're just stamped with you
know the Bank of England's name they
create it out of nothing at the time of
the loan agreement is sight it is not
their property and so all loans secured
against property are a form of
illegitimate consideration and are thus
void and thirdly and most importantly
for me it's a kind of slavery because
they are lending you this fictitious
money and then they are expecting you to
pay that back with money which you are
going to acquire through real work sweat
time giving up time with your family
giving up time doing leisure activities
etc the second main area is the concept
of the inevitable creation of Perpetual
ever-growing unpayable debt in the
economy interest payments are forever
increasing faster than the money supply
available to pay them this creates
increasingly fierce competition among
the population in order to acquire the
unit's to keep up with their to keep up
with their own monthly payments and
ultimately the system must collapse
under the weight of its own debt
at this point you may very well be
asking yourself if this monetary system
is so obviously flawed and doomed
to self-destruction and why do we have
it
why is there no talk about this on the
news on horizon on panorama why are we
not being informed of it surely you must
be thinking this can't be right well it
is right there's absolutely tons and
tons and tons about this on the internet
and as far as I can tell little or
nothing in the way of anyone saying that
this is not how it is remember we are in
the matrix right and money owns media
money owns government and these
organizations conspire with each other
deliberately to keep us in the dark I
didn't say it would be easy neo I just
said it would be the truth and this is
only level one in level two we're going
to look at how the money supply is
expanded and how that expanded money
supply is then in turn used to enslave
not just people but nations and
governments and ultimately the whole
world in unpayable debt okay so when you
go into the bank when you borrow money
that debt that you incur with the bank
now believe it or not becomes an asset
of the bay because you have promised to
pay them this Bank this becomes an asset
of the bank and they can buy and sell
this asset this is what securities are
mortgage-backed securities are mortgages
which there is a promise to repay and so
that hundred thousand pound mortgage
that we were looking at before is worth
in the long term one hundred seventy
five thousand pounds but banks may
choose to sell that right now for say
130 bank or thirty thousand pounds
profit and then pass on the liability
and the collection of the monthly
payments to a buyer now the importance
of these securities I'll talk about in a
future video and I look at crashes but
for right now let's look at how the
money supply is expanded so you walk
into the bank and you borrow a thousand
dollars
that thousand dollars to buy say a sofa
off of ebay the person you buy that so
for from then deposits that thousand
dollars into their bank account this is
where this diagram begins so right at
the top left hand corner person goes
into the bank deposits their thousand
dollars the bank is required to keep a
reserve for this example it's ten
percent it's not always ten percent it
can be lower than that and I'll talk
about the implications of that in a
minute so that thousand pounds that they
have deposited with and they're required
to keep a $100 deposit sorry I said
pounds I meant dollars they could
require to keep a $100 deposit and they
can lend out another nine hundred but
they don't lend out the other nine
hundred dollars that was given to them
in the thousand dollars that still
belongs to the person that deposited it
what they do is they create nine hundred
dollars of new IOUs and they lend it out
to somebody else so that's the person on
the right hand side there they've gone
and borrowed nine hundred dollars we
then go down to the second line they
deposit that nine hundred dollars into
their bank or they spend it and the the
somebody else deposits into their bank
once again the bank is required to keep
a ninety dollar reserve and can create
another eight hundred and ten dollars so
at the end of step one they've the banks
created a new nine hundred dollars so
there's a thousand dollars we started
with plus another 900 days created
there's now nineteen hundred dollars in
the system but the bank only has a
hundred dollars of reserves at the end
of step two
once the reposes is repeated again there
is now two thousand seven hundred and
nineteen hundred dollars from before
plus a new one hundred and ten so two
thousand seven hundred and ten dollars
and the bank has held an additional nice
dollars of reserves and so the banks now
have one hundred and ninety dollars of
reserves and so on and so on and so on
this diagram here goes up to step three
in theory with a ten percent reserve I
mean in theory it can go on forever but
in practice with the ten percent reserve
usually is about a tenfold increase in
the money supply so one thousand dollars
will eventually become ten thousand
dollars ten percent is a pretty high
reserve requirement actually reserve
requirements can be as low as two three
percent sometimes even nothing at all
with a three percent reserve requirement
a one thousand dollar initial deposit
could become as much as thirty thousand
dollars by the end of it and remember
they're creating all of this stuff out
of thin air at no cost to themselves and
lending it all
to the interests so profiting from it
and so they are strongly incentivized to
create and lend out as much money as
possible and you know with this system
banks can between the by lending money
to each other and passing around in a
circle the loan that one to another
becomes the reserves of the next one who
can then lend out more and so on and so
on and so on so essentially banks can
create as much money as they want to and
this is where it gets really kooky
because by be a boy being able to create
huge volumes of money commercial banks
are now in a position to lend money to
governments as interests in exchange for
government bonds I draw your attention
to the fact that the word bond is the
root word of bondage and so and I don't
mean bondage as in the whips and chains
not the fun kind of bondage I mean the
slavery kind of bondage by purchasing
government bonds governments are
promising to repay that money to the
commercial banks with interest how do
they collect that money and interest by
taxing their citizens and so society as
a whole is being drained by the fact
that commercial banks can create as much
money as they want out of thin air lend
it back to governments at interest and
so governments now become liable to
repay at interest their own currency for
which they are the sole issuing
authority I mean the whole thing is
completely insane but then this is to
matrix right so we would expect nothing
less
[Music]
so in short by controlling the money
banks create debt which they know full
well can never be repaid but equally
they know that by all of us individuals
communities businesses even governments
and nations all running around
scrabbling desperately to try and keep
up with our repayment that they make us
their slaves in the process and that is
what the monetary system is truly all
about there are fields endless fields
where human beings are no longer born we
are grown
and what's personally most galling of
all to me is that this has been known
about for long periods of time the
dangers of allowing private powerful
banking cartels to control the currency
supply are well documented and well
known so if we knew about this 200 years
ago why did we allow it that's going to
be a story for the next video I don't
want these to run over half an hour so
I'm going to I think that's probably
enough for now next video is going to be
it's going to start with the meeting on
Jekyll Island where group of bankers
finances got together and hammered out
the legislation they wanted for the
Federal Reserve and how that was
crowbarred through Congress and then how
the Federal Reserve has been used to
orchestrate globalization and the
building of the biggest empire the world
has ever seen the American Empire what
and okay yeah I know yes the American
Empire so yes that's for the next video
to finish with on this one where you're
gonna have a little bit more comedy this
time the late great George Carlin my
personal favorite thanks very much for
watching see you next time
breezy there's a reason it's a reason
for this there's a reason education
sucks it's the same reason that will
never ever ever be fixed it's never
gonna get any better don't look for it
be happy with what you got because the
owners of this country don't want that
I'm talking about the real owners now
the real owners the big wealthy business
interests that control things and make
all the important decisions forget the
politicians the politicians are put
there to give you the idea that you have
freedom of choice you don't you have no
choice you have owners they own you they
own everything they own all the
important land they own and control the
corporations they've long since bought
and paid for the Senate the Congress the
state houses the city
also got the judges in their back
pockets and they own all the big media
companies so they control just about all
of the news and information you get to
hear they got you by the balls they
spend billions of dollars every year
lobbying lobbying to get what they want
well we know what they want they want
more for themselves and less for
everybody else but I'll tell you what
they don't want they don't want a
population of citizens capable of
critical thinking they don't want well
informed well educated people capable of
critical thinking they're not interested
in that that doesn't help them that's
against their interests that's great
they don't want people who are smart
enough to sit around a kitchen table to
figure out how badly they're getting
fucked by a system that threw them
overboard thirty fucking years ago they
don't want that you know what they want
they want obedient workers obedient
workers people who are just smart enough
to run the machines and do the paperwork
and just dumb enough to passively accept
all these increasingly shittier jobs
with the lower pay the longer hours to
reduce benefits the end of overtime and
the vanishing pension that disappears
the minute you go to collect it and now
they're coming for your Social Security
money they want your fuckin retirement
money they want it back so they can give
it to their criminal friends on Wall
Street and you know something they'll
get it they'll get it all from you
sooner or later because they own this
fucking place it's a big club and you
ain't in it you and I are not in the big
club by the way it's the same big club
they use to beat you over the head with
all day long when they tell you what to
believe all day long beating you over
the head in their media telling you what
to believe what to think and what to buy
the table is tilted folks the game is
rigged and nobody seems to notice nobody
seems to care good honest hard-working
people white-collar blue-collar doesn't
matter what color shirt you have on good
honest hard-working people continue
these are people of modest means
continue to elect these rich cock
suckers who don't give a fuck about them
they don't give a fuck about you they
don't give a fuck about you they don't
care about you
at all at all and nobody seems to notice
nobody seems to care that's what the
honors count on the fact that Americans
will probably remain willfully ignorant
of the big red white and blue dick
that's being jammed up their assholes
everyday
because the owners of this country know
the truth is called the American dream
because you have to be asleep to believe
it
[Music]
[Music]