you know on the one on the one hand it
can be a bit dispiriting to look into
the future given the looming shadows
that we see I mean the house is now
moving towards launching a formal
impeachment proceeding of the President
of the United States and you know many
folks may think that that's a good thing
and I wouldn't I wouldn't I wouldn't
attempt to persuade anybody otherwise
but it does it is a foreboding sort of
Colvin in terms of where this country is
going absolutely on a deeper level I
mean I do think what the president did
is very troubling that on the other hand
mm-hmm basically he famously speaks
off-the-cuff and says really appalling
things and to make this one to
impeachment frankly I'm not sure what
the right thing to do is because it is
obviously very troubling to have a
president imply things in the context of
an election like this but Wow the drums
of impeachment have been drummed loud
from the vasila of his taking office and
it does seem like people are jumping at
something that might constitute grounds
where effectively it's not hard to see
mmm how this could end I mean you know
terrible
right but by the way I'm conscious of
the fact as we as we touch on Trump here
again that just from a pure consumer
perspective a lot of people who who
would want to hear the part of this
conversation where it's like Brett
Weinstein and John Wood jr. on Donald
Trump and we spend the next like 10 or
20 minutes just talking about talking
about Trump right that's Trump is good
for clicks and it's good for clicks
ratings and so if any will add an amount
for that reason no we don't want the
clip watching this video right we're
anti click exactly exactly that's how
against the grain we are so again we're
not gonna put it on on the net exactly
this wanna see it this has to come this
immediately the tape there's an
inception thing going on here like you
know intellectual dark web dark horse
podcasts how much darker can we get
before people can't even see the amazing
things that were that's what we Phil's
French Roast that's when we have reached
true
philosophical commitment yes exactly
that gone completely dark exactly yes
that's what we're looking for but um
it's it is it is you know I think why I
even brought this up I mean I know why
it is it is interesting to note what
motivates people as consumers at a
certain point like the I look forward to
the moment where people realize the fact
that we do have the ability to sort of
shift this conversation in a way that
from a demand side of things is able to
sort of change the market viability of
certain messages and certain ideas and
certain certain messengers and so forth
right now Trump is a messenger for a
sort of you know sort of chaos in our
culture and our government and so forth
that derives support on some level from
even from his worst enemies because
everybody's so obsessed with them yeah
you know and one thing I would just
encourage people about his just not be
so obsessed with Donald Trump and look
it's not that he's not an important you
know figure in all of this he is and but
Trump would not exist if we were not for
pre-existing patterns symptom he really
is a symptom and and and some people
want to push back against that but
anybody who sees him as the root cause
of these larger problems is on the one
hand therefore I think going to act in a
way to where they're going to seek a
short-term solution to the problem of
Donald Trump which is likely not even to
be effective and that might be oh what's
happened I hear with this urge this on
these these people are so focused on
Trump that they have the sense that if
we can just deal with that problem that
we will be somewhere and the fact is we
would be nowhere but even if but even if
they succeeded in that in that effort it
would likely result in a you know it
would likely be attended by more or less
the deafness to the to the broader and
deeper concerns which brought them about
in the first place which will therefore
lead to a continuation of those subtlety
and trends will still be here twenty
years down the road one way or another
somebody you know craftier smarter than
the presidents on so forth will come
back the other way and I would say a
similar thing to conservatives who
believe that because look actually it's
precisely parallel for many Republicans
and conservatives including a good many
who would never who would tell you
pretty readily that they don't want to
they don't want their kids to looked at
Donald Trump as a role model but they
felt that there needed to be a a strong
man you know who stood up against the
extremism of the left against the you
know the social justice lunacy that you
see it evergreen and that they fill as
is permeating the the culture of
Hollywood and the Academy and our major
institutions that our federal government
even that there needed to be somebody
who stood in that gap regardless of the
sort of social chaos and political
governing chaos that he that he left in
his wake and for conservatives who think
that way I have the exact sort of same
advice you know don't don't seek a
short-term destructive solution to what
is a a longer-term sort of cultural and
systemic problem ultimately we need to
create the foundation for the solutions
to these deeper things and a consensus
arrived at within the American people
themselves there's a political
conversation about who we elect to be
had on top of that which I think allows
for quite a bit of room for disagreement
right you know but for there to be sort
of a revival in our democratic or
democratic culture a shift in terms of
how we see each other and how we work
together you know that is the foundation
upon which we will be able to absorb the
negative impact of any candidate who
might be elected to office who is more
or less off off kilter in terms of how
they choose to govern this nation
because the ultimate corrective force in
the country has been and needs to be the
American people themselves you know so
putting our attention more on our
relationships with one another and less
on the shiny object that is you know the
shiny orange job
right he really doesn't have a shiny
head of hair too doesn't like a unique
person he is a unique person like
bounces off of it like crazy but to take
our eyes off of the shiny object that is
Donald Trump or Alexandria Acacio Cortez
and you don't take your pick
yeah that is a necessary thing I think
you know for us to draw people's
attention away from you know the the the
figures who arise as kind of the
caricatures of you know who the enemy is
on the other side or who your champion
is right and to return it squarely to
focus on the fact that really this isn't
a question of you and Donald Trump this
is a question of you and your neighbor
you know I see them like that right this
is a question of you and your neighbor
right and to see the connection between
one and the other yeah I love this
framing I have complex feelings about
the president I feel we are imperiled I
don't really feel like he's up to the
challenge of the office on the other
hand all right let me try reaching
across the aisle on this one Donald
Trump accomplished something that nobody
else in recent memory has done he broke
through the duopoly and that required
somebody of a particularly unusual
Constitution and we are now left with
such a person in office which has been
an interesting experience to be sure but
to the extent that we were suffering
from the duopoly and something broke
through it wasn't Bernie Sanders Bernie
Sanders was my guy in this fight but he
couldn't do it and in the end he folded
to Clinton which I must say still leaves
a bitter taste in my mouth I think he
should have stayed true to the fight but
Trump did manage to break through the
duopoly which tells us in fact that it
is possible and that is an important if
he's done nothing else he has done that
service for us as he has demonstrated
that the story that could not be
disrupted by anything
was in fact open to be challenged by
somebody who was sufficiently
politically savvy which I think he is