good morning happy Friday if there's
even days of the week anymore for you
because I know days of the week can be a
little bit weird when you're at home
non-stop every day today on Fridays
today and every Friday we are going to
be doing a coaching session from the
book that I have that I've been trained
in years and years ago they today's
focus is going to be on the relationship
with others I know being stuck inside we
are probably having more intercom
flicked with other people people are
getting on our nerves people are the
government's probably nerves the the
powers that be so this tool is used for
improving that relationship so I'm going
to do a bit of the reading I can find
the papers we've lost the paper they
were here in stack I'm gonna deal with
my kid now they aren't in the stack are
they under here once I got everything
ready okay so there's two quotes here
which I think are fairly powerful and so
if you want to follow along and you want
to do the coaching session yourself
you're more than welcome I'm gonna do it
for myself at the end we are going to be
getting messages from our subconscious
and if you want you can call it at any
time and I can do this with people on
camera but especially for that part in
and of itself to have people call in if
they want to do it to do that part
online so you can do that here if you're
on YouTube you can follow the link in
the description but otherwise you just
need paper and a pen and to follow along
and do this there is a specific graph
that I'm gonna that chart chart is the
right word to fill out but you can just
do it on a piece of paper you don't
actually need to have this chart that's
what I'm going to be doing is just this
favorite the chart looks like this and
we will I will be saying what the
columns are and we just move over and
answer them please paper outside so
anytime we think negatively about
someone we lose some of our self we lose
some of the light we lose some of the
heavenly happiness
that normally belongs to us so if we can
see clearly all of this we actually
cannot afford to hate anyone master
Ching hai this one is from the Dalai
Lama they consider the following
we humans are social beings we come into
the world as the results of others
actions we survive here in dependence on
others whether we like it or not there
is hardly a moment of our lives and we
do not benefit from other's activities
for this reason it is hardly surprising
that most of our happiness arises in the
context of our relationship with others
eyes lost when things go wrong at work
or at home we immediately take the blame
for it and feel sorry for ourselves or
we blame others no one is to blame the
situation was simply created by
ourselves to experience and learn
something about ourselves we can choose
to stay in victim or we can choose to
change our perception of self and others
it goes on to talk about organizational
who's working in organizations right now
actually a lot of people and from home
and you might be experiencing a
different set of tension around us so
for this exercise I'm going to be a both
coaching myself and assuming that the
people watching are coaching themselves
with a piece of paper in a pen so
because of that I can't get answers from
these from these questions so I'm going
to assume like for the first part it I
don't only ask what on a scale of 1 to
10 how focused and ready are you for
your session I'm just going to assume
it's not high so that we can do a quick
a quick exercise to get you in your
heart and and present for thee for the
exercise so with your eyes open or
closed your choice I invite you to take
a couple of deep breaths from your
diaphragm picture your favorite place
I'll give you a moment to get there see
the colors in this favorite place enjoy
the colors allow them to make you feel
more peaceful here the Sal
around you enjoy the sounds feel the
textures around you enjoy the textures
smell the scents around you when you
were ready we can begin coaching so we
also generally start with the clients
saying what their goal or issue is in
this case because the tool has already
been picked you can state it in the form
of your relationship with others or you
can really focus on any issue and goal
and it will somehow relate back to that
because your subconscious is amazing at
that
but because again because we're focusing
on a relationship with others picking a
relationship you have in mind that you
have some tension or conflict in your
not feeling at peace with is the most
logical path did do that so you want to
write down I'm going to write mine down
as let me face
okay so my goal when I'm working on this
session is going to be how can I regain
a relationship with my sister who for in
most degree in most aspects I haven't
talked to in over a year
a year this February so and my nephew
who was born he's about to have his
first birthday
so I had that as a deadline in my mind
for many mending fences and getting
getting back in relationships so that is
another maturity deadline in my head and
that is the relationship with others so
if you have a relationship with somebody
that you would like to write down so you
know what you're focused on what would
you like to gain out of this session
what would you like that relationship to
look like so once people have that done
I'm gonna assume well I get this stated
you can be doing that and then we will
be following this which again take a
piece paper and turn it on its side and
in the first column let's see 1 2 3 4 5
6 there are six columns in the first
column we will be listing the negative
characteristics and there's four spaces
for it all of the negative
characteristics you associate with this
person what makes you angry and
frustrated about this person so the
negative characteristic something right
do 6 columns here and 6 and I believe
it's exactly the same on the other side
just with positive feelings yeah there's
still six in the other side
no way house like that numbers right oh
it's because it continues ripples it
continues across it was like those are
not the same Roman numerals Wellington's
right so what are the negative
characteristics that you dislike about
this person and I'm going to because I
know I sometimes have a hard time
thinking of those things in the moment
hi when I find it well
a list of things negative
characteristics I can trigger your brain
beat while all these things got rained
on one point in time so apologize for
that
because these are the undiscussed are
the negative ones I'm gonna say that
they are I'm just gonna say for now
until we get back to the other the other
part of someone's calling for the
defense for the decoding of the
subconscious message so unconstructive
feelings
oh no the mirror the mirror talk Mir I
can't do this up here there we go
constructive and unconstructive feelings
so on this side what are some things
that you associate with them and how do
I do this while I'm also holding it can
I read it backwards oh it's already
backwards because the mirror thing cool
frustration anger unworthiness
resentment guilt perplexed lack of love
pain death not approved of it's
definitely one coming up manipulation
also one coming up for me addictions
aloneness disappointment embarrassed
unhappy bewildered not peaceful and
empowered loving unsupported no freedom
not strong
judgment plain negativity okay so
hopefully that triggered some things for
you I couldn't write it down well well
it was holding that up I have so many
hands
okay what were the some of the ones that
came up Bandon seems a little
unworthiness judgment blame negativity
I understand there was one that was like
a love pain 7 guilt perplexed it's in
with us but this it was like another one
non accepting I'm supported well these
are all just different things on the
same theme are they for me anyway
1 2 3 i afforda mine my for unworthiness
judgment blaming negativity not
accepting and I'm supported so um this
is kind of hard to coach myself
well coach to other people a little
doing we're figuring it all right so now
Thank You Pierce you don't enjoy about
them and then on the next page we'll be
starting the positive ones column one
has four boxes in each of the four boxes
write down the most aggravating
characteristics that you dislike about
this person let me know what they are so
that I can write them down as well and
then okay yeah this why I'm trying to
follow this
I remember what and then we're gonna
flip over the page and do the six
columns on the other side and write down
the positive characteristics you
associate with this person and that's
from the same chart so but on the other
side is it constructive feelings no it's
not let's be 12 happy right be specific
then you can use the value this chart be
12 strange we were looking at the wrong
one that does make sense why would these
any of these be negative but anyway
whatever values chart I will hold up
here without my fingers over half of
this what are the positive
characteristics you associate with this
person sort of nice balance
I would just like to reiterate that I've
tried so many things in the last year to
heal my relationship with my sister and
none of them have been fruitful and I
guarantee you she has not done anything
over the last year but I might get into
that story time on Sunday as sunday has
become story time for this just that
even if this does support for me in this
session it doesn't we can evoke about
work for you and even if I'm a little
bit better than I was before that is a
success so what are some positive
characteristics associated with her
assertiveness confidence creativity
ocean diligence honesty honor humility
humor idealism integrity truthfulness
justice kindness love loyalty merchants
moderation purity seems wrong but it's
almost there
purposefulness reliability respect
responsibility discipline I'm
I'm going to UM what's the word skin I
can see your comments however right now
I'm just doing coaching so plus it's
related to that diligence
self-discipline self-love sacrifice
service steadfastness tact thankfulness
tolerance trust trustworthiness
truthfulness understanding wisdom wonder
way up for yeah for ones from the
positive side so you don't need to
necessarily have this list if you could
just think of negative and positive
treats that you associate with them so
we break down the positive no I invite
you to go back to column one even though
we may only have time to work on one or
two of these for our characteristics at
the time
make it your intent to have your
unconscious work to provide you with
solutions to all four of these
characteristics mine are all the same so
really it doesn't weigh out of the four
characteristics choose the one that is
the most aggravating the one that you
would like to work on today which one
have I chosen let's think and worthiness
judgmental blame negativity I even read
that one something but not accepted and
supported the judgment blamed negativity
would be the number one one that
encompasses the rest of the other chart
one is disorganized on the list of
people for me because yes yes it is
right negative what feelings does this
character bring up does this
characteristic and bring up for me
there's again is a feelings church on
Beulah Bennett's the other ones the
other side this one then I can hold up
for a moment
constructive feelings or negative
feelings what feelings does this bring
up for you around that one
characteristic for that other human
being and her judgment blame and
negativity the irony on negativity okay
yeah I'm gonna need the feelings jerk my
brain is not okay
disappointed
exhausting sad objected and regretful
right what impact is this characteristic
having on your life how is it making you
feel powerless how is it just
diminishing your power
well that is honest an impact
what are you party it's like I've
already done most of this and my
subconscious already I love it
okay what impact is this characteristic
having on your life how is it making you
feel powerless and powerless is a good
he's a good indication because I spent
so much of my life following my sister's
advice and looking up to her and every
time I did that I got a negative outcome
then because I've got a negative outcome
it's like I would go back and listen to
the next advice and got a negative
outcome and it was this constant cycle
and feeling like because the things that
worked for her didn't work for me I was
the failure and definitely got that
message coming from her as well but I'm
the one who chose to take the advice
over and over and over again even though
it was showing me that I'm not supposed
to follow the same devices her so it's
had a negative impact on my life in that
doing the same things either has a way
less drastic impact on my life like
something's world changing for my sister
and like me for me or it'll actually be
positive for her and be negative for me
and so that the negative impact is what
that's had on my life but what am i
learning from having this person having
this characteristic Oh what am i
learning I had to learn the hard way
that my lessons come from inside that
chances are that works for her it will
not work for me and that is actually a
really helpful indication to have it's
almost as helpful as knowing what will
work so it won't work I think that's the
one path I know not to take because it
was taken by the person that what works
for her doesn't work for me and how
great that she's my sister because that
was exactly what I was supposed to learn
it just took 40 years and then the
resentment the regret is that like I
didn't
that earlier that it took me so freakin
long because I don't think I could have
learned that well having her in my life
on the pedals like I needed this year
that was absolutely dude so that is what
I'm learning my following my okay
oh no we're not so much buzzards right
so the next columns the column so far
we've done is the negative
characteristic that we don't like about
that person what feelings does this
characteristic bring up for us what
impact is this characteristic having on
my life and what am i learning from this
person having this characteristic and
now and oh it's where in my life do i
display this same characteristic on
others and or myself can you use the
seven areas chart
oh and if you get if you need help I'm
thinking of those areas of life here are
some areas of life here are some areas
of life mental and so where in my life
2x display this negative negative
characteristic of judgment blame and
negativity what are you talking about oh
where do I start
okay less and less so in every area of
my life but because it was such a high
characteristic it's still very much left
over in every area of life so let's just
go through financially my judgment yes
spiritually that's so spiritually I'm
basically only judgemental against like
my wound which is Christianity mental
intellectual like opposite of judgmental
of what I used to be judgmental about
which is still judgment health
he definitely health in both a like
being jealous of other people when they
do things and health works out and also
yep what are the carriage mental blame
negativity health social family career
so all of them just all of them I'm
in judgment I can be I can see how that
characteristic comes up for me yeah all
but especially let's go especially
intellectual health and like career like
success and money and getting prestige
that isn't necessarily based on how much
you give or how much you actually should
get but how much the world's like thinks
that you're giving and that is my
judgment about all of Laius judgment
good times good times
why why why must I learn my quest I
happy zoom because that's the whole
point okay how will I benefit from
having the opposite to this
characteristic how will others benefit
so if the opposite to what is the
opposite of judgment acceptance and like
blame is like recognition positivity
which is it kind of a negativity than
even how what is the question how will I
benefit from having the opposite to this
negative characteristics if you go back
to the first column what is the opposite
characteristic to the one that you
picked and what do you gain by having
the opposite because you just did the
the other column of what wearing your
life you experienced the same thing that
you are negative about the person you're
negative about right now experiencing so
how will I benefit from acceptance
recognition and positivity all the time
because judgments and negativity and
blame costs nothing but me to me like
it's I'm the one who pays the price for
that I'm judgments when other people I
know it's me being judgmental on myself
and so I gain from being accepting that
I can see the beauty and other people I
can see how much of a benefit it is to
me that they exist on this planet and I
feel better having having them in the
world and that is very little to do with
whom they actually are and more about my
perception of them in that moment and so
how will I benefit everything I will be
happier see how we all fit together you
know save the world I'll like himself
he'll be good stuff out there on a daily
basis so that was how will it benefit
others yeah saving the world it was an
all better than others
okay we're clipping it over for flipping
it over and we're doing the positive
characteristics so positive
characteristics I associated with the
person with my sister are assertiveness
confidence diligence and self-discipline
and again these are all kind of the same
thing that's right that's right
it's like type-a personality things work
out everything's a rollercoaster those
are not positive
focusing on the positive that she gets
 done and things work out well for
her and she has a lot of drama that she
benefits from what feelings is this
characteristic bring up for you
assertiveness confidence diligence you
want me to pick positive characteristics
because there's not positive
characteristics that's found on the
problem okay what feelings what feelings
does this bring up for you this is a
characteristic bring up for you where
have you exhibited this positive
characteristic okay
relaxed what did they bring up the
constructive feelings
I mean grateful I have been grateful
that she exists in the past then I get
to benefit for these characteristics
maybe my kid gets to benefit from these
characteristics without having to
encompass them myself which is that it's
not only a feeling but it's like a
grateful for uniqueness that we are
different and that we bring different
aspects of that to the world where have
I
this positive characteristic diligence
self-discipline confidence assertiveness
basically only in my project yep that I
am confident that we can save the world
together that I am diligent about doing
the things that I'm supposed to do for
this thing and constantly improving it
and me and the feeling it brings up in
my body of like am i doing the right
thing I'm self discipline self
discipline is just not I can't really do
self discipline but in this area I do
and I do just self discipline in other
areas of my life where it's it impacts
us that in parenting look like okay if I
don't eat and sleep well I'm gonna be a
worse parents I'm gonna be worse when I
when I show up in the world it ends up
being where I do have self discipline
when it's affecting other people and
affecting my bigger mission affecting
the main person my kid so where do I
have these things in project which is my
purpose project slash purpose and
parenting well is it not of fun a little
alliteration strong word that's what
that's what that's what bubbles all
right whoa what are the benefits to me
that they have this positive
characteristic again I got to learn all
the negative ones I got to learn that
their path is it my path that I have
different things to give enemies I don't
think I could have learned that to the
same degree unless she was my sibling so
how do i benefit from her a being
assertive s confidence diligence I'll
just fun also she had money for a period
of time and like we got to go to
Legoland and Disneyland Zandi and she
paid for we got to go to to Whistler
that's when like five years ago
must have been yeah five years ago right
now my grandmother passed away and we
went to the funeral and my sister or
whatever there's other issues that help
with all of that but I did get vacations
and
an advice that didn't work which as much
as that doesn't seem like a positive
thing again advice that doesn't work
it's almost as good as advice that does
work if you know it's not gonna work and
there's a binary you know this it's not
gonna work
there's other one one of the benefits to
me that I have these characteristics
well it's the only way anything gets
done um
so things get you know move closer to
purpose and I'm aware of where more
self-discipline could be used even if I
can't quite do it I can do you know
where awareness okay where did I learn
to beat this way question I don't really
understand that question the way that is
where did I learn to be like that I
didn't know Jacob opposite problem my
sister that I had lived for life but see
the balance in a relationship go to call
them work and see the positive ones to
grins forms go to all six to complete
the release of judgment of others all
right well I was yep yep talk amongst
yourselves
releasing judgments of others Academy
I'm just quite finished though tonight
where did I learn to be this way is the
issue as I were are the benefits to me
from having confidence
I learned confidence in myself through
weirdly the unconfident or my family
this is what I have to look like in
order for them to believe in me and if I
can't fit in that box I have to find my
value in every other place and although
I don't wrestle resonate with these
character traits confidence I do more
and diligence of like what like finding
my own path so I learned it from the
opposite and from not conforming well
maybe we don't do this one we do this
now that we've studied the negative and
positive characteristics you share with
this person in what ways do you see this
relationship differently you know a lot
closer to the emotional sharp like being
emotionally neutral with her so that I
can have a relationship back so that I'm
not in anger or hatred and disgust but
instead in at least neutrality maybe not
back to love and gratitude but
neutrality values chart all right values
turn what are the top values I've not
been receiving from this relationship so
I got it's just this shirt values what
have I not been receiving from this
relationship
acceptance patience respect but
self-love was jumping up at me like
that's the bigger one because if I was
able to be truly in love with myself as
I am
I knew this year ago then I could deal
with whatever shows up in another person
including her and that was what wasn't
so like my own self love and
self-acceptance that even if she or
anyone doesn't accept me for who I am
that my love runs deeper and I can I can
do it so that is what I what are the top
two to three values you have not been
giving to this relationship
what and also acceptance I get it I know
I know
self-love also because I was able to
give self love and I kind of stay
present what was the other one again and
again acceptance like I get it I I'm
angry if she's not accepting me as me
which is be not accepted her as her not
accepting me as be like I it's it's even
seeing that though it's not very hopeful
but uh-huh generosity gentleness
gratitude but I wasn't supposed to I'm
supposed I was supposed to kind of live
in the opposite of gratitude and see all
of the negativity that has happened in
my life so that I could work through
that and what is the number one value
you have been giving to this
relationship is space on here I mean
step oh isn't that ironic but the list
of positive characteristics they were
all quite similarly the same and I've
lost my favor is the assertiveness the
confidence the diligence the
self-discipline that that is actually
what I look cases I've been trying for
the last year I've done counseling and
somatic therapy and meditated can
annually on this issue and now doing
doing this that keep doing that is
discipline a self-discipline like need
knowing that this is a need of mine and
then working with it it's like Oh weird
because that is what I'm like I know
she's not like but she's the one with
these positive characteristics but this
isn't an area of her life that she's
focused on some of that was just
interesting hmm
what is the number one value you have
been given to this relationship and it's
that that I've been giving diligence
that I've been giving self-discipline in
this that I've been trying and trying
and trying and and keep coming back to
it how committed a mine making this
relationship work right out of ten with
ten being the highest that's really
weird cuz I'm not committed as far as
I'm committed to allowing the process to
take place and I have faith that
eventually we will have a relationship
again or won't but it will be for the
highest good that wherever I am is where
I'm supposed to be and even having that
deadline um of my nephew's birthday is
not really helpful but um so it's hard
cuz I can't really put a scale of 1 to
10 on it
I'm out of ten for the greatest good
unfolding whatever that is but how much
my that that needs to be with her in my
life and E in her life not three but for
the greatest good at ten and so whatever
that means
oh that was the point all right release
of the emotional charge okay it was this
we didn't do that I was like I thought I
had to go okay so this is releasing the
emotional charge and listening to your
subconscious so if you've been following
along and doing this doing this you
should be able to get a image something
from your from your subconscious that we
can then um deconstruct figure out
deconstruct strong word
decode because it's specifically coded
to you and your your issue your goal
that is what your subconscious gives you
the perfect advice every time so we're
doing think pink to pop the receptors
and develop more innovative solutions
let's use an exercise of color with your
eyes open or closed your choice I invite
you to imagine the color pink in your
mind's eye let me know when you have it
how do you let me know you know and what
simple image color feeling or sound
comes to mind since you can't describe
it for me I can't write it down you will
need to open your eyes and write it down
but write down as much detail as you
possibly can so if it's it's an image
that's I'm just gonna do it mine no hug
all right that was interesting so that's
right all right so now if you think
about what symbol images colors feelings
or sounds come to mind all right so what
I got was first an elephant and quite
frankly I always get an elephant it was
like no anything else and I kind of
pushed it away and the second image I
got was a little white church like on a
hill with a with a little with a
graveyard surrounding it's like a little
picket White Fence little Church it has
a cross above the door and there's a
there ringing the bell for for Sunday
service for people people to come so
that sound is is going on and now I get
to go through the code it and so this is
the point where if you've been doing
this and you would like help decoding it
if you can't decode it yourself then you
feel free to call in and you can tell me
just without images and I'll see if I
can help you decode it because what does
it represent it's a good question
considering it was an elephant just like
my favorite animal and a church and then
me so the elephant kept kind of coming
back as well and it was almost like a
cartoon elephant that was shy and like
putting one foot behind the other and
like I'm here I'm still here like look
even though you told me to go away I'm
still here oh that's okay so what does
it represent an elephant is my favorite
animal it comes usually when I get it
it's because of the matriarchy and the
Divine Feminine that they are
matriarchal species their wisdom they
remember everything is the connotation
of elephants that they within Africa and
walk long periods without water but they
can find the water there's there's a lot
of so see with elephants because there's
a lot of stuff but memory like
steadfastness church it's a whole other
connotation because I had rather a
difficult time with church I don't
that's not true is that church was like
my solace is a little kid and then when
it fall away it became wound like a
little church with a graveyard something
about it that's like people people's
peace and solitude strong word like a
place where you go to refresh yourself
rejuvenation Cuba nation once a week
that it's oh it's cool it's like a small
town it was in a small community with
history and I like graveyards they're
not new graves they like the old Riley
will pick it fence it's like contains
but not a but pointless like a little
picket fence that clearly doesn't keep
anybody out but looks cute frames it
alright so now that I have the image
that my subconscious gave me the
elephant and the church and I have what
those things mean to me not necessarily
what they mean to anyone else right
someone else get an elephant would be
completely different somebody else
getting a little church completely
different fact that it's white also in
the fact that there's a cross about the
door considering it's like sacrifice
mmm-hmm
like I don't know whether Jesus actually
lived I don't know whether that story is
actually true in any way my logical side
says no and yet the sacrifice that he
did that he came back diverse and rose
three days later that piece of it is
like that he sacrificed and that whether
it's true or not it is the ultimate
sacrifice and it doesn't actually need
to be true for it to be the ultimate
sacrifice like it's there's something
there but it's it's there's something
there all right how is this
representation a logical solution to my
real goal which was how can I regain a
relationship with my sister and help us
a specification of logical solution how
is peace and rejuvenation oh yeah to
come back to serve on tell my
self-conscious to off
because I always say this is the
interacting with my guy it's like white
loving to do what no yeah contained best
[Music]
oh that I needed this year I need this
year this was money rejuvenation but
that we do have that history of course
we're family we have history and it's
the history that we will come back to
when it's ready I don't need to forget I
don't I don't need to concentrate on the
positive and make her on a pedestal
again like she ever she'll never be back
there and that is okay in fact it's
wanted that's why this had to happen but
we can develop a new relationship I
don't yet know what that looks like I
don't yet know what it looks like to
even start that
but there is less emotional charge best
sacrifice untruth for some reason what
is coming up so then the next step is to
actually make make plans make a plan
what what SMART goal does that bring up
and a SMART goal is specific measurable
attainable realistic and time-based and
the two things that are coming up are
this Sunday to do my storytime on my
sister and our conflict and this last
year and all that all that stuff and
also just set up a conversation with her
to actually say hey are you re I'm ready
to talk when you when you are what time
works for you and have a conversation
without needing it to be without needing
it to be planned out without needing it
to be anything more than what it is
without it meaning to be this huge oh my
god it's copa90 know or with a doctor
here just a conversation just an
invitation to a conversation and that
should be fun story time or I can like
re hash out everything that happened and
then also see see what that feels like
because I haven't told the story in a
while I told the story a lot when it
first happened and again and again and
repeat and then I haven't really
revisited it in in a while to tell us
something else so how does one a mean
those are my just like timings goals and
so again if somebody wants to call in if
they're having an issue figuring out
what their subconscious is telling them
then I can help you decode it otherwise
we are doing this every Friday we will
be doing a coaching session I am
realized then holding the things up not
so great but I'm going to do a scanning
of the important papers it'll be in one
folder it'll be on the G Drive and
everyone can have access to it but it'll
be in the description on you too
so the only place to really watch this
and follow along in that way will be on
YouTube so if you're on but I'm also
gonna so periscope Mentos into the watch
me on periscope or Twitter I'm going to
link I'm gonna post the video for these
on Fridays at least on Twitter so then
although I'll be live also it's also you
can follow go to the profile look for
another one and I'll be live on YouTube
as well you can follow that one even
though I don't think it shows up live in
the same way so you can also go back I
mean I don't know how well I did your
this one we're practicing it but you can
go back and watch this one and follow
along and do the relationship with self
coaching sorry relationship with others
coaching and follow along the be the two
let's go with number one first number
one all the negative characteristics of
someone else and all the positive
characteristics and follow through going
through that process I also hold up the
sheet so you can you can pause it and
look for them and then decode your own
subconscious message with that every
equal doing a new a new technique you
might revisit this one in a few weeks
because there's a few that I want to do
to the five questions I want to look at
relationship with others relationship
with self there's one about your overall
life purpose as well as your period
purpose and I want to do do those ones
and any other ones that end up coming
now I did one last week I remember which
one I did last week one of the short
ones
we didn't focus focus on the short one
but so we doing this every Friday
coaching myself if nobody else shows up
and if someone shows up on camera then I
won't coach myself because I'll have
that person to work with
otherwise the coaching the audience and
the people showing up on on camera
and/or me if no one else shows up on
camera so next week we will be doing
this video relationship with others this
week we'll be doing relationship with
self and there's another chart to fill
out and like I said I will scan the all
of the tools that we that people will
need in order to be able to follow along
to the coaching and that will be
available by next Friday I'm committing
to it now and hopefully every watch this
so I remember that I couldn't do it now
and I will see you all tomorrow tomorrow
Saturday so I will be just on for 20
minutes updating and what I've been
doing for the week what what life is
like I want to I'm doing with my goals
updated by mission on on the planet may
be where I am with my five questions
that's actually a good way to do it
where I am with my five questions and
and then today at noon on the together
tech Channel so noon that some help
everyone's different time zones in about
just under three hours I have the
together tech board meeting no sorry not
to attack board meeting we are doing
atrial did a project on knack for the
game B slash together tech projects
porthole a portal so we know what
projects are available and who's working
on what and what those projects are and
so we're going through that tool on the
together tech channel later today and
then tomorrow right after this I have
the masterminds Saturday morning project
meetings where we bring our projects as
they were working on how we did the last
week and then I'm an important
conversation at 10:00 a.m. that day so
it's very back-to-back and I might not
make it together tech conversation on
Saturday mornings so I can be part of
the conversation more refreshed on the
dot 10:00 a.m. so that is what I'm up to
the next few days hope to see you
tomorrow and on Sunday because I will be
doing this on Sunday because I'll be
doing storytime you poke my sister that
is a quite a fall time we'll see we'll
see how that works all right