welcome to your meditating with
chandramukhi I'm a cognitive
psychologist and a cognitive scientist
at the University of Toronto there I
study scientifically and academically
mindfulness practices mindfulness self
related phenomena like Insight flow
mystical experience transformative
experience the cultivation of wisdom
I've also been practicing the pasta
meditation meta contemplation and Tai
Chi Chuan for 29 years and I've been
teaching them professionally for close
to 20 years welcome this is a
progressive course this is not just a
gathering together to sit together every
Monday is a Dharma day every Monday I
teach a lesson today's a normal day I'll
be teaching a lesson Tuesday through
Friday we meet there's some reviews
sometimes we sit at the end of every day
Monday through Friday there's a Q&A if
you are gathered running us for the
first time and welcome to stay but in
order to catch up look for in the
description for links to previous
lessons and since the description in
this video for those of you who have
been asking more broader questions
questions about you know how does this
fit into our overall practice or maybe
some of the cognitive science of
mindfulness and insight or mystical
experience what's the relationship
between stoicism and Buddhism or Savoy
system and Neoplatonism or Buddhism and
neoplatonism there's been a lot of
questions and a lot of topics for these
Q&A the Q&A is at the end of the sits
and the lessons we try to limit it right
directly to the practice it was more
broad for those broader questions and
any questions you might have about my my
series awakening from a meeting crisis
or voices with reveille key or any of my
videos we have a monthly Q&A and we'll
we will be having a monthly Q&A this
Friday so please look for that on my
channel there'll be a video announcement
for it and we'll also send out on social
media and you'll be able to we'll be
having to set up similar to this you'll
be able to send in question
and I'll answer them you want to see
what it looks like there's previous cure
days on my channel so as I mentioned
today is adharma day and so today we
want to learn a new lesson and we're
going to do a particular kind of
exercise to really try and bring this
lesson home mmm so let me start with a
metaphor that you found is you find in
several traditions especially meditative
traditions this is looking at the pond
so the idea is you come upon a pond and
you're looking at it initially there's
wind disturbing the surface of the pond
this is like the way your mind is
rustling monkey mind and what you have
to do first is learn how to sit and wait
for the the wind to subside a bit and
for the pond to go right more and more
smooth because when that happens when
that happens then you get insight of a
pasta you can see into the depths of the
pond so there's two stages the first
stage is the calming and then the second
is insight there's books often
frequently have those two paired of the
petal I have a meditation manual called
calm and insight right so up to now more
explicitly more foreground we've been
concentrating on the first stage calming
the pond now of course it hasn't it has
a lot of calm but we've been just
getting staying present and letting the
mind settle a bit but in the background
I've also been training you with a lot
of stuff for that second more important
stage which is the stage of looking into
the pond getting insight which isn't the
same thing as having sort of a
theoretical idea so let me try and
explain what this means more
specifically and concretely we're going
to talk about the to this lesson
and next lesson are sort of part 1 and
part 2 these are the five factors of
inquiring mindfulness the five factors
of enquiring - I'll first list them and
I'll talk about what's meant by
inquiring and then we're going to talk
about the first factor primarily today
because all of the other factors are
actually in service of the first five
what is that first factor its vigilance
the second one is sensitivity the third
is Hewitt II the fourth is noticing and
the fifth is reminding vigilance
sensitivity acuity noticing and
reminding what what is meant by inquiry
so this is what's really important here
inquiry there's two ways in which we
engage in inquiry one is largely
curiosity inquiry and the other is
wonder inquiry what happens in curiosity
inquiry is we have a question and we're
trying to sort of solve that we have
missing information which looks like we
have a whole we're trying to fill it in
a gap as quickly and as effectively as
we can and that's very very important
I have no way dismissing this or
denigrating in Indian fashion but
there's another kind of inquiry which is
really not questioning it's more like
questing the two are related same route
but it's slightly different going on a
quest because here the point is not to
fill in a knowing gap it's the extent
it's it's it's instead to expose
yourself to exploration to open up to
call into question by going beyond the
familiar right everything that you have
regard is familiar it is to learn in a
deep fashion to give up the pretense of
expertise in our self-knowledge let me
say that again because I think that's
something that bears a little bit of
repeating it's it's fundamentally a kind
of humility it's learning to give up the
pretended expertise we have in our self
knowledge which paradoxically is one
that we all fall prey to especially if
we're engaging in spiritual practices so
this brings me to the the core of the
five factors of acquiring mindfulness
were not truck right which is vigilance
vigilance is about getting us into this
place where we're not trying to come up
with a theory or a justification or an
explanation we're not doing any of that
inferential theorizing justifying
explaining it's much more an exploratory
observation so think of the word
vigilance
something you might have noticed when
you're reading some of the sutras and
translation is something that gets
skipped over because they'll be a word
mindfulness and they'll be a word
watchfulness and we often treat them as
if they're the same but watchfulness is
something more than mindful mindfulness
think of it includes mindfulness but
it's something more think of a person
like a guardsman on a watch tower there
and they're exemplifying watchfulness
they're not just sort of staying present
what they're doing is they're looking
for what they haven't yet seen they're
trying to sensitize themselves to the
unfamiliar they're opening their mind
and awareness into the unknown when an
air traffic controller has to be
vigilant they are they're not just sort
of being present with oh there's all the
little bliss they're trying to look for
what they haven't seen they're trying to
notice what is new and what is different
of course I've been already implicitly
helping you to train that by instructing
you and you know finding your flow and
finding your focus and this is building
on it but this is now making it much
more focal or finally think of keeping a
vigil keeping a vigil and you keeping a
vigil of course you're staying awake
you're staying aware let's say many
people did a vigil over Eastern for the
fight if they stay awake right and what
they're trying to do is they're trying
to open themselves up they're trying to
look for what might come into the sacred
space so well we're trying to do with
vigilance which is the core factor of
the five factors of inquiring
mindfulness is we are trying to explore
and get below the familiar face of our
experience that's the attention and
attitude the attention of awareness part
the attitude part is where we're trying
to give up the pretense of expertise at
our self-knowledge right and the
energetic part is there's a movement and
exploration and a penetrating
observation so some interesting stuff
from the eye angle is it looks
like it's actually this exploratory
wondering you know
observational inquiry that is conducive
to many of the beneficial effects of
mindfulness practices the Buddha was
very very critical very critical he sees
you know it's important to pay attention
to whether where the good is critical he
was very critical of people who pursue
these practices and they're seeking a
kind of contentedness and
self-satisfaction
he called them indolent and sometimes
compared them to cabbages that just sort
of sit there so that's pretty harsh and
I'm of course not the Buddha I don't
have the authority to criticize anybody
to that degree but it's nevertheless
something to take note of we need to
make this focal for ourselves we need to
bring inquiring mindfulness in that
right into our mindfulness practice okay
so how do we do that well there's going
to be two sets of practices I'm going to
teach you today I'm going to teach you
meditative questioning which I that's
how it's called in the tradition I think
we naming it would make it more accurate
if we called it meditative queston
because it brings up that vigilance and
that exploratory observation I'm going
to teach you that today and it'll start
to set up for something which is next
week which is meditating on your
distractions which is one of the most
powerful ways to deal with distractions
in meditation and also how to deal with
hindrances hindrances are things that
prevent from engaging in the practice
but today what I'm going to do is I'm
going to teach you a particular practice
and I would recommend doing this
practice once a week so I practice you
do regularly like meta and past none
which you should be alternating this is
the practice you do once a week because
what it does is it really gives you
access it activates right and really
brings into awareness it accentuates the
factor of vigilance and that's the core
the five factors vigilance sensitivity
human noticing and reminding so let's
work on vigilance today and what we're
going to do is we're going to do
meditative question
or as I'd like to say meditated quested
how does this work okay so you all as
always and you'll see you see now how
the core for sets you up to give you a
basic foundation for mindfulness but
they've already they've already got you
in the training of vigilance in an
important way for the five factors of
acquiring mindfulness so we find our
core form we find our Center we find our
root we find our flow and find our focus
and we do some basic for Passman we'll
do that and so the we will sit together
and they'll be silent for quite a while
and then at some point I'll say right go
into meditative questing how does this
work well why don't you do is pick a
question and it has to have and you know
you even have to play around this
there's always serious play as we try to
learn our way into this process that's
it the question that has the following
characteristics to you it has a normal
familiar automatic answer but it can be
we understood to have a deep and
profound meaning that is personally
relevant to use of these sweet these
vectors right as a normal familiar
automatic answer but it can also be
understood to have a profound deep
meaning that is relevant to you one
question that's used a lot by people and
works for a lot of people right always
you have to play is Who am I Who am I
okay ulema and of course we're deeply
interested in this question and we have
familiar answers so you know John or
this guy here or this body or its
consciousness so what happens when I ask
that question right if I asked this
question and I direct it deeply to
myself from and you're trying to take
that of the friending yourself that
you've been cultivating from the
beginning Who am I
and these automatic answers come up do
not treat them with the state they are
portals they are door
they portend portal portend something
beyond you use them like a lens that you
see through or a doorway that affords
you going further so when the answer I'm
John thank you
but Who am I and the idea is where did
that what did that answer come from
something is behind them and I question
deeper I try to see and I ask the
question again not trying to force an
answer or expect an answer
what answer comes up when I try to get
behind and through my first answer yes
thank you
but Who am I you can yell would say but
Who am I really right another answer
comes up maybe you picture yourself an
image yes thank you but Who am I Who am
I really
another nature comes up you feel your
body oh this is me maybe I'm not gonna
I'm not saying this will necessarily be
the sweet sequence I'm just giving you
some common examples oh yes thank you
but Who am I really oh this inner mind
space uh-huh
yes but Who am I really my memories ah
thank you
every time thank you yes but Who am I
really and the point is not to get an
intercept a special temptation that will
have happen along here is you will get
you might get some really insightful
answers note them the same way thank you
maybe even thank you very much of Who am
I really passed through the doorway go
on the quest the point is to get to a
place that seems unfamiliar people often
describe it as a kind of emptiness and
expectation a waiting it's sometimes it
has an unpleasant tinge to it
Who am I ud familiarize it we have a lot
of evidence that the capacity to de
Familia rise and be autumn of eyes your
cognition is tremendously beneficial for
affording insight and if your be
familiarizing and be automating the
machinery of your self-identity that
opens you up to existential insight
opposed to just intellectual insight
okay so that's a very that's an example
of a question you might want to ask you
might want to but what is really going
on now
in your experience right that one's a
little bit more abstract the one that I
found that is the most successful for
people is who am i because it really
brings together right
the automatic with the get to something
profound personally relevant exploration
the cultivation of the ability the
giving up of the pretense of expertise
and self-knowledge okay so we will go
into that now if you get distracted
while you're doing the meditative
questioning remember if the majority and
the majority in center stage of your
awareness is monkey minding night of
it's a monkey Minds off in the periphery
because the monkey he or she is always
out there if this happens you feel that
shift then you do everything as normal
label the distraction with an ING word
return to the past no first I return to
the past not follow your breath for a
while and then pick up the question and
you will take this right through the end
the point is not to get an answer the
point is to become get the taste the
felt sense of what this exploratory
observation is what this West thing into
the depths what's trying to see into the
pond
what affording existential insight
actually is like to have a direct
perspective oh and participatory
knowledge of it okay all right so please
remember to turn your phone off do not
disturb
please remember and I emphasize this
every time coming out of your practice
is heart coming out of you sit I should
say is part of your practice try to get
your comfortable posture as comfortable
as possible we will begin when I say
begin
begin
you
begin meditative question
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to get
degrade what you cultivated in your
practice with the early day
consciousness and cognition can you keep
that sense of attitude of humility the
exploratory wandering awareness that
sense that energetic sense of moving out
and into the depths getting beneath the
familiar phase of your experience your
sense of identity this is often called
Praja starting to forge posner the mind
sort of wisdom macaques our point of
view when you're using this question Who
am I you're triggering the default mode
Network especially when you're closing
your eyes but because you're bringing
this questing element into it
you're also triggering the task focused
networks and the salience network and
you try to get them all to integrate in
a dynamic state which is very powerful
I recommend this week normally like I
said you do this practice once a week to
us to really refresh and reacquaint
yourself with vigilance however for this
week till next Monday
did you try and practice this at least
two more times at least two more times
perhaps if you could in addition to your
the pasta and your meta practices so
some questions this is from Ann I am an
impulse buyer interesting interesting
handle any tips for posture with
meditation when I sit like you my knees
are rather sort so yeah so you might
want to try so put your like you have as
a foo put it or horizontally
sit cross-legged like this first as if
you were to sit on it and then if you
can sit a little forward and roll onto
your knees like that okay like this it's
good idea generally for this one if you
put you you can do this with your hands
here but it's a generally a better idea
to put them out here because they help
to keep your legs rolling up and they
give you a little bit more triangular
stability try that posture for a bit and
see if that works for you better not so
right of course the people who can go
into the Lotus while they're doing this
i'v optimal because what the Lotus does
is it gives you this and the opening and
the stability and like the kneeling sit
it keeps your pelvis lateral us but of
course for many of us the Lotus is a
very hard thing to do but have you been
doing yoga and that's available to you
that's very that's a very good posture I
used to do this kind of questioning I've
experienced it bringing up intense
anxiety is dissociation and fear any
tips around this yes so typically if
this is so there's two things and and I
don't know you so please take that into
consideration I don't know you
personally two things can be happening
here some of us when we start to get
below that familiar chatter we start to
experience something we're going to see
later that we start to dis identify from
our inner speaking line we come to
realize that our mind is much more than
what we fill it up with with you know
pictures and propositions and there's
much more to us than the automatic
situated images and names and feelings
that we call us and that unfamiliarity
can be very challenging and so if that's
happening to you what I recommend is
that you maybe slow down the rate at
what you're doing this may be only do
this once a week or perhaps even better
wait till I explain next week how to
deal with powerful distractions like
attempts emotions and feelings and
when you do the vigilance practice the
meditative questioning you'll have tools
for dealing with this deep distraction
that's the more general is you might
have a specific case I don't know you
I'm not presuming where you might be
dealing with some undisclosed issues
around sort of trauma or psychological
or emotional abuse and so your sense of
self is is house it kind of wounding in
it that might be being exposed I don't
know you I don't know if this is the
case however if that is becoming a
regular sort of thing like you're
suggesting you might want to consider
talking to somebody about that aspect in
a therapeutic context I'm not telling
you you need therapy it's highly
probable that you're just falling into
the normal cave the statistically normal
case of the you know what just healing
was kind of a woo a kind of deep down
familiarity which is challenging for us
but I would be irresponsible if I didn't
hold out to you the fact that you might
be touching that means something that
needs more significant intervention this
from the math truth when I say thank you
after receiving an answer I
instinctively ask but who are you really
should the question be phrase Who am I
really should or who are you phrasing be
avoided no that's good too right you can
you can even go between them the the the
you is actually good because it's sort
of directing you deeper yeah I find it
sometimes that comes up spontaneously
for me and I I just sort of
spontaneously move between the two of
them Diane Nicholson I found such a
place is it okay to stay there and
wallow I'm trying I'm trying to think of
what the place is the Diane's ask you
mean that place of sort of contentedness
well I mean I am no authority over your
life so if your honor and I I'm not here
to give you permission what I can say to
you is if you want the transfer the deep
transformation and if you want the
affordance
the deeper activity and if you want to
afford therefore overcoming more
self-deception and affording more deeper
connectedness to yourself to other
people into the world
then you shouldn't wallow but perhaps
right now in your life getting there is
a rest like the the concern I have for
this and I've been saying this
throughout all of the practice is that
we do not want to frame this practice as
a vacation
it isn't oh it is an education as an
education
do this literally needs to draw out
educator can draw out to draw out from
ourselves and to draw out from the world
in a corresponding and Co determining
fashion Sam so flow are there books or
texts that you can suggest to understand
the practice of matter better well
that's a different that's a difficult
question there are books the issue that
I have with the books are the books that
you get books in translation the ones
that are popular in North America
because of North American culture I
would say I given you an ornament for
why I have this particular
interpretation so take that in or take
that in hand remember that I would say
that many of the most famous books
teaching meta tend to be satisfied with
the emotional interpretation and don't
pursue it into the existential
interpretation so those books can be
helpful if I would argue if you
understand them as incomplete I would
recommend reading something from
Buddhist tradition with that kind of
critical eye from Sharon Salzberg
the art of loving-kindness or at heart
is why this world but then I would I
would complement it with the pricked
with the Christian practice of the
centering prayer what's-her-name she
wrote a book called the wisdom way of
knowing I her name escapes me right now
the centering prayer so this is a
Christian practice and the Christian
practice involves
that sort of bringing in the christ-like
sense of compassion but this is designed
to more deeply come into a deeper
existential place of knowing maybe if
you read those two together you can
triangulate between them into a deeper
answer Prima if I get a sarcastic or
unfriendly answer my ego is talking
maybe your ego we carry around hungry
hungry ghosts we'll talk about this next
week I'm in the sense that you've
internalized a lot of people you carry
around a lot of people in you and they
have a Senate semi-autonomous existence
they often are they often inhabit your
monkey mind they talk they're talking to
you and so it could be a wide variety of
things simply thinking it's the ego
misses the fact that it might be other
voices it might be it might be the ego
trying to protect and stabilize itself
as you're doing this unfamiliar this D
familiarize ation this but the automata
station if they're in well it might be
but you have to keep yourself open that
it might be other voices that are
present in you I don't say that any kind
of metaphysical you know sense I mean
this at a completely psychological
existential sense zeynep says how do you
avoid getting into an existential dread
to horror well that goes back to the
earlier question so this is called
progressive desensitization so when we
have to deal with the normal as things
especially if we're getting a very
powerful thing is it can be very big so
when like I said part of what I want to
say is next week I'll teach you how to
respond to sort of deep emotional
responses but while you're doing this
practice if you're getting that sort of
existential dread that sort of do it a
little tiny bit and then stop and just
go back to the basics of pasta and then
next time again try a little bit more
eroded progressively right this sounds
like a paradox it sounds like a Zen koan
but you want to familiarize yourself
with D familiarization you want it so
you realize you it's it's it's an
amazing
when you come to realize that this my
suchness my my flowing minded botanist
does not disappear when that nattering
narcissistic you know nanny ego in my
head that Nair at that on doing how am i
how do I look what am i doing uh that
when that disappears and it's hunger
it's a tendon hunger you this this this
beyond that doesn't disappear and here's
here's something that you can't uh
realize that in your life get deeply
into the flow state in the world
athletic activity or playing jazz or
doing a video game and all of that goes
away you know that from flow and but
that doesn't mean that this goes away
they aren't the same so thank you very
much for joining as always I want to
thank the techno mage and dear friend
Omar and my beloved son Jason please
subscribe to the channel to be notified
of the next video tomorrow will be a sit
again the link there's links in this
video description for previous lessons
and sits if you're trying to catch up
and you're welcome to do so if you go to
my channel you'll find lots of videos on
mindfulness wisdom insight flow mystical
experience transformative experience
higher states of consciousness dealing
with existential issues confronting the
meaning crisis responding to our current
situation because what we're trying to
do is we're trying to situate this
practice through a lot of other
practices until we have a comprehensive
permeation for our entire life please
invite others who might benefit by
sharing this video I'm trying to help
people please help me to help as many
people as we possibly can together we're
doing this every weekday morning 9:30
est remember that this Friday there is a
gentle question-and-answer you might
have to any of my work in general please
look for the notification
for that we'll be posting this on social
media as well if you have done it you
know how postings for me you can find me
on LinkedIn you can find me on Facebook
and you can find me on Twitter thank you
very much everyone
remember continuity of practice more
important than quantity
please keep up your practice it will
serve you well if you befriend it it
will deeply preferred you I'll see you
tomorrow take care everyone