thank you so much for joining me very
welcome while we were waiting for you to
enter I was giving my best attempt at a
little introduction to you and and and
your ideas and your kind of larger
project at least as far as I've been
able to understand you know what you're
trying to do and the kind of the major
aspects of your ideas but as I think I
said to you in the email I've only come
around to your work quite recently you
were suggested to me by someone who who
watches these streams I've been doing
and reads my blog and stuff as someone
that you know he thought you and I would
have a lot to talk about and that I
should look into you and I I'm grateful
for this suggestion because I enjoyed
reading a lot of your texts this week
and yes I'm just excited to talk with
you oh but where I was going with that
is that I you know my I don't understand
your project necessarily perfectly well
so maybe one way we could just kick it
off is do you maybe could you tell us in
your own words how do you see like what
how do you how do you see the the larger
from a larger perspective the stuff that
you've been writing under the blog deep
code for instance and the talking points
that you've really been kind of thinking
about and talking about in different
places how would you describe you know
when you meet someone like on a bus stop
or something and they ask you like you
know what aren't you that guy who writes
that blog deep code what's that all
about you know how do you think about it
in a kind of high level overview way
well I guess first the first order is
that I genuinely endeavor to give people
as honest and full a answer to that
question is as is possible and so a lot
of it depends on who I'm talking to
in this case I'm talking to you and by
proxy to some invisible audience that
may or may not be also watching this
video so in that context I suppose may
be the best way to answer it is is in
terms of a narrative which is how did I
come to find myself choosing to do that
great yeah so the arc basically has I
think three major pieces to it
developmentally I I think a
standard child of the 80s nerd archetype
so very low EQ low socialization
introspection introversion on the
spectrum a little bit maybe yeah it
depends I've had a substantial amount of
high-quality help so I think I show up
it's a lot less on the spectrum that
maybe I used to okay but yeah and and
and then the natural attraction to the
portfolio of nerd stuff that was
available in that timeframe so an avid
player of role-playing games an avid
reader science fiction and fantasy an
avid player of strategy and board games
and of course a substantial amount of
time spent on computers originally on
you know computers that had tape drives
and then disk drives and then hard
drives and then those cool things that
could communicate with other computers
etc etc right so that's a one major arc
and ironically enough much like our
current we've got nominee for the
Supreme Court I was also a quite
unsuccessful in well no I don't want to
make that bear law because there's too
much noise on that I did not have any
girlfriends or any kind of female
companionship in any fashion until early
in college so which is sort of part of
that same archetype this had important
impacts in terms of socialization in EQ
so I kind of maxed out that player class
in terms of being a very successful
technology entrepreneur I was involved
in three successful technology ventures
in the late 90s and early 2000s the last
was a company that I was the CEO and
founder of called DivX that I took
public in 2006 and in 2007 ish I retired
from that entire phase of my life cool
then in 2008 I was in retirement and
sort of allowing myself to play
so that play consisted of finding out
what the what was really
going on in the social field so doing
things like going to Necker Island and
hanging out with Richard Branson or
going to the Aspen Institute and hanging
out with you know whatever Bill Clinton
and going to the Santa Fe Institute and
hanging out with people like Murayama
there's a Nobel president physicist you
know geniuses over there definitely yeah
exactly in fact I'm hoping to be able to
go back there again in mid-october
so immersing myself in that and just
sort of playing in that in that field
which had become available to me because
I suddenly found myself wealthy and this
happened in the context of the 2008
financial crisis so I happen to be in a
place where I could just sort of ask
questions and people who should have
good answers to those questions happen
to be sitting next to me at lunch
like you know Nobel prize-winning
economists and literally the guy who
invented the credit default swap as a
concept and what I discovered was a
rather shocking degree of asymmetry
between the narrative that was being
presented at the public level and the
reality of the people who actually had
some degree of insight into what was
going on and so I started just following
that basic thread you know they
asymmetry between the the commonplace
narrative and the people who knew was
going on but in you might call a model
free or a random walk I just started
following my curiosity and what I found
was a really rather surprising degree of
commonality which was people who knew a
whole lot about some particular subject
tended to say that the commonplace
conventional wisdom was highly unaware
of the actual risk that was bedded in
the domain that they had expertise in
they kind of didn't matter what it was
so if they happen to be a person who had
this is like ten years ago the most
expertise in the impact of climate
change on coral reefs or it happened to
be somebody who had the most expertise
on the fragility of the game theoretic
aspects associated with cyber warfare or
had
peace everybody who had expertise on the
impact of immigration on socio political
systems or you know fill in the blank
the the the N and this was actually
rather large I talk to lots and lots of
people covering lots of lots of
territory and what I found universally
was almost everybody was in fact rather
panicked when it came to their specific
domain of expertise and this this shows
up is a really interesting order I say
not inverse has an oblique but similar
relationship to a concept called Gelman
aphasia are you familiar with that no no
it's a neat concept so murray gell-mann
it's his current term and he happens to
know a lot about certain subjects
actually a large number but let's just
pick physics as an example and what he
noticed is that he would find himself
reading some piece of popular literature
a book most noted most notably a
magazine or newspaper so said the New
York Times for example and he happens to
flip to a story that happens to be about
physics and because he happens to be a
domain expert he notices that this
article is really terrible like it has
most of its facts wrong in fact
oftentimes upside down or backwards and
he gets very upset it's like that's
terrible
and then he flips the page to another
article that happens to be outside of
his domain of expertise and he
immediately forgets that that's a
category of journalism and assumes that
this particular article is of course
mostly correct so he has an aphasic
relationship to a deeper understanding
of the fact that the common story may in
fact be universally asymmetrically out
of alignment with what the domain
experts happen to know so this is kind
of like the inverse of that but the
domain experts are completely aware of
the fact that their particular domain is
super fragile and heading in the
direction of fragility
but enter into an almost a delusional
relationship with their own area of
expertise by assuming that everything
else is actually okay right right so
basically I found myself as being
somewhat uncommon ly holding an
awareness of the fact that most things
actually seem to be much higher holding
much higher risk than was normally
understood
and as I started adding these things
together noticing that these risk
factors ended up being self reinforcing
as opposed to ameliorating so this that
entered into a recognition that or
rather rather building a model and
attempting to make sense of what's going
on like why is this happening what does
it mean and because I was in a place
where I could ask people lots of
questions again I started being able to
get access to very high quality models
around how culture works how sociology
actually fits in the context of say
human psychological development and
began constructing a metal model of and
how everything fits together in a
synthetic integration of the scientific
disciplines and different to make sense
of the whole system including the
natural system of the physical
environment the human system the
anthropological system and the anoetic
cysts in the system that operates the
level of human intelligence in
consciousness and how these systems
actually interoperate and in basically
that meta model told me was that things
were in fact actually rather bad that
the civilization and the world that we
are dependent upon are actually
extraordinarily fragile and continuing
to move in the direction of increasing
fragility and that this sort of thing
can actually be model reasonably well
that we have a decent framework it's not
awesome frameworks because you can't run
experiments very well
decent frameworks to explain and have
predictive capacity so then in sort of
the third phase this is the deep code
phase I began indifferent to use that
that model or that set of models in the
context of what would seem to actually
be going on so here we're talking about
around 2011 around the time of occupy
and the Arab Spring and begin making
predictions about what future states
might show up in different contexts and
making meaning out of what events did
occur in the context of the models to
refine the models and in the deep code
arc then it is basic
three major pieces one is what I just
described so you may not think of this
as a making sense of where we are
the second is endeavoring to construct a
way to to endeavor to design a place
where we could and in principle should
go so given that where we are seems
highly unstable what might something
look like that is in fact not highly
unstable by the way in in the context of
what we expect the future to look like
so not just highly not just stable in
sort of the immediate term but it's
somehow intrinsically stable in the
context of for example exponential
technology and then the third piece is
transition what what kinds of things
might be put in place to enable us to
move the maximum amount of what we care
about from where we are to where we need
to go and that's it so that's that's the
that's the story that was that was
compact and useful that's very useful
that's really great yeah for someone
who's only come across you quite
recently that definitely gives me much
more context and background for thinking
about ya just who you are and where
you're coming from and how you're
writing so that I have read how they
came to be so that's really useful it's
interesting a few things come to my mind
listening to you give that story one is
I'd it makes me think a lot about Nassim
Taleb are you familiar with him I'm sure
sure yeah it sounds like a lot of a lot
of consistencies in your stories and
I've always thought he's really smart
and really on top of a lot of things so
that's interesting just noting that and
another thing that I wonder I mean it
was just to kind of jump right in I
guess with with difficult questions if
you don't mind I mean I think a lot
about the degree to which it's even
possible anymore for us to should talk
with these kinds of steering metaphors
kind of like you were just using you
know we think of we tend to think of
society as this kind of ship and if
we're smart and we figure out how it
works and we can kind of communicate to
each other different proposals and then
try to kind of steer the ship based on
on these proposals to get us from one
state
to another and I want I just wonder if
that precisely what's happening is that
in some sense global techno capitalism
has be is be is becoming so complex and
so fast
if the runaway process is so great that
a kind of you know non-human super
intelligence in the form of you know
global markets is basically now escaped
our control to the degree that the even
using the kinds of implicit metaphors
that you were using about like how we
can kind of steer humanity from one one
state to another you know I I'm not at
all convinced that that's not possible
but I have to admit I'm I'm very
concerned and about that about the
possibility that perhaps that entire way
of thinking is is just no longer
something that we have access to like
there we are not steering the ship
anymore in other words and that you know
we are now predominantly being steered
by non-human intelligence forces that
are over and above our heads and quite
beyond our control I I wonder if you've
you know what you think about that I
think that's an accurate assessment this
is my so let me put it in some context
sure what I heard you say and I think
it's probably also important to make
sure we stay somewhat in sync since
we're we've just met and we're talking
about rather complicated things yeah
that's true great what I heard you say
was first something on the lines of some
question about how it is that groups of
humans are able to collaborate in making
effective choices in the world second
that there is some relationship between
how it first comes to being and the
context that it finds itself in third
that the context that we find ourselves
in is substantially more either
turbulent or daunting or itself agenting
then the how that we have in Category in
number one and therefore we find
ourselves
no longer able to have effective agency
is that a fair Restatement sure that
works yeah okay so I completely agree
however let me then share how I respond
to that second the first is to take a
look at in the context of category one
what what might be the boundary
conditions on how much collective
intelligence we could actually aspire to
under different configurations as it
were second in category two is there any
way of having a sense of whether we're
dealing with a practical problem or a
principled problem and a practical
problem is I can't if I can only lift a
hundred pounds I'm doing with the two
hundred pound weight I can't lift it a
principal problem is I can't lift myself
all right that's there's problems that
are insoluble in principle and problems
that are insoluble in practice right and
then the third is what are the
characteristics of the problem that we
that we have to deal with you know are
we dealing with something where there is
a for example a large state complexity
are we dealing with something there's a
large state of complexity also has a
large rate of growth are we doing
something as a large state of complexity
a large rate of growth and has an
adaptive relationship with category one
whereby the more capable we become the
more capable it becomes etc you know
what are the characteristics now it's
this level of thinking and by the way I
should mention I'm going to use the word
I here where in fact the the deep code
project is a collaboration but many of
the folks in the collaboration choose to
remain anonymous and so I'll just sort
of take responsibility and a good rule
of thumb is to the degree to which it
appears to be good stuff that's coming
out of deep code you can assume that
somebody else did it and to the degree
which it's poorly done you can assume in
blame
I appreciate your modesty and then when
you're hearing me speak directly you can
take that for what it's worth
sure okay so category one this is where
I began the process of doing things like
for example considering the blue church
I don't if you spend any time take a
look at that but that was an effort to
take a look at the collective
intelligence coordinating mechanisms
that had achieved the highest level of
actual efficacy in in history which is
sort of where we are right now now that
that analysis has basically two pieces
to it you know I guess three one is
aesthetic here's what it looks like and
feels like but the most important parts
are what its limits are it actually has
boundary conditions and so it is in fact
not capable is let's say for example it
can only be a hundred pounds and so if
you're dealing with a problem which is
about 100 pounds it's not the right tool
and then secondarily in terms of
historical location now for many reasons
that we can drill into if it's
interesting it's also in the process of
a rate downward which is that the blue
church as an effective collective
intelligence is decreasing in
effectiveness so at its best it couldn't
deal with the problems we're dealing
with and it's also not at its best in
fact it's kind of in our way so that's
one one piece the another piece is then
endeavoring at this is what the concept
is called deep code going to the deepest
principles that that we could find what
might be the is there any reason to
believe that there are in fact limits
that the blue church is for example the
best or are there different ways of
designing collective intelligence that
can give rise to something which is say
substantially better and I'm gonna use
the word better here sort of
metaphorically just gooder than the blue
church and while we're at it since it's
not really useful to design something
which is good but not good enough is
there any reason to believe that in
principle it could be quote unquote good
enough to address the problematic that
we're dealing with
and then secondarily this has actually
never been published but also taking a
look at the problem domain you give it a
term what was it called late stage
capitalism or techno capitalism or
something like that oh I I was just I
think colloquially calling it yeah that
can have like global techno capitalism
or whatever you want really yeah so that
was an area and by the way there's a
even other aspects by the way so in
terms of the metamodel you have sort of
base complexity which is it turns out is
a big enough problem that it's worth
that the blue church couldn't handle
that so just like the complexity of
humanity's relationship with the natural
environment all by itself is actually
too hard this is the cup of room
discovered that in the 70s then you have
the magenta capacity the blue church
itself which is kind of like that the
problem of trying to swim out into the
ocean to a drowning person mmm that as
it is flailing about endeavoring to be a
gent akin a decreasing ly dysfunctional
fashion it could take you down with it
so you have to sort of address that
problem then you have the agenting
capacity of functional collective
intelligences that are orbiting around
but not part of the blue church
construct this includes for example say
Google or the NSA these are collective
intelligence structures that are
relatively functional institutions and
therefore operating at a much higher
level than the blue church were at large
which of course is operating it now a
relatively low level I've used the
phrase the characteristic of sort of a a
a very large overweight heavyweight
boxer who they swing slower they
Telegraph their punch if you're stupid
enough to let them land a punch they can
still knock you out but if you just sort
of play a little bit of rope-a-dope
they're gonna collapse with their own
volition you think that's weird them you
think that's where the blue church is
right now oh yes I'm reasonably
confident my confidence on that is say
above 85% I like that metaphor I think
that makes a lot of sense yeah and if
you use that to sort of watch what's
happening in the anglo-american sphere
I think you'll find that it predicts
circumstances pretty effectively right
okay but then you've got again these
sort of these splinter collective
intelligences that have much higher
attracting capacity and then you have
the the collective intelligence that
I've called Leviathan I think Brett
Weinstein has referred to it as Goliath
or emergent Goliath which is what you're
talking about which is a sort of global
scale techno capitalism that runs almost
like an ant hive or a hive mind under a
set of axiomatic s-- and a set of
constructs of how it goes about doing
since making a choice making and
delivering on agency we can drill down
any way you like but the good news is it
seems quite likely that we can in fact
develop a substantially more effective
collective intelligence orders of
magnitude like many like ten orders of
magnitude more than the blue church that
this is more than adequate to deal with
the problem of physical complexity and
anthro complexity radically outcompetes
Leviathan however may not be adequate to
deal with the problem of techno
complexity right okay so maybe we can do
a little bit more syncing up of
vocabularies but I thought that was all
really interesting and we should we
should continue to drill down on that
but I'm thinking I was it's occurring to
me now maybe I was a little bit rude in
not giving you a little short spiel
about myself because you have no idea
what you've stepped into and who's
listening and who I am even so without
much thought about my existential
English that I expected it would be it's
less what English what's up let's
British the only information I have from
you is associated with the UK oh yeah
that's right yeah so you're probably
confused and disoriented so I should
tell you I yeah I'm an American I moved
here for I'm a professor here so I moved
here for an academic job and I've been
here for like five years but so yeah I'm
like a by profession I'm a pretty
traditional political scientist I do
mostly quantitative statistical research
but I've
long been interested in questions of
political theory and basically I mean
without going on about my whole story I
um
I basically just academia is not what I
hoped it would be and I'm just really
bored basically and I'm looking for
something I'm you know I'm looking for
something much much better than what I
can make an offer so I basically just
turned to the Internet and I'm just kind
of going wild like blogging and having
these conversations with whoever I can
trick on meeting me in the chat rooms so
I wasn't an example of the conversation
we were just having what's the what do
you mean well you you've you've been
identified that one of the primary
organs of sense picking the blue church
academia right is so inadequate that
even though you are relatively present
within the center of it you are
nonetheless choosing to spend your time
in an emergent collective intelligence
ie the internet doesn't and one might
say there are particular reasons why
that makes sense to you yes for sure
yeah exactly so that's that's kind of
where I'm at and so I should tell you a
little bit also about my the kind of the
milieu in which I do my blogging and
these live streams and how should I put
this we it's often I'm often kind of
called or lumped in with people known as
kind of acceleration is though I'll tell
you a little bit about though just kind
of very broadly how I'm inclined to see
things and this will probably make a
little bit more sense out of the
question that I originally posed you and
so the way that I tend to see it with a
lot of the people who I write with and
talk with is that basically modernity
was was a real turning point and
specifically what happens at the turning
point of modernity is that capitalism is
kind of this superhuman or you know
extra human force that kind of gets out
of the bag basically so you can think of
most of pre modernity as this attempt by
humans to kind of contain or to lock
down the explosive and and quite brutal
implications of intelligence itself you
know the production of intelligence you
know most like a lot of you know early
pre-modern religious teachings so can
can be kind of
interpreted as you know be careful what
you do with intelligence because if you
let the if you let it out of the bag too
recklessly you know you're gonna you're
gonna regret it and so we tend to see
modernity as kind of the point at which
well that kind of happened and
intelligence was escaped it escaped its
box and and initiated this kind of
recursive explosive process that you
know we we begins with you know
industrialization and we're now kind of
continuing to live through especially
with you know the approach of you know
self-improving artificial intelligence
and all of this so in that in that light
myself and a lot of people I talk with
are inclined to see the increasing
social complexity that you talk about as
this kind of yeah this kind of loosely
organized super intelligence this kind
of in human or non-human super
intelligence that is basically now now
so great or it operates at such a high
level of it's able to integrate so much
more information than any of us are as
mere you know biological entities that
basically it has its own purposes that
capitalism has its own purposes which is
the abstract increase of intelligence
itself and and what majority looks like
is this this abstract process in which
intelligence is increasing itself and
anything that gets in the way of
intelligence increasing itself basically
gets will just be destroyed and kind of
and kind of killed off as as as
deadweight and so in that view a lot of
what you're saying still I mean what you
just said was very compelling but it's
hard for me too it's hard so I'm
inclined to see like a lot of the blue
church stuff as basically quite meek
attempts of human beings to basically
kind of pull people's heartstrings and
push the buttons of of you know moral
intuitions to basically hang on as long
as they can in a kind of increasing
intelligence scenario where you know
they're increasingly obsolete so it's
like this disingenuous game to basically
to
and resources they can in kind of their
their last gasping breaths of you know
their agency being being kind of taken
over so that's just a little bit about
my my kind of the larger perspective
that I'm bringing to the table I'm not
necessarily wedded to that just giving
you giving you that as background so let
me test some yeses quite some questions
does your ontology it sounded to me and
I think this is probably wrong but it
sounded to me like your ontology
consists of two ontological objects
biological human beings and a single
kind of super intelligence known as
techno capitalism is that an accurate
statement no I don't think I see what
you're thinking I could I could probably
clarify better in saying that it's more
like there is abstract intelligence as
this kind of alien alien seed at the
beginning of of the universe or
something like that which then you know
manifests itself in this in this long
developmental process in which
biological humans are one phase of it
and then biological humans who create
capitalism are kind of higher phase of
it but really this is one process this
is one long process of intelligence
basically increasing itself is what is
what it looks like and so there prefer
like part of human history we could get
away with the with the framework that we
were in control you know so long as
intelligence so long as collective
intelligence was relatively constrained
beneath a certain threshold you know
these this language that we are so
inclined to use where you know we are
looking at the at the territory and we
are making these maps and we are kind of
making plans from from point A to point
B in how we want to guide our future
that kind of worked for a little while
so long as the forces were relatively
weak but once once abstract in
intelligence gets out of our box then
it's like
something else something else is is is
emerging that's that's beyond our
biological containers but it's not
necessarily I'm not necessarily drawing
like a really important hard distinction
between our biological containers and
and whatever that is I don't know if
that's useful distinction or not um okay
so let me see if I can try a few
different things one is I'm noticing
that I don't have any sense of there
being a point where there was a a real
notion that individual biologically
individual human beings had any strong
sense of high order autonomy an outside
of some kind of larger context so
whether it is the sense of real
significant low order autonomy say for
example the during high christendom
where there is a sense of there being a
divine plan that was just what it was or
whether it's simply the real recognition
that say for example your family has
significant influence over what you do
in life and it is larger than you and of
course beyond your family many many
other kinds of nested end non nested
forms of things that are larger than you
that impose upon your particular agency
I would imagine that it is a rare human
a handful who have ever had any real
sense of any meaningful degree of actual
agency in the world that was larger than
the context in which they found
themselves and I would say that most
them were probably psychotic manic visit
but I'm here okay so let's see we can go
to a deeper level so then I would said
that the ontology that I'm working with
is a one that is actually III largely
accept the basic premise that there is
the this this notion of intelligence is
real I think we'll discover that we'll
have some very interesting conversations
about what it is and that the
characteristics
this thing intelligence are well quite
specifically these this is the thing
that gives rise to curves that are super
linear and therefore it is sort of only
a matter of time before those
characteristics take over from linear
and sub linear characteristics and
become the primary drivers in any kind
of system that has intelligence that's a
way of saying larger what you just said
yeah I got from however the specific
system design to use that kind of
language they gives rise to a particular
level of intelligence I think is the
area that I have the most inquiry into
that my proposition is that the system
does that so I would outset the blue
church is a particular system design
that gives rise to a certain level of
collective intelligence I would say that
say for example the Chinese People's
Army is the system design that gives you
access to a certain level of collective
intelligence you and I in collaboration
right now or a system design that gives
rise to a certain level of potential
collective intelligence and then global
techno capitalism is a system design
that gives rise to a certain level of
collective intelligence and I'm now
separating out a particular system
design from the large arc of the
attractor of what we might call Maxum
intelligence that we might see as being
that which is pulling in kind of
creating an evolutionary pull for all
the various systems designs that are in
competition with each other so in that
context where I the way I've sort of I
personally have described history is
that there was for a long period of time
a relatively small amount of the
intelligence attractor in the context of
the strictly thermodynamic attractor and
the dissipative structure attractor that
is characteristic of evolution
biological evolution but over time
because of the intrinsic higher than
super super linear characteristics of
the intelligence attractor it has played
a larger and larger role the famous
exponential
and so we we are now poised in a
position where the combined forces of
the thermodynamic and the evolutionary
attractors are beginning to lose their
sway over the resources of the world in
favor of some configuration which is
more fully in alignment with the
dynamics of the intelligence attractor
okay that's that's fascinating so you're
drawing a distinction between the
evolutionary attractor and the
intelligence attractor because I would
have thought of those as basically the
same thing so maybe you could speak more
to that it's not sure yeah yeah so the
evolutionary attractor is dominated by
the necessity of seeking maximally
efficient in energetic processing
systems and has episodic access to the
the innovative capacities that the
intelligence attractor on a playing
field that is still dominated by
energetic dynamics okay okay so that's
basically it it's it's a it's sort of
that yeah that explains a little bit of
the the friction I guess in in our
ontology is then because but that's very
good that's that's useful because I was
thinking more along the lines that in
cues your ontology I think of evolution
as a kind of abstract system design that
is itself a kind of intelligence because
it's doing something it's in its
processing information and it's doing
something but we as humans don't know
where we don't know exactly what it's
doing we don't know where it's going
right yeah but so this is some easily
repeat what I said using the the now
shared language it's doing two things it
is processing information and it is
processing energy and the energetic
processing is the dominant
characteristic of the evolutionary
attractor and the information processing
is this secondary characteristic so this
is why we talk about the thing you know
survival of the fittest or they
selection event is this election event
at the level of energetics and
level of information replication so you
have to survive and then you have to
reproduce and since most of the
problematics that are resolved by
biologically evolved systems have to do
with competition for scarce energetic
resources the primary selection event
for information processing has been
biased towards effectiveness and
efficiency as opposed to generativity
okay I'll give you an example Bletchley
Park so in Bletchley Park the exigencies
of the energetic conflict overrode the
information processing aspirations of
Turing so Turing head as a
representative of somebody who's
operating at a very high level in the
intelligence domain had to subordinate
the what may have been a dramatically
can you imagine what would happen if the
resources of Bletchley Park if Turing
had been able to fully coordinate the
allocation of those resources but he
couldn't because he was operating in a
context which is actually designed very
much like your sort of modern pre
modernity post modernity metaphor he was
operating in a system which was still
intrinsically designed to round
preservation of energetic resources and
local selective advantages in an
energetic conflict hmm so it used
innovation it used intelligence but it
used intelligence as opposed to being
driven by intelligence first so do you
agree with kind of a proposition I was
alluding to implicitly which is that
capitalism is a kind of global force
that is in Crete is is shifting the
distribution of of selection pressure it
towards intelligence do you say that or
no I do right and so if you think that
the blue church is kind of this it's
kind of this like union of humans trying
to basically kind of hold up this this
agreement to to to select for things
other than
intelligence against the increasingly
strong selection pressures of capitalism
and oh that's neat I hadn't really
thought about it in that fashion and I
wouldn't say that it was other than
intelligence but I would say in addition
to so the blue the blue church is a so
sort of not monomaniacal in its
optimization efforts or at least it's
not monomaniacal against pure
intelligence whereas as you're saying
capitalism may in fact be mana
maniacally optimizing for a particular
kind of intelligence so then this is
where I maybe I break with the with the
narrative it is my considered
perspective that as a systems design and
as an intent capitalism is optimizing
for the wrong kind of intelligence which
is to say the kind that is less
intelligent and is a relatively
inefficient and in fact intrinsically
self terminating systems design so it is
something that needs to be considered
and is in fact something that we find
ourselves in in conflict with but I see
no reason I have actually had very
strong reasons to believe that it is not
how do I say this right there's a term
that we used to use
so how godlike in power hmm so that's
interesting I mean that it definitely
flatters my priors and and moral
intuitions for sure but I am curious
maybe you could say more about how like
how do you substantiate a a reference to
a superior form of intelligence that is
that you could argue is is superior to
that which is being selected by the most
intelligent system we've ever had do you
know what I mean
actually I don't know why that's a
confusing question so maybe say it again
it seems obvious to me so I want to say
I want to see what I'm missing
sure so I too want to think it sure
seems to me also that capitalism is
selects very particular kind of
intelligence and as the system as a
whole its
quite irrational and lacking in another
kind of intelligence from another
perspective obviously so I'm on board
with that
but well then what I try to I try to
think that through and if capitalism is
this kind of collective super
intelligence over and above all of our
heads and it capitalism you know global
prices global price system integrates
more like global capitalism knows more
about what we want than we do in some
sense precisely it's it's kind of insane
brutality is in some sense precisely
that it it it's able to kind of measure
and allocate and distribute resources in
line with the sum total of human desires
in a way that is actually more effective
and more intelligent than any of us
could could create you know um you know
through like purposeful designed like
planning programs mm-hm and so it seems
to me that it's very difficult to say
that there exists some other standard of
that there's some other form of
intelligence that we could point to that
that would be like more intelligent than
whatever it is capitalism is is telling
us should come next oh okay yeah it
makes sense and it still strikes me as
obvious so let's actually walk through a
little bit okay um let me think
hmm how do we do this right let me try
one path I don't think it's gonna work
but it might kind of help move this
forward a little bit go for it has to do
with the ability to actually take we can
actually look at the system design of
capitalism we can look at it at its
intrinsic dynamics and therefore we can
actually model the the kind of processes
that it's capable of operating in and we
can understand what the boundary
conditions are because we can model it
and so that we can then begin to say
okay well given that what are the what
are we designed that may in fact give
rise to a higher or
and now it may not be actual so up
ontological proposition possible
probable actual so there is a
distinction and we can take a look at it
say oh there's a way of identifying that
the possible intelligence of capitalism
is X the actual intelligence of
capitalism is something smaller than X
but actually relatively close to X can
we design a form of collective
intelligence where the possible
intelligence is larger than X and that
the actual intelligence is able to move
from 0 to larger than X in the context
of capitalism so we can we can sort of
first of all we can actually do that and
recognize that the same exact
relationship ah cool this is the
metaphor of the previous discussion of
Bletchley Park capitalism is Bletchley
Park this is sort of the whole point
this is the issue
it is a systems architecture which was
originated in a context of fundamentally
trying to solve the problem of energetic
resource scarcity utilizing bounded
intelligence as a mechanism so it
endeavors to constantly control it's
like modern it's a parameter to
modernity modernity took the tried to
take the notion of intelligence and put
it in a control structure and use the
control structure to give act a
selective advantage by getting access to
the innovative capacity of intelligence
but in the context of a control
structure is like a steam engine or a
train exact right metaphor and so it
does is it says okay fine Minh and
Oppenheimer get together and work on the
Manhattan Project but we the military
political class are in charge we control
the purse strings we control the
resources we control the domain and
don't go any further than what the bad
road conditions are smart smarty pants
and don't go any faster than you can go
Bletchley Park is the same thing Google
is the same thing right how do we enable
the innovative capacity of human
intelligence in various kinds of
collective structures to be innovative
but only when it is in fact doing so
under the constraints the capital is
it's capitalism itself
sets in this case for example it has to
actually have a high quality return
investment otherwise it should it throws
an error it cannot actually be perceived
as a valid use of intelligence in the
context of capitalism all right we see
things like for example in the
cryptocurrency space we're starting to
see the recognition of a blind spots
in the form of intelligence the sense
making and choice making capacities that
describe the total of sovereignty the
geometric sovereignty of capitalism and
we're beginning to notice that there's
in fact an abstraction layer that
capitalism is an instantiation of that
abstraction layer we can identify that
abstraction layer and then we can
actually use principle design to
construct a form of collective
intelligence which is categorically
superior to capitalism and it's actually
pretty straightforward
we just invert the relationship please
tell me more about that sounds good yeah
so so let me just kind of drop again
into a narrative so let's take let's
actually take the actual narrative of
industrial capitalism in the United
States as the history of a series of
companies and let's take a company as a
at the time state-of-the-art effort to
form an effective collective
intelligence in the context of what was
happening then and so you're gonna move
from sort of Carnegie steel to the Ford
Motor Company to IBM Xerox Hewlett
Packard Microsoft Google and this is our
our phylogenetic tree of evolution and
we noticed certain things in this
characteristic shift one is those things
that are further down the tree are
vastly more capable of effective
collective intelligence of those things
that are earlier in the tree mmm-hmm so
by any measure if I take the total
number of human beings collaborating in
the space of Google and I measure the
effective collective intelligence of
that total number and compare that to
the total number of the collective
intelligence of all the people who are
employees by Ford Motor Company the
number is lots lots higher obviously
most people employed in Ford Motor
Company we're putting witches together
by hand so they're effective
different touches was purely actuary at
in terms of actuation so almost nil
it's a classic blue church construct so
that's one piece the second piece is
then week okay so this says this is
actually part of this arcs that you're
talking about cool and this is a story
where capitalism is endeavoring to
constantly evolve our effective
collective intelligence into
increasingly actually into a
collectively intelligent constructs
right machines that then collaborate
with each other in larger schemes that
are in fact even more collectively
intelligent so then we take a look at
the actual characteristics of what that
evolutionary dynamic looks like and what
we notice is a an increasing shift from
a an organizational and a human
resources basis towards a certain kind
of relationship between humans and the
kinds of humans who enter into those
relationships which is to say you want a
more a flatter you want a vastly more
abundance oriented we're gonna have to
kind of open up that can of worms of
what that set of concepts means but a
different structure of motivation and
orientation direction and a different
topology of the organizational framework
which is same or driven by agency at the
edge and in collaborative groups and
less driven by top-down command and
control I could say by the way that that
Apple under Jobs and Tesla under musk
perhaps would present a different
phylogenetic tree a much more much more
top-down driven but still highly
optimized kind of construct that has
certain intelligence capabilities for
sure that's fascinating Jordan now the
question one question I have though is
do you see that as something that we
primarily have to engineer as you know
thinking reflective creative agents
operating on social reality or is what
you just described in the last part is
that endogenous to capitalism almost in
a kind of Markson eschatology in which
capitalism at a certain point starts to
follow these kind of flat
dynamics that you just described um well
I'm afraid I can't understand anything
but both yeah at the end of the day it
is in fact the actual creative
intelligence and the actuated activity
of discrete human beings that are summed
in some way and oriented directed in
some way that we would call capitalism
so right if nobody if all people chose
to think nothing capitalism would do
nothing there's nothing to it besides
the collective activity of people yeah
okay what is it it's a mechanism for
orienting people towards what they
should be thinking about how they should
be going about doing it and then
enabling scale larger than end
coordination between people and in fact
scale larger than in coordination
between scale are the larger than any
groups so capitalism is a systems
architecture that enables the formation
of groups of people who coordinate with
each other and that groups coordinate
with groups and that allows orientation
where individuals can identify what role
they should be playing and what
relationships they should form in these
possible coordination structures okay
right and so by being that it produces a
larger scale effective collective
intelligence okay
excellent excellent and so you think
that we're in this kind of transitional
moment right now is that right we're
yeah yeah the blue church is giving way
to a new kind of dynamic in which the
the central features are what did you
say before are kind of flattening and a
kind of post-scarcity a situation of
abundance was there something else
that's key in there oh there's a lot
what is it what I mean what is what are
the main features or characteristics of
the of this transition and other other
than those so let me let me actually
slow down then so what I was talking
about was what I perceive as being the
characteristics of the particular
attractor that I was talking about in
that fellow genetic tree they led to
Google
to slow down and talk about what's
happening in this transition there is a
space that is opening up for
experimentations in many different forms
of collective intelligence that are more
effective than the blue church
architectures okay there are probably
many many like I don't know exactly how
many there are variations on this theme
so even all we have to do is look at for
example the distinct characteristics
that are showing up in just the
blockchain space as efforts to explore
different kinds of collective
intelligence structure I mean there's at
least three and maybe dozens that are
currently being explored it's not clear
which of those have any real stability
and obviously it's it's one thing to
design something is another thing for to
achieve homeostatic equilibrium the
question is so in in this context I
actually sorry Beckett people further I
have basically identified in my own mind
the way I think about it a kind of a
strategic level these three time
timeframes
there's the exiting the blue church so
there's kind of an exiting legacy which
largely has to do at a strategic level
largely has to do with avoiding
catastrophic effects as the old system
gives way then there's the transition
then there's the post transition my my
considered assessment right now is that
it is not necessarily the case of the
transition the post transition are the
same
I imagine and I can use a number of
different models to explain why I
imagine but I imagine that there is room
for call it one more bite at collective
intelligences that are say still a
hybrid mix between scarcity and in
abundance fundamental characteristics
right okay and then we we do or do not
transition and if we do transition then
you just have to look at what are the
stable states that live on the other
side of some kind of transition and
there's only a small number
okay yeah I mean that definitely syncs
up with my observations in academia
right now you definitely get this
impression that there in academia there
are a lot of initiatives where they seem
to be trying really hard to navigate
this transition by taking on kind of
like half-assed gestures towards you
know abundance and and flattening but
really they're yeah they don't work so
well yeah this is right and I think it
has to do with I think this is where I
kind of am right now the I basically
broken up into two kinds of games
I called game a and game B just to make
it sort of neutral game II game a is the
game that in the story that I'm telling
we've sort of been playing maybe from
the dawn of civilization or perhaps from
the dawn of evolution but it's
essentially characterized by winning
rivalries game theoretic games though
assuming that there will be a loser in
the game and constructing strategic
systems to achieve not being the loser
right and there's many different
elements that make up that so there's
the socio-technical layer
socio-technical systems that are
constructed both about axiomatic sub
rivalries game theory and about
effective strategy in the context of
those axiomatic
there are also individual
[Music]
psycho-emotional axiomatic sand
strategies and so you have both the
individual and the collective
coordinations that are in relationship
with each other that give rise so if I
have a highly win-lose optimized
individual entering into a relatively
win-win optimized socio-technical
environment it won't work
and if I have a highly abundance mindset
individual entering into a win-lose
socio technical infrastructure it also
tends not to work they will
show up is sort of it's a deterrent is
an example at best at best Jim Morrison
is another good example okay so there's
a kind of an eye of a needle problem
which is there has to be a transition
from a world that is running human
beings who've developmentally been
operating in a scarcity environment so
they have a scarcity literally a
scarcity biologists care see emotional
construct or scarcity psychological
construct and scarcity habits scarcity
frameworks that are running assumptions
and cognitive bias around scarcity
models and that is in fact relatively
adaptive and fit because they are also
running within a socio technical
environment which is axiomatically
promising the same set of notions and of
course within a natural environment be
energetically scarce Fitness landscape
that is the driver for both of those
okay so that's reality hard-bitten tough
hard-nosed sort of conservative mindset
reality and then on the other side you
have what might be a holistic attractor
which is actually part of so the
transition is a whole whole system's
transition including all three of those
different components so it's associative
technical transition as well as a
cultural transition and a shift in the
actual human beings that are moving into
that new context okay fascinating so if
you do have a kind of post-capitalist
narrative then your because you're
really kind of describing a vision in
which people are holistic and it's much
more cooperative it's much more coherent
you could say and it's going to be less
intensely based on exploitation and
competition is that fair to say yeah and
I would say this both in positive and
negative direction which is at the the
negative direction is that all other
scenarios are inexorably self
terminating in a relatively short time
so if you kind of look at it in terms of
a possibility space at future paths the
basic routing rules prune all those
paths away
so the only available paths are past
that had they look like what you're just
describing and then from a positive
direction there are very strong reasons
to believe that a these are very well
within the domain of what human beings
can be human nature we're not talking
about nature which is talking about
shifting the state variables within the
phase space of human nature and that
there is a direct collaboration between
cultural and societal constructs that
are in alignment with that same set of
human states so they are mutually Co
evolving and then finally the most
positive the best news is that and this
happens to be fundamentally the most
fully optimized for maximal intelligence
that can be achieved in principle so
it's the way you actually win the
intelligence game ok that's fascinating
though I'm definitely gonna have to just
sleep on that but that's really really
interesting so in your view what if one
is attracted to that picture that you
just painted you know what is the
constructive available pathways to
living breathing human beings today that
you think can accelerate the transition
into that to that state hmm
there's actually many so I've noticed at
least kind of three basic domains that
that people seem to be entering into and
this is not in any particular order but
I'll just sort of start my mind can't
help but organize things along some
framework the first is at the individual
level so as I mentioned the the context
in which we have developed
differentially for different people
obviously gives rise to a certain
individuation a certain level or kind of
sovereignty in order to be able to
actually play the new game game B you
have to upgrade your capacities usually
almost everyone I've never met anyone
who hasn't had to upgrade their
capacities and I've never met anyone
who's so fully upgraded that they're
sort of ready to play all the way like
we're all kind of still
working really hard to basically be able
to play some of the time although I may
have different people are quite
differentials so this includes things
like really rather studiously addressing
any form of developmental or emotional
traumas that are short-circuiting your
capacity to participate in a fully
sovereign fashion you know if you have
triggers or defense mechanisms fix them
Hang Ups yeah yeah and these are this is
real work this is non-trivial sure yeah
secondarily and this is by the way
usually in this order because the second
one is going to be your cognitive
frameworks your me with I think his name
is Jonathan hate sure yeah yeah so the
elephant and the writer metaphor that's
right and don't take your cognitive
frameworks too seriously you'll find
that if you shift certain emotional
traumas things that seem so obviously
true and in arguable fade like mists
because at the end of the day our
cognitive frameworks are sitting on top
of an emotional psychological framework
or foundation and shifts at the base
level imply shifts at the surface level
which is not to say by the way that you
say geometry turns out to be false if
you learn how to solve your problems
with attachment but for example
economics will shift for you for sure
and you'll actually be able to vastly
more fluidly be able to load and unload
different frameworks and be able to use
tools as tools as opposed to use them as
paradigms or as ideologies and so if
particularly shifting away from anything
that is attracted to an ideological
mindset which of course is just an
externalized version of reason acting as
defense mechanism so personal that's all
very powerful the second is then
relational and I mean this again kind of
in the same order which is really begin
to become increasingly a skill of
understanding precisely how you go about
getting into relationships with other
people at actually a body level where
exactly are your various
hangups emotional traumas psychological
frameworks bad habits driving and where
you were actually entering into skillful
relationship which is at least at the
level that you would like it to be when
you're considering it thoughtfully and
then begin to get better at so practice
that and practice doing things like
having very high integrity and the
ability to communicate clearly and the
ability to listen well you know basic
communications protocol cleanliness
because this is the basic framework so
the the material out of which this
future system is based is made up of
human beings who've achieved a certain
level of sovereignty over themselves and
have achieved a capacity to enter into
skillful relationships with each other
on the basis of integrity and high
quality of communication and this by the
way is principled I can I can actually
describe almost at a mathematical level
why that is the basis of the maximum
possible collaborative intelligence now
that's that's all very well put I'm
thinking though that there has to be
something else because everything you
just said could be used to describe a
lot of you know blue church operatives
right I mean oh heavens no no you know
you don't think that there you could
fulfill the criteria that you just laid
out and I would say that if you were
currently alive today and you were still
a blue Church operative you are strictly
delusional and what portion of the
population would you estimate that to be
though quite high right oh yes most 85%
well of people who live in the West
probably on the order of 95 percent
right so so are you saying that in your
model the more people do all of those
things you just described intrinsically
the more the the social system will
transition to the alternative post
capitalist state is that is that your
view that is true yes so so my question
or about working there are
that if maybe if we talked about that
might make a little bit more clear okay
all I was going to say was that I one
could imagine people doing all of those
things and currently existing blue
church institutions will you know
happily integrate those those human
updates better workers you know my in my
experience the answer is very much the
opposite okay you may be able to run a
simulation in fact I would recommend
that you do if you continue to decide to
stay employed said the blue church which
increasing you don't need to but two
degree what you do run an emulator where
you're showing up as a blue church
functionary but I would say with a very
high degree of confidence like here like
93 percent that the blue church will
absolutely not have any desire capacity
or even willingness to integrate a
individual who's beginning to move in
the process of sovereignty yeah you know
it's funny you say that Jordan because
I'm I'm actually right now in the
process of getting starting to get into
trouble and I'm not even really doing
anything that extreme at all it's like
just from doing these live streams and
just kind of speaking casually I thought
I already have like a ethics
investigation oh yeah no I'm yeah
seriously and so it's like I guess I see
what you're saying that like although
the criteria that you described are
relatively straightforward you know be
honest work your out to the degree
you actually do those things it's so
relatively rare that you actually quite
you do become intrinsically a kind of
problem for blue church status quo
institutions is that that's what you
mean yeah absolutely there's no question
there's almost nothing more dangerous
and even though the individuals the
human beings who are involved may have a
different set of like evaluations of
what that means the institutional
structure will intrinsically receive it
as an infection or an opportunity for
exploitation so you might find yourself
shunted into like a Google X or a DARPA
kind of a place where you can be
exploited as a game B resource node but
you're intrinsically and corrosive to
the
the structures a particularly late-stage
blue church you might you might still be
able to fit into kind of like a high
tech startup company as a co-founder but
even then you'll probably find that
within a very short amount of time the
entire team will be like I don't
want to take VC money and go public but
that's the stupidest thing imaginable we
should just do an IC o---- and stay flat
and just be the ten of us right and
that's just showing up right this is
just this is as people are beginning to
realize that the you can't actually play
the game at the right level in the
context of anything that is vaguely of a
blue church structure you get people
beginning to try to figure out how how
do I play a new game and that's the
third piece so the first is become a
person
the second is become skillful and
forming these relationships and
communications protocols then the third
is in fact through a combination of
discernment and curiosity begin to
actually form the new kinds of
collective intelligences start having
the right conversations listen to the
right people listen to who's good at
orienting you to the right people and
then begin to sense in yourself building
your own level of personal intelligence
in a much larger way because you've done
the work what are the right kinds of
relationships how do I begin to move in
in more generative directions for myself
that happen to be intrinsically win-win
how do I find out ways to do that okay
yeah that's fascinating and I mean I
think implicitly I'm I'm very much
living through precisely this kind of
model that you're describing obviously
not in the language that you're using
because I've only you know come across
your work recently but it's just so how
it is just kind of interesting it just
so happens that in my actual moment in
my life I'm really at the brink of a
serious kind of strategic reflection on
on these matters and so I'm not just you
know talking about myself for the
selfish reasons of you know wanting to
talk about myself but I'm actually not a
bad example to kind of use to work out
some of these ideas because you know one
question that immediately comes to mind
comes to my mind is like let's so right
now I mean I'm burning a lot of
brainpower thinking about how long I'm
gonna be able to stay in academia I mean
I have a problem I'm basically tenured
already I'm the British version of
tenured so I could stay here as long as
I want I could be and I probably I'm
unless I did something really bad
or this ethics investigation where to
get like really out of hand somehow it
would be hard for them to fire me I
think but I'm I'm really starting to
think like how long should I really stay
in here lay in other words I'm thinking
about jumping ship I don't know exactly
for what I think I could probably do
some sort of I could probably do a bunch
of things whatever without me talking
about that too much I'm thinking about
jumping ship and it's a very it's a very
interesting kind of case study for that
what you said about discernment you know
because how does one how does one
discern when one is making a good
intelligent ethically aligned decision
to defect from status quo institutions
how does one do certain that from just
being lazy and not being able to hack it
and quitting because it's too hard do
you know what I mean that's a part
that's a question of discernment but I
think a lot of people struggle with and
it's kind of the one I'm struggling with
at the moment because I'm sort of like
I'm slow to quit academia because I'm a
little proud you know like I don't want
to feel like I'm quitting I don't want
to feel like I can't handle it and I
have a I have a strong you know
tolerance for pain and suffering I'm a
Catholic and so I'm kind of like
sticking out just stick it out don't be
don't be lazy don't quit but then I'm
like no actually it's it would be better
in every way for me to like ditch these
chains and just go full blast on
vlogging doing this kind of stuff and
whatever and then just find another way
to make money if I want to be an
intellectual that is you know so I I
have for myself formula didn't answer
that question I struggle with that same
question
when I began this journey this is
language that I haven't refined in a
long time so it's a little bit rough but
if you would like I'll share it with you
sure please so and you you use the word
Catholic reminded me of it so I've
noticed at least I noticed in my life
that there see
to be two very distinct ways of going
about trying to make that kind of
distinction that took that kind of
choice that question of discernment well
what I'll call judgment the other I'll
call the Sermon just to put to give them
different names so judgment appears to
me to be something along the lines of
endeavoring to engage in an analytical
process against some kind of schema and
locate a choice
inside that schema so a simple one might
be something like don't touch hot things
and so then all you have to do is you
have to engage in an assessment of the
environment and when you identify
something as hot you access the scheme
and the schema has a very simple rule
don't touch hot things is this thing hot
yes therefore don't touch so you're able
to run a very effective code that has
States and it has actions associated
with those states and your job is only
to be able to with high fidelity
evaluate States and apply actions I
might call this a moral schema okay it's
the reference to Catholicism now you run
into conundrums in this place where
either the state is difficult to
identify because maybe you have a very
large number of distinct states that are
perhaps entering into relationships that
are paradoxical they lead to different
conclusions of what actions should be
taken or is in fact novel that this
scheme it doesn't include anything that
is like this and if your mind has been
if your choice making has been
constructed around optimizing for these
kinds of schemas you may find yourself
quite challenged in dealing with truly
novel situations mmm-hmm become
optimized for computation in moral space
but you haven't learned how to actually
address you've kind of ameliorated the
ambient skill of dealing with novelty
this by the way is something that
happens in evolutionary theory a lot
like organisms that are optimized for
it's called hill climbing right and on
the traps evolutionary traps this is
sort of an evolutionary trap any moral
schema the other kind
has to do with with essentially
generating raw capacity to make good
choices in an arbitrarily larger number
of diverse context so bizarrely enough
the answer to the question in a second
category is something oh let's put this
way in the first category a good choice
is something like a choice that
accurately assesses what's going on in
reality and well deploys the right
schema in the second category a good
choice is the kind of choice that a good
person makes so it's to be able to do
this kind of discernment actually means
become a good person which means things
like build embodied wisdom you know put
yourself into places where you actually
make hard choices so you have a sense of
what it feels like to make a good choice
in the context of hard choices become
very aware of how your total sensory
modalities go about actually making
sense of your total environment if you
if you find that you tend to bias
towards analytic methodologies notice
where you're maybe not listening to what
would be called say your gut which is a
non-trivial information processing
mechanism associated with somatic
survival for billions of years much
older than your rational neocortex
notice where you find yourself engaging
in self tyranny where you don't actually
allow yourself to be in personal
integrity where all the different
aspects of yourself are able to speak
their particular perspectives openly and
honestly and are listen to completely
before decisions are made because if you
don't do that then if you make a choice
the parts of you that weren't listened
to will be resentful and they will tend
to take it out on you post facto so this
is so the second case is about building
character and building capacity to
become skillful and choice making in its
raw sense and of course as you do that
you will notice that you become less and
less concerned with the quality of the
choices that you're making because
you're just really good at that as a
fundamental capacity now let me just
embed that in a larger narrative when
this when the environment is relatively
static the former kind of approach can
actually be more effective than the
latter kind like I said if the universe
consists only of objects that are hot
and objects that are not hot and only
touch and not touch then the schema
don't touch hot things is actually very
very efficient if you optimize for that
you can kick ass right however is the
complexity environment grows and
particularly as the novelty in the
environment grows if they even if the
environment is changing then
categorically the second approach is
more adaptive right that's interesting
yeah I never really thought about that
exactly but you could kind of you could
kind of advance the proposition that
with the acceleration of social and
technological life it that actually
increases the payoffs to a strategy
based on strong character yep that's
interesting to a question yeah that's
interesting this is actually another way
of saying the basic story that I've been
telling throughout this conversation
that once you grasp what that means and
sort of extrapolate it in terms of its
individual and relational and social
consequences you've identified what the
singularity attractor is in terms of
maximum intelligence that's fascinating
and and also I should add useful for my
own for my own decision-making so thank
you for that Jordan so are you operating
on a kind of model are you imagining a
model at the social scale that is that's
a kind of threshold model like you
imagine when this stuff becomes
sufficiently popular you'll see cascades
of this kind of behavior and and that
would so that the face transition would
be kind of slow and slow and then all of
a sudden abrupt in a kind of cascade
dynamic is that how you imagined it or
now I I have my hot my my my Bayesian
priors have their highest confidence on
that model you have not catastrophic we
may be in the order of like 60 63
percent okay yeah and quite quite
potentially quite diverse like different
areas may flip at different rates so you
might see a plea atrophic effect where
say China may hold on to its own China
Ness while other areas of the world are
teleporting into this news place more
rapidly right yeah and you can
even subspaces within societies having
their own kind of local local dynamics
yeah I would expect that extra right
right yeah that's that's really good
that's really good
and so do you have a sense for you gave
very good kind of you gave a very
interesting general advice for how
people should think about navigating
these sorts of things do you have I'm
just curious
you might not but do you have any other
kind of thoughts on how people should
decide how to kind of allocate their
their risk portfolio in this regard you
know and that is you know for any for
any given person in a particular
occupation in a particular sector in a
particular country you know there are
obviously different strategic variables
for how much you can afford to you know
speak the truth boldly right and I think
this is something that people are really
thinking through right now and people
are trying to think because I think it's
very clear to many people that our world
our social world has become filled with
all kinds of lies really I mean they're
just a disingenuous nostalgia
contemporary kind of Western society
there's so many little polite lies that
I think it's quite suffocating from for
many people right it's important we're
far from the only ones I think and so a
lot of people are planning you know some
sort or strategizing some sort of way of
navigating themselves personally to this
type of other sort of yeah equilibrium
but there are different in difficult
kind of strategic calculations right
like some people might it might be
well-advised for some people to make
that defection but for other people you
know actually it's maybe not a great
time or maybe this isn't the case maybe
there is a categorical directive here
where like everyone should do it to the
maximum of their of their willpower to
the maximum their character is able to
sustain this is a kind of categorical
directive well I think you've just yeah
I think you need to find a very nice
categorical directive because you also
made it bespoke and I've actually been
using recently something
on the lines of the I think it's either
Buddhist or Hindu concept of Dharma here
mm-hmm
and you can we can map it to a more
mechanistic model if you'd like but it's
something along the lines of well I'll
just said I found and I've actually
found this that many other people who
have spoken with have shared that
there's a sort of this was sort of unis
like you you are something you're not
arbitrary and you're not generic and so
first is a really strong sense of
humility and self honesty which gives
rise to the ability to then feel Yunus
the most clearly and then endeavor to
make the choices that are most fully in
alignment with who you actually are I
would say that the the biggest traps
that I've noticed are actually traps
that are happening at the cognitive
level because right now if for example
we're speaking at the cognitive level
and so already this might be perceived
and it might be conceived and it might
be acted upon in the context of being a
an injunction from a top-down cognitive
perspective the wishes to say an
ideology and so I find many many people
are caught in that so what they end up
doing is they think to themselves well I
ought to X Y or Z a good person would X
Y or Z they're they're endeavouring to
actually simulate character inside the
context of a schema and so that I think
would be the first thing to break with
is to actually just break with that
entirely and make a distinction made
between what some people would call your
constructed self and your your
essentially your authentic self and try
to reach a place of humility and self
honesty is actually able to accept the
reality of your authentic self in its
innocence and in its richness and then
begin to make choices that are most
fully in alignment with that authentic
self because I can tell you for sure
life is insanely more pleasant and
meaningful even when it sucks it is hard
if you're making choices along on that
basis and then in that context then you
can start doing straight
because then you're actually you're
making strategy you're making the
choices you're making strategic choices
for the right reasons but if you do
strategy first you get in trouble
so you're actually saying that people
should in in the kind of current world
that we're all trying to navigate right
now you think the the optimal strategy
is to first with the kind of reckless
disregard to strategy first just figure
out who you are and do whatever you need
to do following your gut to align
yourself with in an environment that
maximally kind of reflects who you are
do that without strategic reflection in
a first phase and then from there make
your strategic wagers well let me
clarify am i if what you mean by that is
to say that people should make a bad
strategic decision first which is to say
you know quit the job a bit and then
their family leave their context and go
find themselves that's that's your
strategic decision in the context of
them being uh find out who you are
decision what I'm saying is okay to the
degree to which you can avoid making
important decisions while getting
clarity on your authentic self and
separating yourself from your
constructed environment and and and or
your destructive environment so if
you're in toxic relationships it becomes
very easy okay
exit toxic relationships if you're in a
job that is causing an enormous amount
of stress and monopolizing all your time
okay you're gonna have to get out of
that so you can make kind of like this
progressive low-hanging fruit that frees
up more space to be able to achieve a
higher level of clarity on who you are
because you can get rid of nonsense that
is just nonsense and then on that basis
you're now able to make better choices
about the next step and use that better
choices about the next step step by step
and work your way up but always focusing
on okay what's in the way right now that
I can just get out of the way am I
currently addicted to crack well okay
let's stop being addicted to crack
because that's just an obviously good
choice and on the basis it's no longer
which may be hard by the way it's not
trivial to get out of it it's a good
easy choice hard to do once you stopped
well okay now what's the next step
cool I can I can actually get a sense of
that I don't I don't think that my
aesthetic self is a is is an addict
and you can you can kind of move forward
so that's kind that's the way of
thinking about is that you have a maybe
a meta strategy which is on the basis of
taking steps that is the most lucid and
clear step in the orientation if
increasing the quality of the basis of
making choices that you were able to
make and then not making more strategic
commitments because the person you are
now is shitty at doing long-term
strategic commitments but the person you
will be if you start doing this will get
better and better at it and that as you
get more clear then you're able to make
better strategic choices and by the way
also have better relationships with
better people who can support you making
those choices and you may very well find
that many of the things that seem very
problematic have in fact evaporated of
their own accord hmm fascinating yeah
that's that's really good if you don't
mind maybe we'll switch gears a little
bit I'll ask you just a few more
questions that may or may not be related
to all this that was really useful
though and then as I said it is
strangely kind of personally useful so
I'm grateful to you Jordan do you what
do you think about contemporary kind of
party politics in the West looking
around at politicians and stuff like
that to you is there anyone in
particular that you think or project in
particular that you're kind of like this
that you know these people get it better
than other people like a political party
yeah or do you think they're all kind of
equally too little indifferent
symmetrical ways or do you think that
you know for instance like there are all
these efforts to kind of what I would
what I would call kind of update the
blue church to use your language you
know I see kind of like the Democratic
socialists of America and and and that
kind of group you know the the kind of
radical left wing of the Democratic
Party you know there's a lot of interest
right now in somehow kind of trying to
update these mainstream modern blue
church institutions in a way that's more
democratic and and even possibly
socialist do you think that is promising
at all or interesting at all or you
think that's a blind alley yeah I would
say that's a blind alley I think that
there's there's some interesting stuff
that happened in the five star movement
and in the in the previous iteration of
the various pirate parties that had
actually a sense of coming from the
future but I think it's a kind of a rule
of thumb that to the degree to which
you're going to be living in the few
using frameworks that come from a very
long distance in the past mm-hmm maybe
you can kind of extract some essential
elements from them like okay take a look
at democratic socialism try to see okay
what was the thing that actually made
that interesting in its context and
really really extract out the essence of
it in its most pure form and it's okay
now if I took that essence and redeploy
it without any consideration of say
mechanics mechanisms aesthetics what
would that look like now okay well that
might actually be very interesting but I
mean imagining that you can use a 19th
century steam engine to fly a Mars
Lander seems like a pretty obvious bad
choice
right and what do you see Trump as kind
of a similar blind alley or do you find
interesting possibilities in that milieu
well if this is a mapping issue if you
identify Trump as a mapping to political
party then that's a blind alley and it
might be I don't really know I don't
it's been I hadn't actually I've never
actually physically visited any of these
particular groups I don't know what's
really happening inside if you consider
Trump to be a consequence a relatively
predictable consequence of the collapse
of the blue church in the context of the
shifts that are going on then it serves
sort of two distinct goods one good is
shifting or ending the life of the blue
church as rapidly as possible which as I
said the drowning in the metaphor of the
drowning person you need to kind of move
them to a place where they're no longer
flailing about and then secondarily
forcing now unfortunately oftentimes
forcing people in a situation of
distress which is problematic and that's
very problematic but forcing people to
begin the process of as you say jumping
ship and beginning to say okay well
something new has to happen how do I
begin exploring this novel space and
figuring out how to do something which
is at least somewhat adaptive to the
context I find myself in which is it you
know that's generically quite good
now to the degree to which people are
acting out of dis dismay they are going
to the lower registers of the limbic
system as they're orienting basis then
the net results will be what they have
always been when that is the orienting
basis which is terrible
so okay avoid that but well I guess
that's all I have to say about that yeah
okay that's what that's interesting so
what am i one of my listeners who
actually the person who recommended me
to talk to you he told me that you once
said that collapses overripe and he was
very curious to know what you meant by
that oh you saw that could you unpack
that I can unpack it I don't remember
when I said it but it sounds like
something I would say okay it just goes
back to that very first part of the
story which is under ordinary
circumstances any one of the specific
areas of the world where the experts
know that the risk is a lot higher than
people know would be enough to deliver
on some kind of crisis you know so we're
facing an n-dimensional set of crises
any one of which would have been the big
deal under and it sort of almost any
decade over the past 200 years
and so by most reckonings should have
hit the fan a while ago it's actually a
testament to the durability of the
social body and to the legacy
effectiveness of the various blue church
and other kinds of collective
intelligences in the context of the
larger scale cloak of intelligences that
that hasn't happened but we're sort of
way out over our skis in terms of things
falling apart and so and I guess a very
concrete way of looking at this I think
this is actually the very specific path
that got me to this conclusion was if
you just looked at the financial which
is a nice kind of quantitative thing and
you take a look at step by step at each
of the various elements that were done
to address the financial crisis in 2008
and the European financial crisis which
you noticed was a it was kind of like
heroin for a broken leg right there was
an externalization of
the signalling function that we were in
crisis so we traded feeling good about
what was going on in exchange for
actually addressing the underlying
problem and this just externalized the
damage in to other locations it
externalized the image for example into
the socio-political environment and if
you want to do the tracing of brexit and
Trump it's not hard to say oh it happens
somewhere around 2010 when it was
obvious that the financial crisis have
been externalized into the
socio-political domain and so it's kind
of like if you've got a binding of a
bunch of ropes that are round together
they're holding a heavyweight and one of
the ropes begins to fray well what
happens is the weight shifts to other
ropes and even in that one rope is not
actually holding less weight but at the
cost of other the net-net having less
resilience against the way that is
holding so the likelihood that what are
the other ropes beginning to fray has
just gone up the probability of another
rope but as that begins to fray the
weight shifts a little bit missed in
that rope has less tension it shifts its
tension but puts more weight on fewer
ropes and so what ends up happening is
you get some kind of you're getting a
positive feedback loop where there is a
finite time where the whole thing pops
and the open question is okay well where
how deep does the does the does the
crisis go so you can have like a light
weight crisis we've had many of those
and in lots of different domains you
know say just say take for example the
the crisis of the collapse of the
classified ads industry and we had that
was a real crisis from the point of view
of the classified ads people that was a
terrible crisis from the point of view
of the newspaper industry it was a media
stood crisis from the point of view of
the global economy it didn't matter at
all right so you could have micro crisis
this is really good because they clear
out you know underbrush and kind of
shift things forward without causing
bigger things to happen but the longer
the more you delay a crisis and
externalize the consequences into the
broader system the bigger the
consequences will have to be to actually
resolve the tension is pent up in it so
that's what I mean by that is that what
we've done is we've made a choice to
guarantee that things are bigger and
deeper when they finally do move
significantly right okay and so the
current moment of a cultural political
change that we're going through right
now
which I you know the major reference
points of which would be right brexit
Trump and I think more generally the the
kind of backlash against political
correctness that's going on right now I
see very much associated with these
these major political moments if it's
fair to kind of cluster those three
things as representative of a kind of
contemporary you know piece of the rope
breaking and you're in your metaphor
yeah do you and I think that's
consistent with some of the stuff I read
that you wrote about the rise of the the
red church I think that's fairly
consistent with how you see it not to
read it read religion oh right sorry you
read the read religion if this is an
accurate way to see it would you say
that this current you know moment of the
of the rope coming apart is that do you
see it as a mini crisis a moderate
crisis or is this a kind of major world
historical moment in your app if you had
to guess when you say it was currently
me at the political level I was saying
specifically the the cluster of things
that we could maybe curse it from and
yeah do you know they know primarily by
bread crumbs of it and the current kind
of Jordan Peterson will let kind of like
a little flowering of anti political
correctness intellectual breathing space
that's opening up in some way you know
me also and you also and and you know
people that this this kind of stuff I
think it's reasonable to see it as one
kind of package of the moment yeah I
would say the answer is yes I would say
that we're somewhere in the domain in
terms of measuring a pox of world
historical maybe the level of the
Enlightenment you think that's what this
is yeah and but I in the context of what
I think were actually the larger story
that were another thing that's actually
really significant I'm I'm on record so
it's easy for me to say I'm on record as
saying that I would be rather surprised
if this transition was not at a 1,000
year like the rise of Western
civilization out of the collapse of
classical civilization or at the 10,000
year mark which is to say the rise of
civilization out of
nomadic band level constructs it seems
rather obvious that has to be the case
to me at least so in that context and an
Enlightenment level shift coming up is
kind of not that not that surprising I
see what you mean okay so it's not as
grand as it as it might sound at a first
glance okay right yeah so if you're
looking at it from the point of view of
say 1999 it should be holy that's a
big deal like things are definitely
bigger than than they were if you're
looking at from the point of say 2030
it's gonna be a minor piece of the story
from my perspective okay yeah I'm
hopefully very importantly ya know that
that the sense of scale and the and the
the the comparison is very relevant
makes it makes a lot of sense to me so I
know I'm I'm now gonna kind of try to
wrap this up with some questions that
are coming from the public chat but
that's actually watching and listening
to us right now
let's put up if you're cool with that if
you're cool with some random questions
one is about your favorite books what
what are you what what books would you
recommend to people right now that you
think are most worth readings maybe you
could give three if you can think of
three um there's actually if you want to
learn if you want to get more there's
actually two places you can go to get a
list of the books that I recommend nice
one is a comment inside a comment on my
youtube channel and the other is one of
my medium posts in a collection called
practical imagination okay but I will
give three okay let me see well one of
my standby favorites is a 1994 book by
him on world alanna called war in the
age of intellibid intelligent machines
I'd recommend that I guess I'll go good
keep those thematic so I'll keep them
kind of in the same zone I would also
recommend the book Damon by daniel
suarez which is a science fiction book
mmm and mmm that third one will be a
good third book in that context oh man
search for meaning
okay I know of the first one and the
third one I've never heard of the second
one so you learn something new every day
do you what do you think of Vinay Gupta
who I don't know but someone in the chat
wants to know what you think about him
if you know about him I mean in all I
knew is I know about him I've never
actually spent time with him okay and
his reputation is sort of universal
which is he is Sidhu he's kind of like a
Nasim okay same reputation I've
interacted with him very very briefly
and it seems to be about right okay all
right cool um I I noticed I was also
looking through your YouTube channel I
was curious do you have what are your
plans for the YouTube channel I think
you should know my streams if I don't
happen it that the notion of a live
stream is rather interesting
I do not currently have any plans for my
youtube channel I'm just curious I
actually never had any plans for my
YouTube channel and just began doing it
and responding to what was happening I
noticed that I haven't shot any videos
in a long time so it may be that I have
lost interest in that sort of thing fair
enough
oh but here's something I've learned it
was I thought was very amusing it makes
sense retroactively but it appears that
at least some fraction of the population
really deeply believes that the only
reason to create a YouTube channel is to
get on the Joe Rogan show why do how did
you learn that what do you mean a number
of comments have taken it is almost
axiomatic that it confusing as to well
you've created a YouTube channel and it
seems to have some high quality content
it is confusing as to why you're not on
the Joe Rogan show like obviously that
must be why you did it and it seems like
you should be able to so why hasn't it
happened I can say categorically that I
did not and I have never intended to get
on the Joe Rogan show or the Dave Rubin
show that both gentlemen seem very
pleasant and I certainly would not well
no actually after listening I got
pointed to the Elan musk interview with
Joe Rogan and after that I would be I
would I would participate in a
conversation with Joe but I don't have
any particular aspirations to that kind
of thing so I created the YouTube
channel really honestly really because I
kept getting requests from people to
explain certain things to them and so I
figured to be more efficient if I just
kind of like explained it a general
purpose format I could just send them
the line
and it has definitely served that
purpose okay yeah fair enough yeah
people really don't understand the magic
of contemporary communication technology
that people are constantly missing
missing the point I think like people
are always imagining if you want to do
YouTube or you want to do any of the
write a blog or whatever people are
always imagining there has to be some
sort of like like ulterior motive that
has something to do with like well it's
like always referring back to the blue
church right it's always this people
always have this deeply ingrained
tendency to refer themselves back to
whatever represents kind of like power
at the center of the spectacle but you
know where attention is where other
people are looking but the I mean it's
it's it's missing precisely the point
which is precisely that now is the time
to disconnect your attention from where
everyone else is looking and simply look
around you to whatever is most
immediately interesting and attractive
and valuable to you that's immediately
available to you because there's
millions of people and ideas and
projects and texts and and and
everything that's actually within your
reach that you can get to work on
immediately and drive after it and do
that and before you know it you're on
all of these interesting vectors and
before you know it you're the next
 Joe Rogan and he's an old man and
no one cares about him anymore
yeah yes that's very well said I agree
yeah so I mean I mean I think um that's
I'm like I think it's a shame because we
were talking before about like
evolutionary traps and we're just traps
and pitfalls in particularly and in
general you were talking about at a
certain point in the conversation
previously and I think this is this is a
real major one and I don't know if
you're familiar with the kind of like
left-wing critiques of what they call
the Society of the spectacle you know
it's this kind of like this was it guys
that 1970s yeah exactly the you know
1960 shiness French French people
basically a kind of post-divorce what's
that
Guiteau barred yes exactly Ghita bore
yeah the situation half and I read that
back in the day yeah exactly
um but the one kernel that I really took
from all of that that I think you see
very clearly in this conversation we're
having right now which is people do
really just overly refer themselves back
to to what they imagine other people
our thinking and what they care about
and it really prevents them from doing a
lot of so much that they could do
immediately yeah yeah and it kind of
sucks too it's sort of like you're not
feeding yourself you're not you know
you're not getting this it's funny I can
imagine so like I just like to do it
very simple imagine if you chose to eat
based upon what you think you thought
other people wanted to eat
yes it's an obviously silly thing to do
but I get it I mean we've been trained
from child well not birth but shortly
after birth
to be unbelievably tuned to this notion
of broadcast asymmetric collective
attention so it's visceral it's hard to
train yourself you have to be conscious
you have to consciously train yourself
off of it you can't just or you might
just get lucky and just have not been on
that train but it's pretty rare yeah for
sure well I think that I think that
things are becoming so Inc so flattened
and they're gonna continue becoming so
flattened that I think you'll see more
and more people doing all kinds of stuff
like this just for their own sustenance
you know for the immediate intrinsic
value that it brings to their life and
before you know it you know they're like
in some sense the Joe Rogan like someone
like Joe Rogan is a kind of what happens
when you take the blue church down a
notch you know so it's like you used to
have like one Walter Cronkite right and
then right that gets decimated into like
you know mm Walter comic rights that are
at a little bit of a lower level but
these things happen over time right so
you know Jude like Joe Rogan is a Walter
Cronkite for a particular slice of the
personality right uh profiles of the
population and then all of the other
people are kind of at his level of Fame
or attention are just a bunch of mini
Cronkite's but every passing year the
number of those Cronkite's is going to
get you know increased at a lower and
lower flatter level I think and I think
where it's ultimately going is people
are going to be doing this just for
their own purposes in their own groups
for its own intrinsic benefits and
values and it's not going to be this
like media fame game where people are
like right now people think about these
things that's like oh who's got more
followers who's like making more money
off of it who's who's winning the
who's at the top of the pyramid but
people like precisely what we're talking
about is that that pyramid is going away
it's rapidly being flattened in every
passing year who has the most followers
matters less and less and what really
matters is like how effective is the
intelligence community or structure or
institution that you have operating
around you just for its own intrinsic
purposes that's that's how I see it I
think that's consistent with what with
your view right yeah
yes and I'm the only thing I would say
is that it's to me there's kind of an
inside and outside correlation one is
from the inside perspective that is
actually the thing that feels the best
mmm yeah there's like the distinction
between having 10,000 Facebook friends
and having 10 friends yeah
but second is again I strongly believe
that this also tends to be is exactly
isomorphic with the collective
intelligence topology that is maximum
maximally intelligent yes so it's fun
like it's actually by playing this new
game this game be you simultaneously get
to live the most fulfilling and
meaningful life and also happen to be
perfectly deployed your personal energy
is fully participating in that which
will ultimately would ultimately be the
best possible way of constructing of
collective intelligence just say the the
thing that is the maximum the
intelligent place to be right I like
that yeah absolutely yeah um I don't
want to keep you too long I know we've
been talking for quite a while maybe if
it's okay with you all ask you just one
more question there's that cool it
sounds perfect yeah all right great um
maybe I'll make this last question about
blockchain I think from what I gather
you're you're rather bullish on
blockchain do you see it as how should I
put this
um you you do you think people kind of
underestimate its significance or do you
think people kind of overestimate its
significance hmm gosh or just you don't
have I mean you can just tell me why you
think blockchain is interesting and I
don't know I I I want to give you a good
answer but it's not decidedly
non-trivial so
to do this right we have to actually
build some constructs okay so the first
construct is something called C Gnaeus C
nice it's kind of the genius of a scene
or it's the the emergence of a
collective intelligence around some
novel capacity or some novel attractor
so punk rock has a scene II as quantum
mechanics is a see me as the emergent PC
was a scene yes the organic food
movement see Gnaeus like fill in the
blank there's lots and lots of these the
second is a self-organizing collective
intelligence so this is a particular
subset of the C Gnaeus where the
characteristics of the seniors give rise
to a series of feedback loops whereby
the the collective intelligence has the
capacity to maintain or increase its its
capacities with what it is by virtue of
what it is so punk rock had less of a
self-organizing collective intelligence
character then say the personal computer
you know so more people who participated
in the PC universe increase the demand
for PCs which increase the economic
flows which increase more people who are
to participate and sort of caused that
collective intelligence to expand it had
a very flat capacity get only do certain
things but you know we're doing we're
doing because that happened so within
that context when we say blockchain I
definitely don't mean the technological
innovation of Satoshi that was able to
resolve produce a solution to the
Byzantine generals problem I don't
really necessarily refer to the C Gnaeus
that that is an aspect up right so if I
think of oh use punk rock as an example
we might say that it's a Bitcoin
represents I don't know the clash or the
Sex Pistols and theory am representing
the Ramones or something like that right
so we've got a very different flavor of
something which is clearly part of the
larger milieu and is currently operating
under C Gnaeus rules in this case both
Bitcoin and aetherium represent a in
internally they're self organizing
collective intelligences in the broader
context of the scene is so what I am
bullish on is that the the scene yes of
the blockchain sometimes I'll
called cryptocurrency sometimes called
but took an economy right at the fact
that it has many different names as a
good sign has it has a different
capacity than the space that is
operating in most notably I'll have to
give some caveats but me just cut the
park is good the the optimistic part is
that it it still attaches a premium to
people who are able to think clearly
about very complicated things and
communicate with clarity and honesty
those complicated things so it selects
from italics it does not select
principally does not select for
now caveat all see Gnaeus has become
almost immediately parasitized by
 and the blockage in space is
full of so the diet you know
the struggle is on to see whether or not
the potential the blockchain to be a
place where clear and very lucid complex
thinking about big questions is
supported or it dissolves into just a
miasma of marketing
and financial gerrymandering so it's
kind of it's and it's I'd say maybe it's
early teenage stage it's a tween right
now it's about ten or eleven okay very
gawky it's a very gawky teenager tell
you what but the B potential that if I
take for example the number of people
who are interested in and able to think
about the early part of our conversation
you know the proposition of what would
be the characteristics of a maximally
intelligent collective intelligence and
why would that even be an interesting
question to ask and and then I look at
the population of that the portion of
that population that has some of their
attention in the blockchain space it's
actually relatively high so two degree
to which the blockchain space is able to
build institutional frameworks to pull
the
against parasites and artists
and select for clear honest thinking
kind of like to say they wait
mathematics was able to do that or
science which differentiated science for
magic in the beginning was its ability
to build those kinds of institutional
structures and say okay this is
pseudoscience and and this is
in fact clear thinking and we have ways
of separating those things somewhat
rigorously not perfectly but a hell of a
lot better in Prior centuries then the
blockchain space as a senior's is able
to we'll be able to realize the
potential that lives in the sea Gnaeus
and that potential is extremely large
and it is entirely possible that we
could see a of 75 percent of the global
economy into that sea Gnaeus in a decade
if it had it together likely it won't we
may see we may see zero may just die
that's unlikely it's just too much
potential and there's too much
dysfunction the legacy technology
industry but the potential is is very
very high and it's still quite right
like it's too early to tell exactly
whether or not these these subgroups
will figure it out and it doesn't take
many it could be like as little as 10
people if they were able to really
really get a clean structure that was
able to be very effective while
maintaining a high integrity
institutional framework everybody else
would begin to emulate that and they
would grow organically into a much more
powerful collaborative space ok right
that's that's interesting is there a
particular kind of social application or
kind of social engineering solution that
you think blockchain could possibly
provide that you're personally most kind
of excited about or paying most
attention to yeah the one that I'm
actually most excited about is the a new
form so Amparo say this right
so there's the yellow pages and there's
Google there's the fleamarket in a ZB
there's first Barnes and Noble and then
Walmart and there's Amazon okay there is
the city and there's X X is the thing
that I'm most excited about that the
blockchain as a senior's can give rise
to hmm wow that's interesting so it's
it's sort of so much of a question mark
that you don't even know it's you would
call it I mean what I would call it is
it's gonna be bad because I'm not a
marketing guy so I can't name things
well but it will be in relationship to
the way that we go about organizing our
ways of living with each other in space
you context right that gives rise to the
highest quality ways that we actually
coordinate our activities together in
the generative direction all right so
it's gonna actually resolve the question
of how we live and how we develop how we
do hmm that's very interesting but it's
very interesting I mean there's so much
more I'd love to talk about but I don't
want to overtax you and we've done a
good two hours man so this has been
really interesting and really edifying
and it's been fun too so I'm inclined to
let you off the hook now I think that
sounds good to you yeah thank you it has
been a while I can't feel my lower back
is definitely needing some stretching
well uh thank you I enjoyed this
conversation and I I think I'll be
chewing on some of the questions and
some of the ideas for a while and I hope
that you and the folks who choose to
watch it felt like their time was well
spent
yeah the chat the people in the chat
seem to be enjoying it in fact a few
people said a few people watching right
now are I think big fans of yours and
they a few people said that they feel
like you you kind of broke some ground
in this conversation like saying some
things they never saw you right before
or say before I don't know if you if you
would agree with that but that's
interesting though it was shocking if it
weren't the case that's always a good
time that's that's maybe one of the best
measures I think of a successful
conversation at least a
the lines that I'd like to do them you
know I'm not a fan of like you know
doing too much rehearsal love of Cree
that's great that's very game a that's
very gaming a game B you do it real you
do it in real time and you always should
break some new ground if you have is
good in your market or if you have a
good conversation you'll definitely
break new ground definitely definitely I
think you and I are both on the same
page in that way for sure and that's
probably why this was fun and yeah the
people watching I think have quite
enjoyed it also so thanks again and
we'll stay in touch you know my line is
open if you want to ever follow up on
any of these things so it's good
remember I'm having a baby in a month so
I will probably be going awfully dark
corner maybe even till the end of the
year cool well congratulations to you
and yeah I definitely enjoy enjoy life
with your family and away from the
Internet's for a while good luck making
your choices thanks man I appreciate
that and I appreciate I appreciate you
sharing your you know your insights and
having these interesting especially with
respect to my some what some of them I
personally motivated curiosity so it was
interesting to get your take on them
right on our jury but thanks again take
it easy