there are times when she feels lonely in
this responsibility to her family yet
she carries it in ways that are varied
in ways that are many in ways that call
for careful planning and for further use
of what we already have for making do so
nothing will be wasted the most
rebellious thing you can do right now is
take personal responsibility commit to a
person raise a family with that person
invest yourself fully in them being the
best they can possibly be like
wholesomeness is the most
countercultural rebellious thing you
could do right now this country of
wholesomeness is so it's so powerful
because there's when two different ways
you can go about making a good choice
like doing the right thing one way is
you can do the right thing because
you've been told it's the right thing to
do mmm that's hard it sucks it's fragile
you're almost like struggling against it
you know it's like you eat your broccoli
and what's gonna end up happening is
eventually you're gonna grow up and
you're not gonna eat your broth because
the authority figure is not there
telling with usually the
opposite as much as you can right now if
you actually folsom your eating your
broccoli because it's the right thing to
do and it's easy it's just a natural
thing and so this builds up from the
bottom it's basic just building it on a
solid foundation and you build it on the
base and say okay I'm gonna take
responsibility and then I'm gonna enter
into a relationship with another human
being where I'm gonna take
responsibility for the relationship and
with human being who's taking
responsibility for my cos herself and
then we're gonna have a child together
responsibly and we're gonna take
responsibility for that child and we're
gonna start stepping out and taking more
responsibility for the place where we
live and where the child's my perhaps go
to school or write humanity and and and
not and that with a sense of like
powerlessness and therefore the sense of
either like that lashing out edge of I'm
powerless and the only way I can express
my anger at powerlessness is do that
shout but with the sense of okay how do
we do how do we do this and how do we
find other people with whom we
collaborate and can coordinate because
we can we can
them anywhere who are willing to enter
into honest relationships with us to
build these things it's important and
part of the whole the story of this new
golden dorm is that like the biggest
thing in cinema is the Marvel Cinematic
Universe and these gods reborn as
archetypes rendered by our splendid
technology in such a fashion that like
we could never really like imagined
Marvel have just bought back Fox and it
was like ooh getting the x-men back also
means they're getting back the Fantastic
Four what happens when the Fantastic
Four comes back into the Marvel
Cinematic Universe is that with like the
x-men that we've they have that whole
story of was called the punk rebellion
the marginalized in the atom eyes and
what that feels like
and with the Fantastic Four it's a
completely different feeling it's
different era right it's that notion of
wholesomeness oh it's incredible
yeah it's so funny I remember that the
the in the in the telling of the
Fantastic Four stories that have shown
up in Hollywood thus far I felt sad and
more sad than I would have thought I
should have felt like why why do I feel
sad about that
this revealed it like I actually
remember as a kid sitting down or laying
down and reading those comics having a
feeling of a connection to family having
a feeling of connection to a sense of
human wholesomeness to community that
it's funny it feels more like mr. Rogers
[Music]
it's like they couldn't do Superman
right Superman hasn't been done right
for a long time that's right Superman is
far too wholesome Superman is is a
symbol of everything that humanity could
be if we really got it together and
really believed in each other
and we really were the best version of
ourselves the past however many years
you couldn't tell that story because
like that was a joke yeah you know
 yeah guy being nice we've done
that we edge it ourselves and so we
could edgy no more this in some sense is
the Jordan Peterson story right he is he
comes in he shows up and he shows up as
my man suppose a bit of a northern
Canadian a little bit more austere
version of a dad who wants you to be
better off right but at the end of the
day is but dad who wants to be better
off yeah he's here to help you
you grow up and be a more fully
meaningful human at a point when that
had been completely for governor that
was a thing that anyone was supposed to
do it so evaporator point went days were
like hanging out pretending to be 16 in
their 40s yeah yeah absolutely
[Music]
cheeseburgers every dangerous mix and
kids were in their sixth when they were
16 had no idea what it meant to actually
interact with the man at all yeah never
met one and so that's it's so funny to
see how that archetype is returning and
then BAM you got your you got your
fantastic four so for those mavens who
happen to potentially be in control of
this particular piece of the Marvel
Cinematic Universe please find an artist
who in their heart and in their soul
deeply grasps the essence of that which
is supposed to be expressed through this
and allow this to be the vehicle that it
needs to be yeah and then the world will
be saved everything then then we can
save mankind
and we can move on right you can get
them with them we can get them with Mars
that's awesome
[Music]