[Music]
but for the Silk Route a god was needed
and that is monism that I firmly believe
in and process I couldn't I couldn't put
a title on myself or the religion but it
didn't have a monastic worldview a
modest unified world that debts cannot
endless multiplicity within it and
divisions and everything but it's a
unified world everything relates to
everything else that's just no it
doesn't so - mr. Garvey the other one is
processed but what are then discoveries
are awesome that I didn't require when I
started because I you know like you go
to the east you realize that Norma dalla
G that we had in paganism is obviously
all there were just Hinduism how's that
right there Hinduism is no mythology
even each it calls eternal return of the
same so yeah every new year the world is
born in you but it's the same world all
over again like if the world
mimics itself year after year after year
and nothing new really ever happens all
novels nothing is new Under the Sun it's
a perfect sample of no matter logical
fundamental statement that is the
fundamental religion of humanity that's
the religion we had for a hundred and
ninety five thousand years undoubtedly
the only religion yeah
so I would say no matter all of you was
there was a politician is no mythology
in practice I was a numerologist and put
people on the move you need to you had
to tell them a story in the evening that
tomorrow morning we've got to get up and
move again and if you're not moving
you're dead and behind us it's the chaos
goddess and she will kill you ahead of
us are the fathers and if we just go
where they've gone before us which is
the origin of the gods right who falls
if you go where they gone before us we
will survive so I required monism and
are required processed fundamentally
from religion I believe in no mythology
solvency process and no matter all it is
modest so I could have gone all the way
become a Hindu know what happened though
was that I discovered that even in Hindu
mysticism separate from Hinduism and
certainly
religion zoroastrianism is orestes
Reformation came the idea that we could
create a world that's better than the
world we live in and of course then I'm
a marshall mcluhan guy and I studied
Hegel's so there has to be condition for
us to be able to believe the world be
better than it currently is that means
that could only happen after the art of
writing has been introduced and we all
know that we out the art of writing we
couldn't have permanent settlements that
stay permanent we still had violence for
like thousands of years and this is the
Gerard in universe is your art and
universe opens up when we settle down so
we need actually okay okay you know
there's a rotten universe happened when
when humanity happen okay okay okay so
alter okay
I know but scapegoating sure I would
agree in scapegoating escalated when you
have the permanent settlements I get to
chin for example is showing we denoted
apology the first 1,000 years of
permanent settlements were the most
violent ever right that's very likely so
somebody had to tamed that force to
begin with so roster doing it was we
Dasha and realizing there's one little
loophole in Amidala gee you could use
this is very delicious
so if de leurs would sit with us that he
probably agreed but the difference a
repetition that he talks about the 1960s
this little loophole the Nietzsche's
looking for where can the eternal return
of the same be broken so that the
possibility of novelty exists that you
can build from which is essentially you
become an engineer rather than a hunter
or a warrior if you have a permanent
settlement now how did that shift happen
well II know mythology I would say why
the daughter mimics the mother
completely is what Lacan calls the woman
as the one all with exception right
where no the one all the one all without
exception where is the the phallus is
too big did not know the woman is the
non all that then declares it's all
where's the what all that has an
exception is the fairness right so that
means coming out of a makan understand
ER that means if you read the list
there's the possum
for the Sun to be different from the
father and that probably was the case in
the nomadic tribe the sound was
different from the father she come up
with a novel solution to a current
problem that solution would then be
forgotten that's why you had to repeat
the same mistakes over and over again
but by storing that information that
means the father could die no my son
will no more when he he's a man now than
I did when I was his age that loathes
shift means that as the law says with
every return of the same there's a small
deviation and that deviation is the
possibility of being a novelty on which
we can build
if we can only store it you see how this
is even the beginning of artificial
intelligence today starts with that
evolution so raster saw that the last
completed that revolution then in 1967
between it you get Nietzsche and all
these other guys and process
philosophers who thought of where did
the possibility for novelty exist and
how could you build that all because all
of civilization all of technological
evolution of the last five thousand
years is built on that one thing level
two is a phallic it's a phallic drive
that's what's or aster was adamant about
he said the women hold up the world
whereas the men had this little tiny
possibility of innovation and innovation
and I'm interested in because I'm
studying where did the hunter warriors
shift into becoming the engineer could
then remade the world that to me is what
civilization is all about that that
change of phallic direction and for me
that that means I got so fast there with
that and then like you Thomas I went
back and studied dudeism Christianity
disarming our Bionic religions with
fresh eyes because it was okay they
wrote their old sons and daughters of
also as soon as him in the sense that
the event ology went vests went west
and the only way of intelligent occurred
in these was through Confucianism and
state bureaucracies and organizational
society and it never developed into an
idea of a better improved world
it's just maintenance Confucianism will
never be on maintenance what is the idea
that the world can be better than it is
actually I think it's the opposite
mostly in most of the Eastern religion
is the world is we're in the Kali Yuga
cycle it's like this big where we're
heading towards more and more
fragmentation and everything's falling
apart you know for the next you know
10,000 years and then there'll be a new
cycle but that is no madala G giantism
is the ultimate form of numerology and
it's incredibly popular with women I
wonder why and your women that highly
respect I love know Madonna G it is half
the world this is in our book process
and event this is process that's what
processes but this is kind of maybe
simple but what I'm hearing is like
there's a kind of religion that is is
very pessimistic and it's all you know
it's all about you know things falling
apart and then there's another kind of
religion that is about building or it's
a constructive or it's about it's about
the this building the city on the hill
rather than just I had that question in
India last fall we toured India when
Peter calcite traveled through India and
you know the Indian students are smarter
than just like we're gonna be like the
Chinese have become the manufacturers of
the world it moved into the middle class
in India we're all going to be the
computer programmers over the world but
that's just factory work and they'll
know that so how could engines become
innovative and in creative and I said
well then you have to go into phallic
mode and you've got one tradition in
university and she likes a fish I've ism
but Shia Basin is so forgotten and and
and put aside that you know it has to be
resurrected I said without shy this
Renaissance in India you will not have
the capacity for innovation or novelty
and you'll be cursed by it because you
will be at the end loop of the world
economy you'll be the guy you'll be the
place that we're going don't even count
to the corona of corpses today that's
the tragedy today and yet today still
today only twelve percent of people who
dine in gay even get a death certificate
88% of bodies are just left right so you
don't even know what the corona is of
running a marking and you're not that
that's still the tragedy of India and
the tragedy of India is that it's stuck
in an orbit ology without an of ontology
and a world of seven billion people you
must have an event ology you must our
vision that we can maintain this
population even grow to ten billion and
still not ruin the planet and still fix
the idea that we have to love strangers
rather than kill them
and all these massive existential
problems ahead of us including locking
off the atomic bombs and locking up the
biological weapons
we've just been reminded of the threats
to ourselves that we are right now eat
that's not even possible to me without
an ontology there has to be a new
message that's what are you what about
what about the more industrious
countries like Korea and Japan and are
they industrious because they've
inherited Western capital no but they've
inherited okay the shared heritage
tourism Taoism became through the Silk
Route which is called Zen in Japan Oh
Han in Korea it's definitely vent
illogical there's strong event ology in
Zen and Zi on the coaster that you you
mimic and you learn from your master and
then you do the same thing and you can
improve it and make it even better you
don't have this kind of let's say
narrative structure that like a Hebrew
the Hebrew religion has the worse you
know you're on your way somewhere and no
not in your own journey no no it's these
are tribal collective societies they've
never had individualism not at all it's
unheard of it's it's unthinkable
individualism with the cart as a sort of
a vulgar reform of ultimate Christianity
and then of course I would say the
ultimate for I think there's something
unique about Judaism it's like that is
very different than then let's say that
if it's an event ology it's a very
different kind of mythology than Eastern
Judaism kept normad ology and EV
ontology in parallel that's why I called
you this Orestes and the grown-up face
coming out of the Middle East and I
considered Islamic Christian to be pop
religions the reason is that they kept
no mythology and event ology on two
different levels it's just it's just a
question of this just two different
levels the EV ontology is kept basically
for men it's the priestly mystical
religions urbanism so rationalism and
then of course it's like a folk religion
for the military guys and that's
Mithraism but didn't even the Roman
Empire inherited from the person's cuz
it was such a clever idea to take the
military out of the polytheistic falk
related the women basically practiced
and then put them in another religious
realm which was Mithraism and of course
the call to Mithras
the dragon all these things are military
myths the military thought he had its
own religion so with the person person
see it was natural we have Mithraism
absorbance or Iceland is the overall
ship but if people don't want to
practice a folk religion which was
essentially the same as Hinduism of the
same as you work and paganism you know
with the different gods and goddesses
that's just if they don't have that if
they don't have the lesser gods the
people out there you know they'll
worship Elvis Presley and Marilyn Monroe
whatever I mean they they celebrate
celebrities you know the that's what
human common people do and we should
allow them to just like we teach them
sutras they can become good parents and
and you know they will be slaves but
since they don't aspire to be masters in
each instance that's okay that's like
90% of the population that's fine you
know they probably consider us to be mad
heads anyway and that's perfect you find
they probably come to visitors every 7
years when they need us and the other
six years were probably more likely to
become scapegoats if you walk into the
village more than anything but we can't
stay there we had to pursue another
journey and as a gnome in the know
mythology you can definitely be shamanic
you can be androgynous go between
between men and women after an inner
circle and you can also be shamanic cast
which means you go between between the
tribes you could go to New Guinea having
jarred diamonds new book writes about
this that he discovered then you gain he
had some people that were allowed to
walk freely between the tribes even in
the middle of a war and they won't they
weren't wearing a Red Cross for anything
then we just chained that's right
so shamanic has proven exists in any
culture that's no madala G that's where
we come from
that's one hundred and ninety five
thousand years at least out of the last
two thousand this kind of runs the risk
to bring back the victim its mechanism
right so you have tribes are usually
tribes they are held together and they
are you know the violence within the
tribe is specified by turning the vans
against against the outsider which is
what Carl Schmitt basically says right
above the pole
political requires an enemy so I are
gonna create tribes that do not make use
of this very dangerous mechanism yeah we
had what's currently going on right
people are forming all these stripes and
they're they they actually create a
cohesion within the tribe by turning to
a next to an external enemy my response
to that as a philosopher is to say that
you can either the winner or loser in a
very fundamental sense you can need to
become an underclass person or an upper
class person in the digital age so if
you stay with your tribe your echo
chamber that's a great word for it these
days echo chamber means that you're
stuck with your own tribe that only
tells you what you want to hear if you
stay there your mind will never grow and
be stupid it you'll be left there you
Belov behind it's like staying in the
village was during urbanization maybe
you would start to look for a scapegoat
and want to sacrifice you probably okay
okay okay but that's what happens in
villages but if you want to move into
the equivalent of the urban realm today
which is like you want to be successful
digital realm the first thing you must
do is that you must keep your algorithm
clean and pure so you need to keep the
corruption or politics
you need to keep the manipulation on the
market out of there right I would say
the corruption of money and the
manipulation of politics that's the
better but that's bad match artyom bad
pat rocky you need to keep them out so
it's your and your community's algorithm
that algorithm then if you're gonna be
successful needs challenge it needs
tantra it needs support of its tourism
that you're talking about yeah tantra
kind of open and targets entre is tight
antagonism is tight to the shocking then
bevel and the things you can't make up
your mind about and that's only then are
you truly digital grown-up and and i can
assure you this will be the success
recipe in the digital age so that's what
I try to do I basically try to tell
people that yeah you can comfortably
probably stay you echo-chamber find your
own little local scapegoat do all those
shady things the pagans have done in the
past but you know that will happen very
likely to happen evil happily small
communities digital communities physical
communities
yes I don't think it's gonna be over and
then in a long time soon but if you want
to be successful staying within the echo
chamber is not gonna make you smart it's
a bit like convincing somebody in the
1850s that you can go to school for a
few years and then probably go back to
work on a farm or you can go to school
and aspire to one day go to university
and get a higher education and move to
city be highly successful and I don't
think there's a better way of telling
people the story about her life operates
that's what the elders say adults and
this would alt adults should tell the
kids was it true has he answered your
question Thomas I I'm feeling like
there's there's more to your question
than that thought well it was like yeah
well the thing is that you know if a
small mind let's say so minority kind of
gets it right I mean that's great but
the rest will be very destructive yeah I
know I don't have I don't have any hope
for that at all to solve that problem
that's what we addressed and it did it's
the libido and we said this is gonna be
terrible the next 50 years because all
this tribalism you know it sounds like
you're celebrating it but you know it's
also going to be it's problematic pretty
yeah that's why I think we need to keep
nation-states and structures that
actually can keep certain things in
place I expect a certain level of police
state bill but necessary I'm not naive
about that either I know some sock recei
will be called for and I expect some
sock receipt to happen meaning that we
will have sensors absolutely everywhere
the collect data but absolutely
everything we do okay because people
would demand it because they will demand
safety and of the man you know being
safe from pandemics and demand for no
just required a little flu right
everybody's just going to embrace oh oh
you did how many new details we still
have on this planet now how many
democracies began with this I was
looking at a little clip from Jordan
Peterson and he was talking about how
when the people get more and more
authoritarian the more there are back in
bacteria or
what's the word I'm looking for like
like the pandemics the more pandemics
there are the more flus and what would
he call it yeah temporarily you have
more dictators and then then then really
people get very extremely authoritarian
and yes they do
but since pandemic skilled people
actually the slaves of society also can
benefit from it that's what happened
after the plague in the 14th century
Europe we wouldn't have had the
Renaissance and wouldn't have other
Reformation and none of these things and
probably the printing press wouldn't
have taken off in Europe if you died
before the plague before that so the
complexity grows over at the time but
temporarily yet it costs us all for
terrorism in Wall Street 1929 out of it
to 1933 the first are connected so yeah
authoritarianism grows when these things
happen police's will be there that's
what we're not philosophically working
on response to the Chinese Communist
Party's fantasy of a dictatorship and a
one-party some Socrates was important
hmm that's how he work at Koreans and
the Taiwanese Soderquist has been in
Taiwan for many years thousand are going
to Korea this fall as soon as we can
start flying get our lockdown will be
there will incredibly fascinated with
how the East Asian democracies have
somehow managed to stay democracies
while also actually practicing so
Socrates before Europe is even
considered it so we can respond and say
ok so what are the benefits of a
pluralistic since aa cracy and how can
we achieve it how can build artificial
intelligence to encourage pluralism
within this and sokrati ok number one
you cannot be innovative and you cannot
go for novelty because if you live in a
dictatorship what will you do
mimic and you'll be - nothing a minute
again Gerard's nightmare of a completely
mimicking society will happen in any
dictatorship starting in that nonsense
Egypt going on to Hitler in Germany you
know that's why you know I I tell all
the kids these days not only should you
watch Chernobyl to understand how bad a
dictatorship is because the information
flows that are so corrupted and
destructible and that's why China kept
the virus itself for four months and
then caused a havoc in the world and it
cost that's what the Chinese Communist
Party should be really held accountable
to that
they're a communist party and a
dictatorship and that's why the calls to
Sabha the same thing goes for any of
these systems and that's why I think the
tin drum that beautiful old film the
German film from the sixties you know
with the dwarf and that the old kid and
you know when you see like underneath
the Nazi mouse when you see actually but
beneath all this beautiful it was just a
shadow and a mess this is like a thin
surface of aesthetic beauty when you
look back at this static soft wood you
see how banal and childish did all this
I mean Hitler was the ultimate plate on
his Gnostic right him and Khamenei plate
on his Gnostics opposed to them both and
that's why the response to that
Gnosticism and the Platonism is to say
wait a second we know from history that
open and free societies with tons of
trade are tend to be more peaceful and
profitable in the long run and freedom
has his own value here but we we need to
philosophical respond to the Chinese
that would happen in Europe when the
Quran ahead speaks volumes everybody
copied China they mimicked lecture art
says they would they meant because they
didn't have a model oh you don't know
what do you do you mimic so they all
mimic the Chinese Communist Party and
all the politicians of Europe behave
with their lockdowns as if they were
Chinese Communist Party dictators
seriously no that's how vulnerable we
are because we haven't philosophically
prepared for the digital age and we're
working with it now aren't we working
fast to respond to that we need to work
with the Koreans of Japanese and
Taiwanese and anybody out there
understand since Socrates he undeniably
will happen he will have enormous
benefits to it will make it easier down
to pandemics but at the end of the day
to me the biggest question of our time
is what are we as human beings going to
tell the Machine when the Machine asks
us what does it mean to be human
hmm kind of announcing I'm wondering
about a link between this cosmopolitan
pluralism the
talking about yeah and Tantra again now
because I was talking about Tantra how
there's this sort of pluralistic kind of
like you know expression yeah I have a
great and for somehow even though Tantra
has to be it has to be done in secret
and it can't be a very public you know
affair at the same time it seems to be
very important
maybe then in a less absolutely
acknowledged explicit kind of the outer
way right in an inner well buddy hates
Tantra more than the dictator yeah yeah
okay I would say Tantra actually that's
why all the tantric iconography was
wiped out in the 12th century by by by
Islam and you know all Tantra was all
the way all over the east it wasn't just
in Tibetan yeah it was all over the
place so a one oh yeah I Kanaka fee was
destroyed and and all the demon
creatures and then you just had these
sort of you know whitewashed kind of
Buddhas and you know anyway yeah Museum
postures some of the curt's have done
research on it there were centers called
cos stocks and crosstalk is actually the
origin old-lady becomes the the clusters
what are you saying Latin forums that
became the clusters and then later the
monasteries of Europe in Christianity
the idea came from the Middle East it
came from the silk route and the
psoriasis obviously were inspired by the
Indians and the Chinese and the build
cost Fox the Costas were locations where
he went for tantric practice yeah sure
great so we want to create a constant
movement don't listen now it's part of
the restorative Renaissance were working
on and and and not just fire temples and
things but the cost i think the cost is
a wonderful way of both looking at the
monasteries the proud monasteries of
Taoism of Buddhism and you know the
great monasteries of Christianity too
and they'll respond to them and say that
was arrested and had his own tradition
but he was wiped out by the Muslims
absolutely right they didn't want any
CCN of it yeah because they didn't want
the Tantra they big dancing Islam is
because they wanted purity they wanted
you know a topknot
order
purity and they wanted I would say Islam
is the ultimate form of decentralized
loose network of very high-minded pillar
saints so for good or bad Islam doesn't
have a center and she has long it is
even is the religion that you must
follow your local mullahs interpretation
of the scripture and since their local
knows everywhere and you just move on
one village to the next you get a
different religion now the great thing
about that is that actually it's kind of
surprising that she Aslam wasn't wiped
out because she's obviously just another
center it's it really reminds me of the
echo chambers today like you stay in
your own village you hear the same
message every time this old man called
the mullah you must follow him you must
not be any smarter than he s you must
never be challenged challenging him will
be challenged by you like okay so that's
a local sort of Shia Muslim community
okay and Sony just says that what the
text itself replaces the teacher so you
must follow it literally and and of
course any religion that has a literal
interpretation of the text is probably
missed the whole point with religion in
the first place
eleven-year-old it's watch out for them
11-year olds who don't have a sex life
yet you gave them a throne or you give
them a pillar to sit on and you get the
pillar Saints and the boy Pharaohs of
the world and they've been the problem
ever since
so you give power to somebody who's not
mature enough to contain and understand
power yet you get problems that means
ultimately to me the tyrant is not so
much a compromise between the priest and
the chief tank but rather failure of
both the chief of the priests to step up
and that means a little boy aspires to
be priest thinks I can have it all or a
little boy who aspires to be chieftain
thinks I can have it all and that's
that's the tyrants of history dictators
of history and they don't stay long but
they caused enormous havoc all we have
and these days these are the guys
they're gonna blow off the bomber blows
all up the date happens so we got to get
them out of the way and we got to find a
mythology where we kill them and I don't
think collectivism is the way
forward because it ended up North Korean
Stalinism that is collectivism in its
purest form ever and individualism ended
up with a religion called Scientology in
California in Hollywood of course the
ultimate individualism is a guy so damn
narcissistic he goes to cult full of
narcissists and pastes him three
thousand dollars a second to have his
astrology done for him okay how could
anything be more stupid enough but that
is Cartesian individualism par
excellence
it is Scientology so you got Scientology
one hat and you got North Korean stars
mother okay if these are the two
extremes of neurosis and psychosis Kip
maybe we can just please try to find
something right in between the work from
there which to me is tribalism but when
in tribalism today we have inter
tribalism inter tribal ISM if you want
to say inter tribal in your own
echo-chamber your loser if you go into
tribal and start exploring the
challenges of actually trading with and
communicating with other tribes in your
own you'll be a winner turn-key mm-hmm
so that's networking a networked society
again sort of that is it from this
conversation I would say Tantra and the
bard absolute the Tantra the bard
absolutely absolutely tied together
what did you say Thomas yeah some time
ago we discussed the you know the this
guru Mahal right which is actually you
know I mean it's often vilified but I
mean there's something to say for it it
oft often Tantra is kind of transferred
by looking at how somebody is in the
world right but but there is a talked
about we mentioned Osho right off you
see an example of a guru gone rogue so
you don't want to go there but not
really basically so you think and it's
the network is the Guru right you'd
learn from your network you learn from
your from the what is it that I guess
Alexander would call it the tribe right
and let her make sure that the tribe is
not homogeneous that includes different
religions so you can for example as we
did learn from from Buddhism so that we
can actually have a decent connection
with Christianity and that's why
broadening your eyes and then you can
you can start looking at your own
culture again
yeah well that just reminds you of you
know you if you if you practice a
tradition you practice Tantra Buddhism
for example it's best not to just study
the text of tantric Buddhism is but it's
best to you know to study as many things
as possible and you know in order to
become like a cosmopolitan person rather
than you know an arrow you know could
becoming narrow in your and as you say
you know stuck in your in your I don't
know I've just I've talked to a lot of
Buddhists who sort of they just become
kind of parroting different Buddhist you
know by such a great guy right
yeah true warned against you know
Buddhism is not about like wearing funny
clothes and and and and you know
adopting the culture of the people love
that rather they start wearing these
weird clothes and I mean it's great I
mean I spent years reading longchenpa
right I still absolutely love it but you
know you can read you can read white hat
you can you can meditate on white hats
you know if you're interested in in
these in some of these metaphysics or
some of these philosophies I mean we
have fantastic philosophers that that
that talk about exactly the same topics
and and they don't come with all this
this cultural luggage that that you have
to kind of go through right which is
very difficult for us to to absorb I
think that is I think that is a very
good practice doc I agree and I would
say the closest we have but the
fortunate is a lot more boring than
Tantra the clothes we have in the West
that still attempts the same thing is
psychoanalysis and la Cohen is crazy
Western yeah absolutely and so is young
I would say that about Freud Freud tried
to State Choir and thinks it did but
certainly when you get in gone much more
March than it is sine certainly yeah but
you must I mean like almost mischievous
character if you
about him if you read from his his
disciples he was pretty mischievous as
well but yeah he was okay okay but
psychoanalysis has the Chan trick about
it and that's exactly why psychoanalysis
cannot practice within the state order
you cannot be you cannot be on a state
bureaucracy salary in these economists
you can be psychotherapists a
psychologist but then you just serve the
system because the cycle analyst first
and foremost so yeah I do question the
system which is exactly what Tundra does
not to teach you the ultimately you must
be your own judge over your own reality
meaning that you you you you must see
through the system you must stand is
corruption to understand it's
manipulation to understand also in
within you actually that you are 99%
nature and just a tiny tiny little
sliver or some kind of culture on top of
it it may be through prohibition we
could train into you but you know other
than that it's it's um
you're wild in the world is wild and in
psychoanalysis teaches of that but on
the couch it's kind of boring we talk to
at least you get to fuck and take drugs
and tons of shit so I prefer to be
trying to cover to be psychoanalytical
but they share exactly this idea of the
borrowed absolute you take you retract
from the world you move outside of the
world and then you see through the world
and you become actually critical of the
Society of living but what you want to
be involved in that society or not or
wedge your part or something probably us
to do the times you live in and it
probably has to do with your archetype
personality type you don't necessarily
have to go back into the square and get
engaged and be an activist but you
certainly see that yeah a few things
could certainly be done to fix things if
I get a chance to do it I probably would
but it doesn't necessarily with them it
doesn't necessarily mean that I have to
do it I can make the choice to stay
retracted or to do something else
there's no moral obligation on me to go
in there and prove the world yeah
you're perfectly okay to because you're
not a soldier I would say that you can
stay within process and ignore event if
you choose to do so I cannot argue
against you if you decide to go no
matter logical because
the numerology presents are perfectly
viable narrative that includes all
humanity
but if you're interested in using what
happens to be something beneficial that
your son could you know pick up from you
and improve on and somehow that get you
get a kick out of that then I'm all
welcoming it because that's what of
ontology teaches you can do you can
improve on a work of the world and these
days probably even you have to because
you need to build around and avoid
certain existential threats that's why I
preached a koto pian ISM and constant
positivism but it could tokenism which
is the completion of the Agricultural
Revolution and and cosmopolitanism is
the completion of the urban industrial
revolution and then synthesis is
actually the turn of religion away from
the religion of magick toward the
religion of Technology little synth ism
is so it prepares us for a machine as a
messiah if you could probably
collaborate with with the machines you
do with the machine is good up which is
probably logos and we should focus on
what human beings are good at we just
pathos to then find a share methyls
that's how I see synthase and that's
where it comes in and then of course you
can go back to any of the religions and
discovered that the religion of
technology was there all along it was
part of all all parts are looking to
teach you how to be grown-up take
responsibility for yourself and others
and then if you can't improve on the
world all of that is religion of
technology it's not religion or magic
later on magic was mercifully right
John causes psycho technology and then
there's technology agree I agree I agree
psycho technology yeah so we don't need
telepathetic you know miracles any
longer we don't need to walk or water or
anything like that or why because we
have we have boats and then we have your
waterskiing and we have smartphones we
have technologists now that we've
invented simply because we had magic and
magic made you know young guys think
that I could actually make that happen
for real and that's the engineering
mindset that's wherever ontology starts
this is what a mental logical religious
that deal with the phallic to deal with
this is phallic of ontology to me
now I'm interested anybody out there is
interested in exploring frolicking
ontology this welcomed a converted
Zoroastrianism because it's all about
phallic in ontology it's a center of
that religion but it doesn't mean the
trace of phallic of ontology does exist
all the cultures of course it does
especially today although civilization
is about that we haven't improved at all
technologies the entire improvement it's
everything that
make several different today for what it
was five years ago is a direct result of
technology try to make the link between
technology and Tantra I'm trying to yeah
well technology can be taught in Sutra
but maybe not technological innovation I
don't know the technological mimicry can
and that's a large part of practice
technology you know 99.5% of practice
technology is just mimicking but the one
part that is the in innovation of the
new technology probably would require
tantric mindset or a more laboratory
mode right and in the laboratory mode
has to be what retraction exclusion
moving out of society separating
yourself to go into a truly innovative
mode very interesting yeah there's a ton
tantric mindset that gets you out of the
copying right I mean it's what Peter
Thiel calls you know going from zero to
one instead of going from wanted and
yeah I agree strong you can train and
you can train this mindset using tantric
practices mmm-hmm yeah and maybe we said
that last time didn't we we say that
that crazy wisdom is is is going beyond
beyond
mimesis or men alexander set the bit
that's behavior that that cannot be
mimicked diagnosis that's right we
haven't really talked about it very much
but it can be inherently very very
problematic right this this this mimesis
and basically it's behavior that cannot
be copied I think that's a very nice way
of looking at the Python right I mean
crazy vision isn't always like you know
sex and drugs and whatever I mean Monty
Python I mean there's something that's
that's kind of a form of crazy wisdom
right it makes you think and it says
something new in in in a very surprising
way and yeah I think that's what it is
in some way in some level it's it's just
it's just pure creation it's it's
aligning yourself with this pure
creative act
oh yeah I mean I don't think it's real
art to mean really that's why the
metaphor sexuality and art are just
talking art is not transformative unless
it has a ton of quality otherwise it's
just decoration that's what happens when
you mimic something mmm it's not art art
requires novelty mm-hmm yeah yeah that's
why the conservative people who really
don't like art very much because they
want they want to keep which they go and
they want to keep you know creating
icons of the same thing and take the
society together Haiti
that's why dictators say and all they
want is mimicking boring bland infantile
aesthetics that's why that's why always
dictatorships always look boringly ugly
they look like yeah it's like a nobody
first not a killer
and everything is the same so every year
is repetitive so everything looks like
Stalin's Moscow 1953 for the next 40
years without any change at all this was
a conservative in aesthetic conservative
in steady conservatism is exactly what
dictators love precisely because they
hate Tantra they hate art so that's why
they blow up with aesthetics that it's
just infant Isaac Hitler wanted to copy
his fantasy or what Greece looked like
2,000 years ago he didn't want anything
else and then he had these fantasies
about the perfect jehovah's witness
style
german farm which never existed of
course and he was the failed artist too
as me he totally felt he was failed
precisely because he could not beat he
didn't have the talent to be country he
didn't have the talent for novelty at
all Hitler is the ultimate mimicker he
mimics mimics made he's a boy he's a
plate honest Gnostic and he's 11 years
old and he wants to mimic me make me
make me make me make all the time in the
blend that's a spectacular example of
the use of the victim each mechanism
right there is it's an extreme return to
paganism yeah absolutely yeah nothing is
to scan paganism that that's exactly not
system in Germany it's paid
Gnosticism combined is exactly what is
this may be a good way to put it because
yeah Gnosticism and paganism that made
some weird cocktail and it completely
exploded yeah call me mean Iran is a
good example too because he's the murder
of Islamic Gnosticism and even Islamic
theologians don't even understand what
Khamenei was all about
he was even rare and weird to the Shia
Muslims he was incredibly charismatic he
state didn't stay true to single word he
ever said in his life he only saw like
the benefit of his own artistic mission
and it's incredibly Gnostic he saw
himself as a gnostic misti very similar
to Hitler I mean he was terrible very
similar titler and popular too because
something to do also with an inability
that - to kind of have a see the humor
of existence on some level it's like
they don't have a sense of humor dog
again humor is pathos humor is that you
know machines cannot crack jokes
definitely something human beings do and
definitely something is tantric so we
are at our best or humans we go towards
the human not just cracking jokes but
humor in the sense of like real humorous
like the humors or something or I don't
know what I'm trying to say here and I
think Simon Craig she wrote a book like
there's something extremely humorous
about about about you know well children
Trevor called it this blue pancake that
falls from the sky it's like you're your
whole enterprise as its kind of humor to
it that if you don't see that you're
you're in trouble most dark humor is an
example of intelligence that's how you
deal with catastrophe in the most
creative way possible so yes okay so
again so I'm a Christian a boring book
on humor on purpose great book and and
he says says humor is fundamentally a
form of intelligence it's it's a form of
stupidity not to be able to understand
humor because you're lacking a level it
is they again it is it is when logos and
pathos cannot collaborate and that's
already the pathology of Sutra is is a
certain kind of humor lessness yeah
we're back talking about because that
was our original topics you know suture
versus Tantra so
and not only do they lack human when
they get stuck on the citric side and
can't be turned trick they also get
pretentious mm-hmm
is also part of that and
passive-aggressive oh absolutely
mmm yes yes exactly you know what I'm
talking about
the love and light brigade they're
feeling right now and oh god how deep
they are and how authentic they um I'm
feeling really vulnerable and not safe
right now talking yeah he goes at
egodeath it's always eat nobody's more
obsessed with her own ego than the
person talks about ego death because he
said I experienced davidís but there was
an I that experience it wasn't there
your ego didn't die you didn't kill your
ego and it blow up your own brain
inserting your ego to be gone because
you'll be dead but as long as you live
you'll have an ego
yeah pretentiousness the pretentiousness
is that quality the other around there
around in their pretentious echo
chambers only seeing people who think
like they do and using the same
vocabulary off what the same and also
we're back to Gerrard again and also
they tend to be unconsciously searching
for a scapegoat oh yes because there
there's this emptiness inside of them
that you know they just they have to
find because they've become so loved and
lady that they they're the they have to
push down the dark side of them it's
like they exert their first order of
classical scapegoating because it's like
they first turn you into a messiah and a
guru and then they go after
sadomasochism right yeah that's uh
that's sheer art wrote a lot about that
so it's I mean there's this metaphysical
desire and stuff like that I mean it's I
mean I loves you right because he
explains all these very puzzling aspects
of human behavior like say the masochism
where does that come from I mean it all
fits into his grand theory of the human
mind which is basic that's the program
that Freud started and that you work on
and lock Albert on and Girard basic
we basically finished it right I think
is the is it's like it's like Darwin
this is a Darwin or anthropology I think
the dark which I'm extremely surprised
that everybody knows Freud and and you
and Locke on and that that grr this is
comparatively no it only see only
started and peter thiel know this will
breaks your art massively big I mean
sure art of the X started fifty years he
will definitely be memorable definitely
I mean he moved one of the joints like
Whitehead or something yeah both in
anthropology where it's from le odd all
the way up to Girardi what I call the
massive anthropological revolution of
the 20th century anthropology explode in
the 20th century almost on a par with
physics so he was a golden age for
anthropology 20th century and it would
be helping out with data because a lot
of the ideas from the 20th century can
also be proven because what apology
after all is supposed to be science so
in Girardi's is the king of that he's
definite the king of that I read him the
same way you do Thomas and I think is
amazing there will all be your audience
we are more or less already I can't help
thinking about you realize the day you
realize that people are just mimicking
all the time it is gonna be one of the
biggest events of your life to realize
that that's what everybody does that's
what I do that's oh god it's how you
turn people into enemies because you
mimic and that means that you're going
to want what they want but that means
you turn them into competitors so
paradoxically you know it's the people
that you admire and that you really want
to be close to that's not you're gonna
turn into mortal enemies because you you
copy what they we copied their desire
yeah I think I think you're right
Gerard made explicit right with what
could only be expressed in like theater
and literature before yeah you know I
read Proust and like Dostoevsky in and
and improves Shakespeare so and all
those render study and we're expressing
what he was saying but they could only
do it in the form of
sure and he kind of kind of made that
explicit it's an amazing story also if
you have I've read this first book
what is it romanticism and I don't
remember what it's called but so where
he discusses all of these these these
books like Dostoyevsky Cervantes and and
he just shows that all the same
mechanisms are just described again and
again by these writers in different
contexts
Stendhal as well yeah guys I'd love to
return to these conversations with you
guys and I've got to read up you Lauren
Gerrard and also reread him which I'm
doing at the moment while I'm writing
the new book and that's quite a bit
audible mmm highly recommended reading
for anybody follows us Gerrard pick him
up Gerrard and Whitehead does all the
rich yeah and Trump we're done we are
gonna start by appreciation society
mainly Ghana we got a credit a short
game trunk but Renaissance in the West
did you see I just had a podcast with
Fabrice yes I did have wonderful he's
beautiful they would love for is my
daughter
he's kind he's the only guy that's ever
been able to write a biography of Champa
no one's ever been able to write that
biography because it was such a
everybody who met him had a different
version of him so it's like very
difficult to actually just a typical
trait for a crazy list exactly yes
but that's what you and Tonto will make
you like that right he will we become
you can fit your personality to the to
the to the environment yeah cuz if its
promises anyway and you are a lazy
person person you need you don't you're
not an object anymore so fixed rigid
object but you become a process
something fluid
yeah that's that's the tantric attitude
to life yeah and of course if you
perfection of that is doctrine because
in the idea of did in Tantra there's
still the idea of transformation right
so there's still the idea of like I'm
there turning something into something
else and then
with the level of Jochen you cannot let
that go this is this TED idea that are
still the practice that you need to do
hmm any worse both in Amidala G and of
ontology so in Amidala G what I call it
as vertical numerology so there is
journey you do but it's your own journey
throughout your life that is studies
that that is like millions of years
older idea the idea of an event ology
were society itself the world itself
improves or changes over time
he's very recent that is I think it
great in our ago yeah well thanks thanks
a lot guys this is this is awesome oh
yeah I love it I love it it's really
interesting cuz I was listening to your
thing with Tom like he we just you just
had a you know podcast with Tom where
you you did a very nice job of laying
out you know your ideas and then in
these kind of conversations which are
much more chaotic and wild we just go in
so many interesting directions and yeah
I love both of them don't worry only the
clever guys will find it so we have a
bard absolutely and that's quite natural
he said only the clever guys to find
each the rest they lose their temper
it's like wiping it is publicly released
available to all but only few people can
read him and that actually saves him on
the right side of the bard absolutes
know there's quite a number of people
who follow this I'd say about a thousand
for a minimum for each podcast and then
and then you know some of them get a lot
more so yeah but these are I mean it's
amazing I mentioned before it's amazing
that now you can just go to Amazon and
just buy anything right thousands of
years of wisdom and then and then start
cross-linking this I'm discussing this
like we did tonight and and that gives
that gives me a lot of
because all of new thinking is going on
a lot of new solutions can emerge yeah
and we don't even have search engines
tied to order yet but that's gonna
happen that's one of the things I will
do for us and then you can just say when
was this bird first used in history and
then we'll go and said there was a
certain podcast recorded this year at
the state 46 minutes 11 seconds into it
here's the work I mean you're amazing
you may think that the machines will
help us they basically say we got a huge
huge library the expanse all the time
and still although it expands we can
just quickly within seconds find exactly
what you're looking for at the right
archive here it is now it will be a
massive revolution when it comes to
learning and and I I love that that's
the good thing I think it's time to put
some optimism in the narrative because
there's a lot of gloom and doom around
and of course there's yeah but I mean
humanity has always been on the brink of
extinction well this isn't you
yeah and at least now we have a lot of
Technology and philosophy and religion
and we can we can have a very fresh
perspective on it which i think is
amazing okay not fair like Alexander is
conspire constructive thinker I hate to
say it but the new book is going to end
on a good note it's so much easier to be
dark but it's true you're absolutely
right Thomas yep so that's two hours man
those two all right you've got a lot of
editing there Andrew wow that's great
I love brutal edits so go ahead and do
it your way and and I mean it I mean I'd
love to pick up this one again soon and
just dig deeper do what we talked about
we do that naturally anyway these are
the things we love to study so for the
three of us that's the easiest thing in
the world this sort of 10 - Brotherhood
we just created it's wonderful