[Music]
go help equalia was to meet the
immediate cognitive needs that being who
are looking more product solutions or
they're looking to off-label smart drugs
or energy drinks are looking for which
in their ability to get through this and
interim unis business launch to sustain
program attention promising capability
but were so many of the solutions either
T command crash or overrides of you
determine regulatory system leading to
dependence one into New Zealand v could
actually support flattening benefit
because rather than over writing
tutoring tourism subsection working
through through the choices to a bus
that increases resilience and I'll meet
that composite not just massage this
regulation so the goal is both something
to had meaningful nearly immediate
subjectively observable effects as well
as
no lasting negatives or dependence and
lasting segments and also benefits
across a wider spectrum of what's
actually relevant to me so if we
increase someone's focus but at the cost
of irritability or anxiety or
personalization or even increased
aspects memory functions is really
interesting this is what we've seen so
many chemical solutions that are working
to a very limited pathway they're just
working their apartment importantly for
part of me adrenergic operational
quality company so our goal affection
autumn all of the states of experience
and cognitive abilities strategy meeting
all kinds of creative people work and
this is a very nuanced combination
short-term memory and long-term memory
and different kinds of remember what we
call an digits bananita Consuela's
intend to be a focus and duration of
attention and both synthetic and when
you bilities all these different
companies they don't come together to
not that meaningful on dishes man myself
on that and then it's not just as
property relations also the
psychological dispositions of moving
from around the nation to portray having
drive and the aspects of focus more
emotionally
and this related as well as emotional
resilience and the cognitive ambulance
positions do task-switching well so
there's a whole set of things when
Marlon make up what we call that full
cognitive creative productive capacity
most needs the people it could be anyone
experience being in sometimes but not
readily accessible and our goal is to
see how to me all under my physiology to
begin the stage support the physiology
across all of those different pathways
to be able to advance short term and
long term everything in equipoise
[Music]
[Music]