[Music]
can you talk a bit about your personal
background your personal history and how
it relates to the war and sense-making
and the models that you've constructed
to understand the world over the last
sort of 20 years or so if you if you
notice that what we're engaging is a
very interesting inquiry because we're
attempting to do sense making about
sense making and for me with that ends
up always doing is creating many
different layers of awareness of what's
happening so even trying to figure out
how to tell the story of how my personal
history leads to the inquiry into sense
making us of course making sense of my
story but broadly speaking it shows up
as I was born in 1971 in Texas and my
father was in the military but we didn't
move around too much and my mom was
college-educated went on to a career in
psychology and education and ultimate
politics and for me there's if you know
anything about the culture of Texas in
the 70s just assume that's if you watch
the movie boyhood or Dazed and Confused
just assume that that's the context and
then later on the fact that I sort of
was participating in boy and nerd
culture in that time so comic books
science fiction fantasy really OCD level
of pop culture film and television
computers and role-playing games and
again pretty obsessively like a lot and
so this is impresses itself upon my
psychology lots of different kinds of
artifacts things like not just the the
notion of say the way that a person who
grew
playing chess thinks about life in the
model or the framework of chess but
actually growing up playing every game
and thinking about the meta structure
that gives rise to games intuitively and
how you can drop into any game and be
able to derive what it is and I guess
kids these days are already they sort of
naturally think about it like the idea
because I'm calling a game of
first-person shooter or calling it a
sandbox game has become part of the
content conventional language the back
then the concepts didn't exist so for me
they were built at the level of
intuition but then also things like
role-playing where the notion that the
world that you lived in the narrative
structures that gave rise to the way
that you made sense of meaning in your
world were actually objects of creative
participation and not just a
role-playing game but all of them so
having to figure out how to
spontaneously create a 1920s simulator
and had a created medieval Japan
simulator and how to create a simulator
of contemporary New York but with
different changes different natures of
reality was again just part of my
developmental environment and I guess
you'd add to that the experience which I
don't think is that atypical but my
particular experience of not being able
to play the game that was handed to me
fluidly you know so the game of going to
school mostly going to school right as
soon as you show up it at I guess first
great was when I first started getting
to recognize that there was something
definitely off
and initially simple things like the
idea that there's an authority who
doesn't actually have the capacity that
they are supposed to have like they're
teaching things that are in fact
actually wrong and you can tell that as
a first grader in my case a second
grader and then the notion of having to
deal with an arbitrary Authority that
you didn't sign up for but nonetheless
has coercive capacitive force to do
things that clearly suck and by the way
or stupid
so that idea that feeling of trying to
figure out like what the hell's going on
here in a sense of constraint but so the
the official game the official story
didn't fit and my developmental
environment was teaching me that these
things these kinds of stories are in
fact creative acts they
just the laws of nature put me on a
journey of trying to figure figure it
out and figure it out always in a combo
between West suppose we might call
sense-making and agency never just one
of the other always thinking okay how do
we figure out what's happening and how
do we have agency in what's happening
and if we sort of fast forward to
college this put me in a place where for
example I didn't really have any
particular notion of a major because
that's just a story and it's not a story
that worked for what I was trying to
accomplish so I just hacked that it was
nice that the concept of hacking had
become somewhat meaningful in that
timeframe and I had participated in
hacker culture so broad like broadly
applying the hacker ethos to what ever
happened to be there you're in
relationship with the power structure
that's stronger than you but if you can
use a combination of cleverness and
elegance you can figure out how to
actually make it do the things you want
to do and get away with it this is kind
of like the very gen-x temporary
autonomous zone hacker cypher freak
ethos we can create a space for autonomy
and my junior year of college I ended up
coming up with the basis of the
beginnings of my meta theory of
particularly how culture and technology
co-create each other and spent the next
what was that probably 93 to 2007 so
it's 14 15 years kind of playing that
out and refining it building it in me
distressed so you know it's reading
sheet alloys and learning how to do
learn how to do information theory for
video compression for example or more
specifically actually reading logic and
cents and learning how to do
spreadsheets actually even more more
specifically and so eventually what this
leads me to is I figured out another
hack which is a social hack that
University is largely credentialing
credential izing exercise is content you
can meet people but largely credential
izing exercise and that to be able to
move into the economic functions that
have the most leverage in the interface
through technology and culture ie high
tech entrepreneurship I needed to get a
more legible credential and a relatively
brief search led me to the path of
noticing that you could get into law
school through the vehicle doing well on
a standardized test and really nothing
else and so I knew from experience that
I could do well on standardized tests so
I took a weekend study for the L SAT
took the L SAT low cost if I got a good
score cool if I didn't who cares
I got a good score this allowed me to
get into Harvard Law School which the
law school part you can kind of like
tear off the bottom of the Diploma and
throw away because most people just read
the first letter H Oh Harvard cool
that's neat and you have a credential so
that's write it so I spent three years
again more or less not going to law
school
it spent most of my time with Larry
Lessig and with people like Cornel West
and folks like that doing whatever I
thought was interesting and continued to
refine the stuff that I've been trying
to figure out
lesyk stuff was awesome like very very
important for me at least and more
broadly back then and then when I
graduated moved out to California had no
idea by the way how the tech industry
worked at all I guess zero experience
and for example didn't know how the San
Francisco was the place to go I just
knew the kind of West was a good good
directionality and in San Diego ended up
getting involved in the high tech scene
and then it being involved in the
startup of three companies in a row
pretty quickly right at the froth stage
of the but kombu something called mp3
and then the third company was DivX
which I was the founder and CEO of and
rode that through the bubble popping and
then all the way up to the financial
crisis of 2008 but it's nice like I
actually got on the one hand to apply
the underlying theory refine the theory
in practice like really seeing firsthand
how a lot of these things emerged and
went through their arc it's like from
inception all the way to maturity
through that pace and ended up with
enough resources that I could more or
less do what I wanted to so so then I
did and I spent two glorious years doing
exactly what I wanted to and in the
process of that war do what I want to do
is like spend time at a place called the
Senate famous to do and by the way
another place called Necker islands like
two very different versions of what I
want to but continued by the way basic
under the heading of getting a better
sense of what's exactly going on like
are who are these rich people we've
heard of and who at the global elite to
be pretty so much about oh I would just
meet them and find out so I did and in
the context of science art we're the
smartest people do the most interesting
work in the broadest way oh they're here
okay cool let's go spend time with them
as well but then the financial crisis
hit and I happen to be just sitting
there at a place where I could ask
questions and so I start asking
questions
and I was in this really interesting
place where I was literally at a
conference at SFI when I think like the
Dow dropped 800 points 900 points and a
thousand points like day after day after
day which had the consequence of getting
a lot of attention and I was able to
watch the story that was being told
through MSNBC and through official
channels I was able to ask the actual
Nobel prize-winning economists who just
happened to be like right there what's
actually going on and as they better
than witnessed the gap between the
official story what was really happening
and the fact the economists had no
 idea there even their underlying
models were just whack so I got
interested and so I started digging and
I just more or less followed my nose you
know I tried to read all the books on
money theory for example and David
Graeber book by the way is fantastic and
blows a lot of concepts particularly the
legitimacy of the economic discipline
out of the water and of course also
about other things like complexity
economics but didn't you know the you
know it didn't stop there what you start
getting into complexity the first thing
you learn is that everything's connected
everything else
so if you want to do economics you also
have to look at the interface between
economics and politics I think yesterday
we talked about the four layer model
that talks about the path you can for
example model finance economics politics
and cultures being distinct layers that
feed back into the very complex fashion
but that if you have a financial crisis
you can actually allow that financial
crisis to happen at the finance level
and while it will have impacts at the
economic level it may not necessarily
have any meaningful impact at the
political level and may even strengthen
the political level or you can do what
we did which was you can actually more
or less bail out well both
metaphorically and practically bail out
the financial level by spending cultural
currency meaning breaking people's
underlying trust at the political level
and then ultimately even at the cultural
level to say people's sense of being
part of the same cultural fabric greece
for example i think has had a lot of
that then of course again watching that
in real time so again a place of being
able to be front and center with the
unfurling of reality and by the way
having skin in the game my large pile of
money that i'd made by being a tech
entrepreneur became a smaller pile of
money as a result of financial crisis i
wasn't with the right term interest I
was not disinterested I was quite
interested in a bit pissed off to be
perfectly frank and I got even more
pissed off as I continued watching what
was happening because it was to me at
least now increasingly obvious that the
choices that we were being made at the
level of how our collective choice
making worked let's say for example to
level politics were bad like actually
bad like they would have long-term
negative consequences and
just kept on going deeper and then I
found myself in a situation where I had
a series of significant oh where I
would have conversations with people who
were really like the expert in some
particular domain of interest say for
example a nuclear proliferation or the
concentration of estrogen in amphibians
like very narrow specific domains and I
had to probably over period about a year
a series of conversations each one of
which was things are really terrible
like there's something going on that is
way bad like but nuclear proliferation
the likelihood that we will be able to
and to keep the world from having a
quite significant bad nuclear event of
the next decade is very low like 5% like
sitting there was like the three experts
in the world on that question they're
all a lot not in their heads saying yeah
this is like they were this is
really a serious problem and then it's
taking literally one step back and
noticing that that fact does not seem to
propagate out of that room and then
beginning to you know get my metamodel
relationship between culture and
technology now just plugging we're in a
relationship between politics and
technology in between communications and
politics and between environmental and
between the whole thing and begin you to
notice that I seem to be one of the very
few people who was talking to all these
different groups and trying to see well
how the chain fit together from
beginning to end top to bottom and how
the thing everything synthesized and
what happens when you start thinking
about changes in rainfall and
temperature impact on food with
populations and politics what impact is
migration have on political stability
what impact his political stability have
on financial stability like you know
watching the Cascade effects and
somewhere around I guess 2012 came to
the conclusion that the thing that we're
operating in whatever the container is
that keeps the world held in a somewhat
functioning system is end of life and
there's theoretical ways to describe
exactly why exactly what it is
exactly
why and exactly what we might be able to
do about which by the way is very little
in the context of itself right so we've
reached the end of life of a deep
premise on how to go about being humans
together in relationship to the world
and we're seeing this come to fruition
everywhere by the way I mean everywhere
you can even literally describe
Hollywood blockbuster films in this
model and video games so okay so then
the next couple of years was given that
just get back to actuation so in a sense
making let's take what what might we be
able to do and this gave rise to a
project that became called game B which
some people have heard of that which is
actually kind of neat because they were
ultimately about 30 or 40 people who
were involved in that project and we
weren't able to get to where it needed
to get to in and of itself so he
dissolved the project in I think 2013 or
so maybe 2014 and the fact that the
concepts have propagated out is actually
very interesting reality but not vastly
and means that kind of gets this more or
less where we are so so the story that
I've heard you sketch out is that you
have been a tech entrepreneur for many
years which has given you the ability to
then kind of detach a little bit take a
bit more of a bird's eye view and speak
to people who really know what's going
on in the culture try to understand and
put the pieces together one of the
things that I've heard you talk about a
lot is the crisis of sense making which
in some sense seems to be underneath all
these other crises because if we can't
make sense of the world it's very
difficult to know what we what we should
do next so what would you how would you
describe the crisis of sense making what
I'd like to do first is maybe establish
a method and in the method that I would
propose is one of having a kind of
attentional parallax but just to say
that we're going to talk about it
and we're also going to be doing it and
we're willing to be aware of both so we
have a couple of different perspectives
going on simultaneously
so what I'd invite us to be but just
notice that there's that fact and
you can try to be split your attention
into three distinct pieces and try to be
aware of all three simultaneously now in
the context of let's call it the big
question of the situation where are we
one of the things that we'll notice is
that we're engaging in a narrative we
end up having to take a slice like our
attention is finite really quite
distinctly finite and our capacity to
engage in conversation has some
linearity to it it may be wandering but
it has a reality tunnel ask effect but
the problem that we're in isn't it's
it's hole it's a it's a wholeness to it
it's a whole system and I don't want to
use the strictly physical but it's a
wholeness so we find ourselves in a
circumstance where we have to use just a
lens a perspective but be aware of the
fact that we're trying to do is actually
grasp a whole and it's a little bit like
that well at least my version might take
in that story of the blind men and the
elephant where if the blind men take
their perspective as being the hole
they're making an error right it's the
task turns into a rhino and the foot
turns into a tree but if the blind men
are able to recognize the distinction
between the narrow finite perspective
that they're holding and the notion of
the trying to grasp a hole and then they
communicate with each other they
establish a parallax
then they can in fact perhaps grasp the
whole oh it's an elephant and there's
something about that that is very much
more than just the sum of their
particular perspectives and take a lot
more in this case and we can even maybe
enrich that metaphor by saying okay well
we generally when I say it's an elephant
will end up happening is wool will
actually put visual take we see the
whole elephant but the blind that are
blind they feel pieces and we perceive
seeing the whole elephant to somehow
seeing the whole but of course we're not
we're seeing the exterior as reflected
by light when we're seeing we're not
seeing the interior of the elephant
we're not seeing its blood pumping we're
not seeing the micro level of the
metabolic processes we're not seeing
that
netcode converting into proteins we're
not seeing the developmental history the
elephant elephant through its lifetime
as an elephant we're not seeing the
evolutionary history of the becoming of
elephant missing world which is part of
the whole and so it's interesting to
regress the relationship between the
parts that were perceived by the blind
men and the whole that we could perceive
we saw and then noticing that that hole
that we see is actually a part of a
whole and we just try to kind of absorb
that and take that it's almost a moral
lesson how to tell the difference
between dark parts and holes then we can
talk about the crisis of sense making
because it is a part of a larger story
but a big answer to the question is
being able to separate between parts and
wholes and actually learn how to
perceive through homeless and
that last part has a lot of richness to
it I think so there's a lot of different
ways to start this and I think I'll just
kind of start near the end and then
teleport to the beginning so so near the
end we have we have a problem and that
is if we want to be able to respond to
our environment if we want to be able to
make good choices in executing our
actions effectively it's useful to know
what the fuck's going on this is
particularly true when we're dealing
with multiple people and we're trying to
get us all to work together and we're in
a situation where the magnitude the
complexity of the problem domain that
we're dealing with is is very large and
getting larger by the minute and at the
same time the way that we go about
knowing what's going on together is
actually at its best isn't up to the
task at its best could not make sense of
what was happening and is actually
getting worse and worse every day
so if we need to be here we're here
we're going that way and the problems
getting bigger so that I would consider
that to be a because of ever increasing
complexity no let me get to that in a
moment we'll take that as a whole piece
and yes by the way but it's complex to
figure to explain why that's the case
but just by itself we can just take a
look at the degrading functionality of
our since making systems has its own
story and they can talk about the
increase in complexity of our
environment as its own story and then we
can actually talk about how those two
pieces actually fit together in a larger
story so that's the where we are now so
we talked about the crisis and sense
making through the trying to get to the
edge of it like why does that land why
is it a meaningful proposition what I
would say is that we can't make sense of
what's going on and I mean this in
almost any way like we can't make sense
of climate change
can't make sense of financial
instability we can't make sense of why
politics is unrolling the way that it is
we can't make sense of gender we can't
make sense of why we can't make sense in
gender right we're rapidly moving in the
direction of having a very hard time
making sense about anything at all and
the urgency the the level of
meaningfulness the level of impact level
consequence of the need of us making
sense is increasing and so we're in a
situation where we actually could be
really really good at making choices
because we're very powerful in the
context of our world and so that means
our sense making has to be vastly better
than where it is right now and soon
otherwise we're likely going to be
experiencing the phenomenon like wheels
coming off you know small perturbations
creating bigger perturbations creating D
destabilization in both sense making and
harder choices leading to a race effect
into catastrophe so that's a crisis so
that's what I mean by a crisis and sense
making so maybe now we can teleport back
and do some basic models it's like some
basic notions and I actually did this in
the blue church essay so what I want to
introduce is some concepts around
coherence and yeah I'll do maybe two
turns on it at different levels of scale
so let's just begin with one eye you've
got one eye and that gives you a certain
level of perception and then you have
two eyes and you may notice the two eyes
are better than one
in fact a lot better than one so then
you might think well and I should stop
there's two eyes are better than one but
it's actually quite important that
they're not independent it's crucial
that they be bound into a visual field
you notice that you actually don't see
two eyes you see one reality so they are
coherent so there's a capacity to have
diversity of perspective in this case
and also to integrate it into a
wholeness of perception so those are all
part of the
chunk so you want to have as an
increasing diversity of in this case
perception while maintaining an
integrated wholeness of perception and
that combination I'm going to call
coherence of perception at least so then
you what you might do is you might want
to add a third eye then that's cool
and flies have multiple eyes that's neat
but here's a better move adhering at
ears if you had hearing to vision that's
a lot lot better than just having three
eyes because you've totally shifted you
actually have qualitatively different
perceptive capacities and you might
notice that for example a very large
amount of seeing doesn't really help you
at all in the domain of hearing and vice
versa so modal increase in prospective
capacity and then still being able to
integrate that into a wholeness of
perception of course this is just
experiencing reality that's one story
right that's own story of coherence and
I'm using that to give you a sense of it
in your own body yes your body is a
coherent entity at the level of
perception you have many many many
different modes and many different kinds
within those modes two ears two eyes
that are integrated into a coherent
whole mnestheus rise to you're
perceptive capacities and we'll get back
to that by the way because the
individual human body is important in
this story but then we can step it up
let's not take a group and now I'm going
to combine both perception and action
because of course your body does that
but we'll do it in a group and the blue
church si I talked about it in the
context of rowing a boat so in the
beginning let's say you're trying to
canoe so you have from one oar and you
have to have the effort of getting the
physical motion to put into one the
water and pulling it not tipping over
the boat so that's a a set of functions
a set of different kinds of perception
and actuation capacities you have to
have some sensitivity to how your weight
is affecting the way to the boat and how
to buy higher arms and moving the or
into the water but as individual as it
as a body which is coherent it's a
relatively straightforward thing to do
and you can notice this when you go from
one order to you go from a canoe to a
rowboat but once you add the second war
it takes a little bit of time to figure
out how to get them all together but and
not too long
you can become coherent you can bring
tours into coherence you can take the
the sensitive sense sensing of muscle to
or feeling when they're in the water and
pulling it in the motion the bode you
integrate it integrated integrate it and
it pops you have an insight which to say
you bring into your body the wholeness
of that you've integrated that into a
coherent whole
you can now actuate ruin the boat but
now you add another person into the boat
and notice that there's a significant
difference there that two people ruin
the boat is it hard a thing that you
have to use communication you have to
actually practice substantially more if
you get a sense an embodied sense and
feeling and say so you just wrote a
canoe it's a little bit easier the
person in the front the person in the
back you may even have official
divisions of labour the person in the
back is steering while the person in the
front is you know just throwing the
person the backs in charge like there's
a big bunch of stuff that has to happen
that enables two people to come into
coherence and you may be able to scale
that to say three people but at a
certain point you actually start seeing
a phase transition where I'm
particularly now to switch it to Rowan
with two or so you've got three people
in the boat you really do have to start
doing division of labor to maintain that
you have to actually have the guy in the
front I suppose who's yelling stroke
because otherwise the ability of the
individuals to stay coordinated to stay
perception link to action in a fashion
that is acting as an integrated whole
it's not up to snuff what we as humans
haven't got the capacity to be able to
maintain that much complexity with our
embodied sensorial without trying to
simplify the task so we do we simplify
agency we actually compressed the agency
and the perception and the actuation
agency so what happens is you now become
a instrument you no longer have full
agency over your choice making or your
perception you don't decide when to
stroke you just do it when told and if
everybody now is acting in that
actuation function and you and the
person up front is doing it at least a
mediocre job of keeping a good rhythm
suddenly you're now coherent again and
able to go much much faster
hence the trireme you know the big guy
with the drums that's my vision I'm not
British so I don't have the
Oshin okay so that's a framework now the
reason why I wonder about that framework
is that this is dynamic between complex
coherence your body integrated as a
whole and what I'm gonna call
complicated coherence which is this
relation of simplification and actuation
through some kind of structure is a big
part of the rollout of what I've come to
call game a which we might also call
civilization if you want to sort of
start at fifteen twenty thousand years
and up to ten years from now that story
and it's a story where just like moving
from one person to three people to seven
people and moving from one art of Tours
is a story of an increase in the the
nature of the lived environment that are
structures of sense making and choice
making and actuation are endeavouring to
be coherent in into therefore give us
the capacity to operate in effectively
as a group okay so you can then use this
to decompose take a look at Bronze Age
psycho technology as John forever pinky
thank you for Vicki I think is right now
very lucidly
articulating this notion of psycho
technology in how it rolls out and you
can look at the transitions of when that
particular toolkit fails how it turns
into collapse how in the intermezzo of
that collapse there's a new liminal
experimental phase of building up new
tool kits that are able to handle the
complex problem of all the diverse
elements of the new state of affairs
larger population new technologies you
have to deal with different
environmental constants integrating that
into some kind of new coherent whole
through some kind of set of technologies
for doing it and then how that does it
does and broadly speaking in a triadic
relationship it has to be able to be
responsive to nature has to be able to
itself and survive the winter has to be
able to be responsive to other things
like it that may tend to take its stuff
away and it needs to be able to maintain
its internal integrity not fall apart
from the inside and of course the the
broad story of game a has been different
efforts to figure how to solve that
problem and how they fell and then how
we you know pick up the pieces and put
him back together again and try to kind
of go back into it so we can then tell
the story of that story we can zoom all
the way back to the Paleolithic
transition and work our way through step
by step and that's a very good useful
thing to do and I think John's narrative
and my narrative are very connected and
there are two very nice parallax
perspectives if you take his entire
perspective and you take the one that I
can rolled out today if you'd like and
notice that the two different
perspectives on a whole and then try to
grasp the whole which both he and I are
urging you to do then you're in a really
good place and there's other people who
are doing the same kind of thing and
that's I think is the key is to be able
to recognize that they're each
perspectives on a whole which happens to
be by the way reality and if you're able
to hold that notion of wholeness and
then allow the perspective to give you
sensing into what the wholeness might be
then you can start dropping into deeper
insight about the nature of the whole
and then begin to be able to make better
choices so I'm tempted right now to kind
of drop into the blue Church story just
kind of fast forward well fast forward
from the axial age yeah I mean the
question that comes up when you talk
about game a is game a synonymous with
the blue church no no game a is the the
larger but in terms of the structure to
create coherence that's the blue church
blue church is the very specific
solution to the problem during the
timeframe between roughly 1930 through
[Music]
2016 and so it's a in much the same way
that say pre airshow Tilian Athens had a
solution to the problem the blue church
is a historically specific solution to
the problem of which game a is the gen
category of establishing coherence of
establishing coherence and very
particular using complicated systems if
you want to be precise so using some
combination of simplification and causal
mechanism to be able to establish
coherence in perception and meaning
making in an actuation so that's that's
game a and then we get a little bit more
precision what I mean by that
so we talked about as a rower when you
shift from being a fully autonomous free
agent to being the guy who just does
what he's told
that's what I mean I say simplification
and bounding choice within a straight
causal context so if you remember Henry
Ford's story you can choose whatever
color you want as long as it's black
that kind of an idea you take choice the
human capacity to have free will to make
choice and you put it in a box you get a
very specific set of input outputs you
make a machining right you can say the
game a is a machine ik structure it is
fundamentally computational in nature of
course it's always complicated by the
fact that it's always in relationship
with nature wild nature human nature but
it in its essence is of that sort and so
every Barack bureaucracy is an effort to
do that right you want to have very
well-defined processes and very
well-defined inputs very well-defined
outputs and then the human agents you
put into the box
have choice within that box and so you
can put the bottle cap on the bottle or
not but that's it that's what you do on
the assembly line or what is it you file
the weenus and you check one of three
boxes and then you you put it out there
or you fill in the spreadsheet and you
input an output or you try to turn human
agency into effective delivery of choice
making in the context of a broader
system that is computational in nature
and the reason for that of course is to
simplify you radically radically
simplify the amount of complexity that
each individual has to hold and you try
to therefore create a system that has
enough information processing and
actuation capacity to manage complexity
that's what you trying to do trying to
manage complexity with a complicated
system that is gaming there's a couple
other ways of looking at it but that's a
very good way of looking at it and so
what we find is over time and remember
there's three different dimensions you
have in relationship with nature with
the world in relationship with other
people who are trying to play that same
game and in relationship with your
interior tea with how your interior
system of people doing people nuts is
working out design and what I mean by
that people doing people miss you have
things like defection and self dealing
and corruption and well stupidity and
fill in the blank like the whole
complexity of being human has a
corrosive effect on the well functioning
of your social machine and then the
competitive pressures of let's say the
Chinese who are rolling out sesame
credits to try to make their machine
more functional what do you do well if
their machine is better than your
machine they can take your stuff and
that may end up being catastrophic to
your machine and then of course nature
you know if it turns out that we no
longer can grow food then it's not very
effective machine and we have stories we
have stories like the the Tainter curve
that talks about how and why these kinds
of complicated social machines break
down in the context of nature that we
can you know go into our ad nauseam if
you'd like and we could talk about why
they fail I think it was I think that
the segue into the blue church was was
good yes okay so so now we're gonna move
to the blue church so what we do is we
have a if you don't mind maybe I'll just
recapitulate that story I think I can do
it pretty quickly so we're exiting what
I call the Victorian synthesis I were
talking the time frame roughly 1852 now
ten or so and we're entering into a
period of chaos there's actually little
collapse that happened right there it's
not a Bronze Age collapse it's pretty
decent collapse that period from the end
of World War one to the end of World War
two which you may remember kind of
sucked and a lot of stuff happened like
a lot of change Kurt in that context the
Titanic always feels like this kind of
weird harbinger of life that's because
you watch Downton Abbey panic seems like
a weird harbinger of yes it has that
archetypical feeling of a portent yeah
and of course it is right it's saying
hey Victorian synthesis complex reality
is still out there and you have not yet
in fact conquered it which i think is
kind of the moral lesson of course then
world war once it was a demoralization
of the sense of mastery in the sense
that complicated had finally mastered
the complex largely in the context of
human humaneness and then we got to
delve into the meltdown of culture
mostly in Germany but elsewhere and then
we got to delve into what happens when
culture melts down and then we got to
build the blue church alright so coming
out of World War two we have a new state
of affairs so a new set of problems
instead of capacities with which to
engage in trying to bring the
complicated relationship with the
complex so we have the mass production
so the movement of industrial like
trains to cars and in post-world War two
mass production of cars like the
invention people a to produce a lot of
it and so the significant economic
dislocation that that involves in the
massive wealth at least in in the US and
then ultimately percolating out into the
quote-unquote first world you have mass
media and you have the ability first
earn in the earliest stages mostly radio
but then transitioning very quickly and
for the dominant period of the blue
church television right has lots of
characteristics people probably zoom in
on back is it so important but let me do
a few more you have education
the formal structure of like for example
the missile gap during the Kennedy years
to vastly increase the intensity of
expenditure and effort on college
education at the number of kids who went
to college through the arc of the blue
shirts went from I think like twenty
percent to eighty five percent or
something like that so significant and
the the normalization of education
because obviously when high school is no
longer a end of itself but is part of a
larger story it now becomes some train
to a bigger structure now becomes
normalized as a single object a lot more
people you know the population went from
100 million in the u.s. to 300 million
during that arc so it's a lot and a lot
of urbanization and by the way mixing of
demographics because you had the
interstate highway system allowed people
in cars to drive around so you had the
massive diaspora of moving from city
centers into the suburbs and moving from
the east to the west and the south so a
lot of change happened and the blue
church emerged in the context of having
to figure out how to navigate all of
these changes and generate coherence how
do we get all of these people with these
new capacities to be able to make sense
of the world in some fashion that is
able to then make choices together and
to act effectively right that's the
question and the blue church developed
to be the answer to that question
and so it developed the ability to say
for example you use the education system
to establish an embodied sense of
vertical meritocratic hierarchy the idea
that some people are better at others in
knowing certain kinds of things we can
find them and then we empower them to
have hierarchical authority in the
structure that we're in and I should say
this by the way both formally and
informally you know the role of being in
class is teaching that whether the
content of the story of the of the class
whatever the in the class is the
experience of the student is the
teachers in charge our job is just to
listen and some of us are smart and they
get to be teachers or in charge right
that's kind of that's the story
school it's very important that first
part that there's a relationship between
authority and receptor that has a
broadcast modality so the blue church is
very broadcast across its entire mode so
what I mean by a broadcast of course is
exemplified in television which is to
say that some small number of people get
to speak and a very very large number of
people get to listen this is very
different and then say but we're doing
right here and it's it's symmetric
well of course I'm the one speaking in
principle there's nothing about this
conversation that couldn't be perfectly
symmetric but in television in any kind
of broadcast modality structurally that
way so Walter Cronkite tells the news
and everybody else watches it and
there's a lot of passivity there like my
job is not to perceive what's going on
make sense of it and then express it in
the world my job is to see the story
that I'm being told and be able to then
express that story effectively in the
society that I'm in and I call this good
sense the emergence of good sense and
you see an emerging mesh of good sense
you know who are the authoritative
speakers whether they're NBC News or
they're the New York Times and there's a
diversity of course these are a variety
of different perspectives in the
authoritative frameworks the blue church
recognizes the necessity of having eyes
and ears but it also recognizes the
necessity of having coherence so there's
a diversity but there's a diversity
within a particular boundary and so when
you show up in society if you are
speaking good sense if your expressions
are of the sort that everybody else has
broadly been hearing or the
authoritative statements then you're
showing up well and if you aren't then
you're showing up poorly and you'll
notice that I can you begin to say
things that are contour narrative in a
deep way even today much less so now
though than like 30 years ago
then you will notice an discomfort
people get uncomfortable viscerally
physically and you will notice that
discomfort of this way physically and
then you'll stop doing it and so there's
a nice policing mechanism there just at
the cocktail party set particularly
places like say New York Los Angeles
Chicago
sisqó where the the elite cachet is the
most important where the choice of
social success is the choice between
being elevated in the hierarchy or not
then good sense becomes even more self
concern so good opinion so I good
opinion thank you thank you good opinion
and it's actually interesting to make
that distinction because the effort of
the blue church is actually provide good
sense and what is the truth about the
war in Vietnam but of course what it can
only produces good opinion what is our
perspective and then make sure everybody
more or less has that because then you
can actually have choices you can
actually make choices together if we all
more or less agree this is the nature of
reality and we more or less agree that
these kinds of actions will lead to
effective results then we're we're
rowing the boat to the coxswains
yeah we're pushing we have a menu that
has six buttons pick which button you'd
like to push you have choice no question
but it's in a constraint all rights
within a boundary condition that works
and then what happens is when you push
the button it actuates a whole lot of
stuff we've all decided that we're going
to have a war on poverty so we turned
the dial on the world war 2 era
bureaucratic machinery that took us to
the moon that built the interstate
highway system it's ok go out and point
that engine at poverty we're gonna start
building the welfare state go right and
that's what they did and they sometimes
it worked you pointed it at the moon it
goes to the moon
imported poverty and it didn't work
wonderfully created a mess and that
tells us a lot by the way so I guess
kind of that's that like that's the blue
church and there's an entrainment
because this structure has Harvard is
kind of at the top and then you have the
rest of the Ivy League and Oxford and
Cambridge I'm sad to say that the UK
lost their position the Victorian
synthesis of the UK centric the blue
church was a us-centric global sense
making system and it was broadly global
of course through the first three
quarters there was the Eastern Bloc that
was doing their own thing but starting
in the late 80s totally global and for a
little bit of time there in fact
actually functionally global on the
period from 88 to maybe 1999
was a period where the blue church was a
true hegemon and was doing stuff and
[Music]
what constitutes the blue church he
mentioned Harvard but could just a
sketch out hmm it's interesting way of
asking the question so I thought I was
just telling you so the set of ways of
going about making sense
broadcast modality formal good opinion
structures of hierarchy that's
constitutes ablutions in terms of who's
part of it who who has hierarchy in the
blue church I think it's the question
you're asking who is thorn of Harvard
Ivy League universities some of the sort
of bigger think tanks the RAND
Corporation significant governmental
entities like the Department of Defense
NASA the CIA in different domains large
corporations in GM G back in the day and
that was like when it's good for General
Motors is good for America it's a very
blue church kind of concept you shifted
to the tech sector for a little bit
Microsoft and Apple and that kind of a
thing had a little bit of cachet some of
the media structures like the New York
Times The Washington Post really call
the paper of record the more formal
authoritative broadcast television
programs NBC ABC CBS CNN for a while
like in the heyday the you could like
look at that second-tier going on in the
quote-unquote allies I think Japan is
probably third tier to be perfectly
frank so the UK isn't very much in the
second tier Oxford Cambridge the
Guardian actually know what some of the
other I'm sure there are other
equivalent like Tavistock or something
to have think-tank II functions in the
UK the various papers of record in
Germany and France and their governments
I could with their entire government it
has second tier status visa vie say the
DoD in the u.s. is that kind of a
structure so usual suspects it's not
that hard and think who who know
stuff it's a certain question you have
to ask who you gonna ask who do you
think what Mabel to answer that question
effectively who will if they tell you
that 17 intelligence agencies agree that
you believe is telling you the truth
Encyclopedia Britannica is a very
churchly function you know the idea that
the what is it called the American
Association for the Advancement of
Sciences those kinds of things Nobel
Prize winners are very blue church
that's what interesting
Eric talks about that a bit there's a
certain special arc in the sciences
where you get this special badge that
gives you cachet that is brought what's
the guy's name to the New York Times who
writes the economics Paul Krugman
there's a Nobel Prize winning economist
which means he gets to talk about
anything he wants to and somehow
is special genius where sometimes it's
true
and sometimes it's not by the way just
to add the Federal Reserve is a big one
the IMF is a big one as part of the blue
church the Council on Foreign Relations
is a big one
and by the way this is just like real
things like the CFR is something that
was started in the 1930s it's a bunch of
smart people in New York thought hey if
we get together we can make things
happen that are better than if we don't
and just kind of iterate on that and
that kinda like the cocktail party set
but there's a feedback loop remember I
mentioned that actually did some case
studies I actually just went to places
where fancy rich people hung out mostly
Aspen and Neckar and other places like
Hollywood and what I noticed at least my
first person experience was that there
is absolutely for sure an elite
conspiracy which is just they all kind
of hang out in the same place in like
each other but it has a characteristic
you know if three four people one of
whom happens to be in charge of Deutsche
Telekom one of them happens to be in
charge of British Telecom one of them
happens to be in charge of a global
investment bank one of whom happens to
be a successful entrepreneur who just is
looking for something to do and they're
hanging out at a dinner table in Aspen
and they just start shooting the
they'd have a lot to talk about because
there's only certain things that they
actually do
which is business in politics but mostly
business so they start talking about
business and it turns out that if
there's an opportunity for Deutsche
Telekom and British Telecom to sell
there they're so mobile divisions into a
new company that the bank will fund and
this guy will run you'd be surprised how
rapidly that gets surfaced and
identified as a thing to do now
growing up in the Texas Hill Country I
wasn't having this kind of conversations
and I think most people don't so that's
an example like that that that's an
artifact that emerges out of the notion
of the blue church that once you have a
vertical hierarchy and then by
definition you have a finite amount of
time you get clusters of these people
who are hanging together and then by the
way a lot of that human complexity
creeps back in they start having clubs
cliques they start caring about each
other and that's what's lurking a lot of
group think that good opinion stress to
really solidify and they become blind to
what's not within that good opinion yeah
in fact so at this point and introduce
another concept it's kind of a deep
concept it's very useful and then it'll
help us navigate the transition of
what's happening so here the concept is
that's a bundle so what we're gonna do
Fitness landscapes we're going to do the
idea of excellence and remarque ability
and then we're gonna do niche
construction okay I don't think it'll
take that long
very helpful so Fitness landscape is a
concept that originated in evolutionary
theory biological evolutionary theory
but evolutionary theory has become more
and more meta so it covers a much more
abstract function so the fitness
landscape is an abstract concept and
what it describes is where you have
agents that have resource needs and will
find themselves in conflict with each
other and with the environment to
acquire their resources and have an
agency then certain kinds of things are
going to happen and the landscape
describes what strategies what kind of
approach is what kind of agenting
choices or capacity to make choices will
end up being successful and then as it
turns out if strategy effective strategy
can be passed down in either
moment-to-moment
or yeah
child to parent to child then you start
getting concentrations around good
strategies because those were successful
repeat so if you look at a fitness
landscape for example in the Arctic the
strategy of being a dark black rabbit is
poor and so you might think of it as a
valley it's a very low Fitness choice
and so nothing survives for very long
down there whereas the strategy of being
a perfectly white fuzzy bunny is good so
it's very high point and if you imagine
you were to change the fitness landscape
so taking my two bunnies and shift them
to put it be say in the desert when
maybe it's a brown bunny just to make it
a better metaphor Sandra the bunnies are
the same the landscape just inverted so
now being a bright white fuzzy bunny is
bad you're gonna die out and being a
brown Jackrabbit is good you know
survivor is the relationship so then if
you imagine that Fitness landscapes have
a certain topography and a certain
variability so topography meaning what's
the shape of the hills is there one big
hill right in the middle or there a
whole bunch of little hills and what's
the spacing between them and how long do
they last
is it fluctuated wildly or is it just
like one massive hill forever and I'm
gonna define a concept called excellence
I think Brett one side actually uses
different terms
so I'll just define them that I'm pretty
sure he does richer uses the right terms
but I'll use my terms so excellence here
refers to a strategy which is about
climbing the hill you're on and getting
very good at holding the top so if I'm
on a landscape that is defined by a
small number of large Hills and that
doesn't change very much excellence is a
very good strategy if I happen to be
near the bottom vaguely near the bottom
of a good hill then what I do is I climb
them all the way to the top and then I
stay there
saber-tooth Tiger goldman sachs banker
all right excellence so then the next
concept is remarkable it's so smooth
Bally crossing sorry that's the formal
term so if I'm in an environment where
there may be in fact many hills that
maybe not aren't so tall or just many
hills and or a lot of variability then
excellence starts to be a pretty poor
because there's a lot of competition
trying to get to the top of that one big
hill everybody's right there it's a it's
hard to get to the top and particularly
aren't the very top being third or
fourth tier really sucks if it's
possible for me to go down for a little
bit which isn't great
I better get across at a different Hill
when there's less competition that's
awesome so this is the remarkable
strategy the valley crossing strategy
it's a very different strategy and
equivalently if it turns out that we're
all in this big hill and then it goes
away
whoever had the capacity to go somewhere
else wins survives and who didn't that
rates the saber-tooth tiger goes extinct
and it turns out these two strategies
have a certain tension so if you're
really optimizing for excellence what
are the things you'll have to do is get
rid of your remarkable this to make room
for more excellence you become a
signature tiger or a Tyrannosaurus Rex
if you're really optimizing for
remarkable nough specialization of
excellence and so you're not gonna be
able to be as effective so then they add
finally niche construction it's very
important so niche construction is your
strategy is not just responsive to the
niche passively it's able to feedback on
the niche actively that's you're able to
transform the fitness landscape into
something that by hypothesis you prefer
so if the brown bunny could somehow say
put a lot of sand on the Arctic and turn
up the temperature and convert the
Arctic into the desert it would do so
that's niche construction now of course
you can imagine that when excellence
combines with excellence at niche
construction you get a very interesting
dynamic
it turns the fitness landscape into a
hill and then it keeps it there and then
it becomes more and more excellent so I
have double order call it local
excellence I'm good at climbing this
hill then I have global excellence I'm
good at keeping this hill taller and
stable well that was the Great
Moderation of the blue church one of the
things that blue church was able to do
was niche construct its own environment
at a global basis and hold it constant
and the fact that has being a very good
thing
and tonk complicatedness likes to keep
complexity at bay let's keep the world
from changing too much we want to keep
things more or less structured where
they are allow it to evolve within
bounds but the structure the primary
components of particular tall part of
the structure and the fundamental
content of the fact of the structure
stays the same and this turns into for
example the notion of financial bubbles
instead of letting financial crises
actually wash all the way down through
into the political level for example
maybe even to the cultural level and
shifts things with the cultural level
that maybe could go for some growth
holding it keeping it static preventing
the EU from collapsing in 2010 11 right
and holding it which of course creates
an excellence it creates a fitness
landscape that reinforces what's already
there it makes you put more and more
energy on it because if you bet against
the Greek debt and when the EU bailed
them out you lost and so you're gone
you're no longer on the board and so
there's a continuing cycle of that but
reality doesn't give a so reality
is still there complexity and the
fundamental nature of reality is still
doing its thing and by the way as you
begin to the longer you keep the niche
the way it is you also start running
into the complexity from the inside and
get the humaneness you get corruption
starts to work its way in and eventually
you run into a collapse of it you get
run to some scenario where the the
interior the structure in this case the
blue church finds itself in a context
that is in fact changing outside the
boundaries of its ability to control
through niche construction and so it is
if happening as you get almost cover
banding effect instead of the knees
changing like this it kind of like
wanted to change wanted to change one to
change wanted to change building up
pressure all over the place until
eventually the ability to hold back the
waters breaks and you actually have a
dam bursting phenomenon catastrophe like
catastrophe theory in math bubbles
popping dams bursting rope staring like
there's a hole
mathematical description of phenomena
the state ship between one state and
another discontinuously and that's what
happens so that's that's a to tell us
where we are is the blue church was
really really good at what it was doing
the best effort and we got eight billion
people under its stewardship and broadly
speaking quite peacefully and we've not
met we've managed not to kill ourselves
of the nuke which is actually quite a
bit of a feat and the level of poverty
has gone down the level of wealth has
gone up life spans are back to pre
agricultural levels which is ironically
funny to say but isn't back to the
standard that we've gotten to so where
now people are living as long as we
lived back forty-five thousand years ago
although by the way not as healthily in
that last twenty or so years gone to the
moon can fly around I fell cleansing
awesome stuff has happened but in the
mean time it's obsolete meaning both
that the complexity of the world that we
now live in and largely as a consequence
large is a consequence of communication
technology is changing the velocity have
changed as possible and eight billion
people changing the amount of stuff
that's being talked about and as a
consequence of all of our actuation
capacity lots and lots of cars and lots
and lots of large tankers shipping
across the oceans pushing the
environmental system out of equilibrium
along many many different dimensions not
just co2 or methane the scope of what
this complicated system means to take
responsibility for is now the whole
thing so has to move from being able to
take control of some defined domain and
have to actually take control the whole
enduring and in the meantime so that's
what I mean the scope has gotten bigger
and it's outside the boundary capacities
of what this kind of says banking system
can do it all before we move off the
blue church too much I'd like to get get
this with the broadcast versus digital
paradigm and the need for discernment
okay alright so let's do it in that
context all right so so broadcast so
we're talking about an ocean we're
broadcast is faced with a
a couple of different problems I mean
and we're talking about it both from the
outside of where those three domains so
from one perspective broadcast has
limitations in its capacity to perceive
and respond to reality cuz it's pretty
obvious but if you think about what's
happening is every layer of the
hierarchy has to compress the
information you know if you were out in
the field seeing what's going on with
say the rain forest insects and you're
reporting it up to somebody who's at a
think-tank who's reporting it up to a
policymaker who's porting it up to a
legislative decision maker they're
having to simplify a lot to go up the
chain right so you're losing an enormous
amount of information which means that
you can only do so much it's kind of
like if you imagine was like in the 80s
they had those glass spheres if you
touch some lightning bolt to touch your
fingers so the sphere is the whole thing
and the broadcast modality is one of
those lightning bolts so it kind of like
maneuvers around the sphere but it can
only handle that much that's not a lot
message the nature of the structure like
just the structure that has that kind of
geometry to it can only perceive a
certain fraction from the bottom to the
top and then by the way the same thing
happens at the way down the directives
that are given from the top have to be
they have to be relatively simple
because as they go down there's a an
expansion of scope which increased the
ads basically noise because the new
person down below has to add a whole
bunch of specificity to what to be done
and I guess it gets handed down you get
more and more noise and so the this
means at the top the directors that come
down have to be ready broad and simple
and at the bottom the divergence between
actually happens out in the world what
was intended to the top it was actually
quite large so you've got a lack of
elegance and precision and you get a
compression going up and so this means
that it has certain capacities it can
actually get us to the moon turns out
that's a domain that's well within the
scope of what it can do it cannot solve
Clement
. period and there's a lot of other
things that can't solve so that's one
boundary condition the other boundary
condition is to this transition between
broadcast and digital which is happening
after the blue church
gave us digital we move from an analogue
world to a digital world during its
period of being charged and when I say
digital here I want to say very
specifically what I mean is Network
symmetric decentralized so it's a the
fact that being digital is important
it's actually very very important but
it's not the thing that I'm focusing on
right here I'm comparing broadcast to
this network decentralized not analog to
digital by the way both are true but
we're just gonna focus at the network
broadcast piece so what happens is is
that a network intelligence and networks
system for sense making and choice
making is different
full-stop let's just start there it's
just different and it has different
capacities as different ability to take
information from the edge process and
make choices and disseminate actuation
back out to the edge and it's more
available to solve all our problems that
we're dealing with it's a kind of
collective intelligence topology that is
fundamentally more available to being
able to address complex systems problems
how our brain works for example but to
use a kind of developmental metaphor if
the blue church is a really really
sophisticated developed and mature aging
boxer the new digital collective
sense-making is a four year old all
right so he's got good genes
you could see he's gonna be good when he
gets strong and gets bigger maybe when
he's 14 he'll be able to punch this guy
up but in the meantime was not for toe
but in the meantime it's not really a
match if you look at it and say hey wait
in terms of lifting heavy weights the
blue church is gonna win in terms of
being able to answer a lot of questions
at least appear to be able to answer a
lot of questions the blue church looks
like it's quite robust if you take a
look at the emerging decentralized
collective intelligence that's beginning
to happen on the internet it mostly
looks like gaps
it mostly looks like it's doing stuff in
the gaps that are being left behind by
the bleachers just look like it can do
anything holistic and when it's endeavor
to do something holistic like so the cue
and on phenomenon it looks insane any
kind of it's that if you've ever seen an
absolute newborn baby in its body
it's insane there's limbs are flailing
wildly its heads rolling around so I was
rolling in his head because he hasn't
figured how to wire itself up yet
that's what's happening in the network
collective intelligence so there's a gap
there's a transition but the whole new
concept new de loop if we're going to do
that when we can there's very good
reasons to believe that the blue church
is done meaning that it's in the
senescence stage and senescence has a
characteristic where when you move into
the senescence stage you tend to go
downhill pretty quickly so I'm expecting
to see the blue church sort of
increasingly obviously failing and
increasingly obviously losing the
habitual or unconscious or unspoken
position of being authoritative and
being just reality more and more people
are going to be going ah that's a thing
that's not the whole thing it's a thing
and it's kind of doing something and
maybe parts of it are still good but
it's not the whole thing and it seems to
be increasingly up and in the
meantime looking around going okay now
what that's the key I run our in a space
for in that space between 1918 and 1945
or in the space between 1077 BC and 800
BC where there's a gap between a
coherent collective intelligence is a
coherent structure for being able to
respond as a as a whole to what's
happening and I knew it not an old one a
nooner and anda fading so we're
witnessing that transition we're in the
middle of it and a lot of the phenomenon
that was experiencing over the past what
15 years or so are of that sort starting
around 2000 ish particularly
accelerating you can explain a lot of
the things that happened it seemed very
inexplicable like brexit and Trump using
this model
the partly it's about novelty building
up behind the blue church and then
exploding because it had nowhere to to
go well what we're it has to do with
gaps in the blue church so blind spots
and actuation gaps that's one side so it
can't do the things that it thinks it
can do and it doesn't perceive there's
lots of things that can't perceive kind
of willfully actually then of the flip
side the rapid evolutionary development
of capacity in what I'm calling the red
religion or the decentralized collective
intelligence just to make it very clear
it's not the red religions just happens
to be an instantiation of a way of
solving the problem so there's a
developmental curve this idea of rate
and state is pretty good here so blue
church state of sense making choice
making an actuation high rate down it's
getting less effective over time
decentralized collective intelligence
state low rate high so there's going to
be a crossover point when we see is on
occasion we'll see a breakthrough where
this new thing has reached a point of
criticality where its capacities are now
good enough to show this actually
effective in the visceral world
these are V the fading legacy and I
think now it's actually becoming we're
up to the commonplace if you kind of see
the the struggle between blue church
normative good opinion and new
structures of sense making and new
structures of meaning making a new Jeff
structures of how those are beginning to
try to cohere into actually sovereign
collective intelligences that are able
to do the whole the whole thing but
we're a bit of the way is there for sure
it'll take certainly single-digit years
and possibly double digit years for the
whole thing to come together to a point
where it's transitioned formally we talk
about discernment and how that's a key
skill in decentralized media compared to
broadcast media oh absolutely so so now
the the conversation which i think is
really nice is turning to
now what and how so the answer now what
is decentralize collective intelligence
great how how do we do that
so I said first step is know that you
don't know know that most of your habits
are blue church habits in fact most your
average even gamei habits but let's just
leave it up to church right now
and certainly everything you've been
formally taught and everything you've
learned from formal institutions and
almost all those are gonna be wrong so
you have to actually step into a pretty
child's mind place and as a rule of
thumb go very slowly and don't try to
come to doing come to action very
quickly step-by-step you have to learn
was it you have to stand before you walk
and to walk before you run and this is
very much developmental so within that
context what are some of the core
capacities that are part of our
development of stage for us to actually
be able to move this decentralized
collective intelligence forward and one
of the core capacities is discernment
and I will distinguish discernment from
st. judgment or good opinion so and oh
and here I would like to actually invoke
the distinction between thinking and
simulated thinking so let me just do
that distinction really quickly and then
come back to discernment so if we
remember that a lot of the way of
thinking about the fundamental structure
of game a and in this case specifically
the structure of the blue church is
computational in nature there's a schema
of information which is simply true and
your job is to simply learn it as a
schema like know the map and to be able
to repeat it back with fidelity and if
there if then statements to be able to
execute on identifying what is the if
what's the pattern that is present and
then execute on the then so
if I say read press the red button your
job is to be able to know that I said
read and then to press the red button
when I say computational function
bureaucratic game a and when I'm in that
mode there's a optimization for being
able to do that
which is to be able to do so quickly and
with fidelity I want to become a really
good computer I want to be able to
recognize do pattern recognition against
the patterns that are available very
rapidly and never get it wrong and then
I want to be able to output the
appropriate output very rapidly it was
high fidelity I mean if you ever played
the game where you did math challenges
where a kid would stand up the kid next
him would stand up the teacher would
sure like four times four and whoever
said the answer right got to move things
called around the world that is this
precisely right your job is to know your
math tables down pat to be able to see
four by four before the other kid is
even figured out what the board says
you're saying eight that is a simulated
intelligence optimization function and
then this other side thinking from
similar to thinking - thinking thinking
is a very different gig thinking is well
it's so different I have to actually
slow down even begin to articulate it
for example we absolutely have no idea
what's going on thinking is helpful
retract it's necessary it's what you do
you have to be able to perceive a lot I
perceive subtly and multimodal II like
to be able to use your eyes and ears and
anything else you happen to have as much
as possible and you want it to be very
available to
novelty which means you don't want to
close what you're perceiving on
something that you think you think it is
you don't want to impose a structure
from your framework what is real so if
you're walking through the woods and you
hear something in the bushes
if you imagine it's a horrible monster
and you panic you're engaging in
simulated thinking if instead you stop
walking and you listen and look and you
don't have any preconceived notion of
what it what it is you know exactly what
you know which is that I heard something
and no more and you tune yourself to
just become increasingly capable of
perceiving reality as fully as possible
and then as that reality reveals itself
in clarity making use of that and
nothing more I have just seen a flash of
orange I haven't seen a tiger I just
jumped to a conclusion that imposed
sense-making on reality I just saw a
flash of orange okay what else oh it's
up there oh I also heard chirping oh
it's a to camp right you slow down and
allow the perception to really settle in
and you allow your mind to even be quite
open and fluid you're in a flow state
not to use that language the closer you
are to a flow state and the more you
were able to engage in insight which is
to say not be in the box but actually be
perceiving reality with a lot of
fluidity to it that's real thinking okay
and so discernment is the the the use of
sensing in very a very subtle way a
nuance and subtlety and a broad net of
sense particularly like your whole
instrument noticing for example that you
actually do have a lot going on you're
not just eyes and ears you're several
billion years of biological evolution
that had to survive in the
wilderness using whatever it had and
didn't throw out the good stuff right so
all of that is here and it's all more or
less fully integrated into a very
effective sense-making coherence as an
individual such a discern is to be able
to to
to attune your full perceiving and since
making instrument and to be able to use
that fully in the context of reality
without having any prejudgment collapse
that listening and then notice when some
kind of quality of feeling shows up and
now to actually explain that have to go
a little bit deeper now to make a
distinction we keep having to make these
distinctions because well the world's
gotten a lot of phrase well it's been
very sloppy frankly in making meaning of
what's going on so I want to make a
distinction that's relatively well known
in cognitive science between emotions
and feelings and feelings and thoughts
so and DiMaggio is the guy who I first
learned this from I'm not using his
particular framework but it's where it
first came from for me so an emotion is
a very physical shift in disposition
poised for action okay so you feel the
emotion of fear you're poising your body
to flee and that you begin to feel the
building of that energy what you're
actually feeling is a whole bunch of
stuff going on in your body that is
beginning to shift the entire
disposition of your body and mind by the
way to be able to change from sitting
around to running rapidly if you're
feeling a building of an energy to begin
to engage in conflict to fight we call
that emotion anger so there's not that
many emotions and they are systemic and
very biological physical feelings are
completely different we if you feel our
emotions so we can get confused we feel
fear as well as in fact actually
experience or have fear but a better way
of grasping feeling would be something
like you're trying to stack a rock on
top of another rock and you're trying to
notice
they're not the rock is balanced that's
feeling a very integrative systemic
subtle and nuanced use of many many many
different kinds of sensing and actuating
simultaneously that are way beyond the
capacity to do it analytically standing
you know that it's a complex problem
standing on two legs nonetheless you
have to be able to use all these
different muscles you know hundreds of
muscles involved and be able to sense
whether you're for example are your
knees buckling or are you falling to the
left to the right if you've watched it
one-year-old try to stand you see how
many failure conditions there are you
get this big thing limb top it's
actually rather ungainly you have to
figure how to hold that appropriately
standing is a feeling thing the feeling
of being balanced is what I mean by
feeling and then we can move that to a
higher level of action if you've ever
shot a basketball there's a feeling of
shooting a basketball we've trained your
body to be fluidly able to execute an
extremely complex effort of moving a
sphere from here to there possibly while
being guarded by other people and in the
air and the thing goes in that's
feeling right now thought is something
that happens in a much narrower
bandwidth conscious thought in
particular like if you're actually your
conscious awareness is measured in bits
not the many many many megabytes of
information that after you process to
having the least amount of like standing
up and so to the thinking process is a
very distinct kind of thing than feeling
it's much more associated with this
simulated thinking to be honest
simulated thinking is in fact when you
just take thinking it to be the whole
thing and you don't allow feeling to
participate meaningfully in the equation
implicit thinking is deeper so if you
think about implicit thinking the way
that John talks about it what you have
is remember he wouldn't even to describe
that experiment but you had the the
series of alphanumeric codes there were
like 10 digits long so it's not the kind
of thing that was available to thinking
it was larger than working memory and
you had a series of them and it had an
algorithm to define what they were you
were gonna be able to figure that out
and their chance
but then when shown other hexadecimal
codes some of which did use that
algorithm ie matched the pattern some of
which didn't
you could kind of tell much better than
50% much better than random and but if
you ask people how did you know the
honest answer was I have no idea but I
felt it that's what I'm talking about
okay so there's a functional capacity to
be able to use the whole thing by the
way the whole thing here to write this
this whole brain includes a whole bunch
of stuff of which the prefrontal cortex
is the super cool awesome tiny bit but
you know the visual cortex and the
cerebellum are actually doing a whole
lot of work so being able to use the
whole thing to make sense of what's
going on that's the beginning of
discernment alright so you learn how to
come into a tune which you learn how to
bring your body into alignment with your
mind and to use that whole thing to
perceive and then you allow feeling to
emerge which is the appropriate modality
for this kind of thinking by the way
this is true in any type of this source
so discernment for example is how you do
art if you want to be able to express
yourself artistically you first feel a
feeling with clarity and then you allow
that feeling to become expressed with
skillfulness which takes time of course
and it's done by the way by feeling you
you feel the feeling and then you take a
color and you notice whether or not that
color corresponds what the color feels
like the feeling you have to get good
and notice in that correspondence like
balancing a rock when you get good at it
you can now put a color on a piece of
paper that feels like the feeling and
then you actually look at what the line
has the feeling on the feeling of
adventure to you're a painter so
discernment attunement feeling clarity
so now you have to actually have the
sense of when a feeling is actually
coming to clarity when there's a yep
to me at least it kind of feels like
everybody's checked in that there's an
internal consensus to whatever degree my
ability to perceive and make sense of
what's happening has done what it can
not a whole lot more it's going to
emerge and there's something about this
that has a
yes to it where I can say like I am yes
I'm balanced I'm not falling over right
now yes the rock is going to stay that's
a good human it's great practice just
put a rock on top of another rock and
notice you can in fact feel when it's
gonna stay and you can do with another
rock maybe you knew seven rocks same
idea and you've got clarity yep it's
balanced then you could step back so you
build clarity now the deep thing here by
the way is what happens next is you can
actually at that point have insight just
by the way I practice back to John stuff
which is in this place of clarity
whatever it is that is coming clear you
may have a capacity to actually learn
how to express something now is where
thought comes back in that it is new you
may have actually changed your self in
some way in relationship to what's
happening and now because you've changed
your capacity down to do out in the
world has changed so now we take a break
to talk about this discipline this
concept of discerning the context of
decentralized collective intelligence so
in in centralized broadcast for example
collective intelligence
it is mostly judgment you know I have to
be able to measure good opinion and say
I be able to know hierarchical
relationships I have to be able to
output the appropriate output within the
very narrow boundaries of what I'm
allowed I have a certain amount of
artfulness that I can actually apply to
the equation but it's mostly fitting it
in the box and then popping you up to
the right place increasing yourself by
the way underneath construction what's
interesting this is a huge meta story
I'd be interesting if you could actually
forgot to get this gigantic story into
something even Begley hangs together
it'll be any trick because I'm about to
jump to not just discernment and
decentralize collective intelligence but
also remarkable nasira sponson each
construction and what the equivalent of
niche construction is in the domain of
the remarkable so
in decentralized collective intelligence
what ends up happening is there's a
signal-to-noise dynamic as things move
through notes so if you receive
something from a note from from me for
example I'm telling you this is actually
here we are I'm telling you something
I'm telling you something if you listen
to what I'm saying and in yourself are
able to find that part of what I am
saying that feels true feels right does
not kick off emotions of you know greed
or fight or flight or lust or as if it
feels there's a quality to it you've
just you built that quality with your
level of capacity where you're like I
don't understand exactly what is being
said here and most of it seems like it's
kind of weird or noisier cringe-worthy
but there's a thread here that feels
very strong I'm gonna separate that out
and now I'm going to skillfully express
it back out when you actually have now
is a positive feedback loop filtering
system if every node is doing that and
by the way those two recursion if every
node is primarily focused initially on
building its discernment and
skillfulness in doing this process all
right then what ends up happening is the
network is amazing
and making sense of subtlety right you
can take the perception these subtle
broad implicit pattern recognizers that
were also gifted with and grab very
vague and weird not quite knowing what's
going on thing put it into the system
and after a couple of turns it's
actually reified to a very crisp clarity
that can be shared so that's what we're
doing is we're trying to accomplish it's
that process and you notice how much of
a burden is placed on the individual now
it's not like the broadcast modality
where most of your agency is limited to
a very narrow band and you're really
relying on the causal structure that
you're embedded in to do almost all the
work in the decentralized collective
intelligence for to actually work almost
all of the agency is actually on the
individuals you have to have really
really a
affective responsible individuals and by
responsible I mean is there they're able
to respond to the environment in the way
that I'm talking about they're not
reacting they're not shifting to a
causal domain they're not saying what
they're supposed to say or rejecting
because they're supposed to reject their
listening and refining and doing the
work of collaboration think about
collaboration how collaboration works
you and I are collaborating on a song if
we're partners we're really
collaborating I'm gonna be like ah man I
just had this crazy sense and I'd like
to play it terrible sound
but you're listening very closely right
and you're good at it you're good at
listening very closely and you're like
you know what is it like this and you
play it back and what you play back is
actually closer to what I'm feeling like
ah
yes more like that more like that and
then like okay and then this but now I'm
actually little bit better right because
it's more clearing me because what you
did was you refine it and expressed it
back to me with it I couldn't perceive
myself but once I saw it pop that's
insight you just gave me an insight
collaboratively collaborative insight so
now I take a night out put something
back to you and now you're like oh yeah
I totally get it and then you drop into
it and now we're now a collective
intelligence coherence is now happening
in the flu and collaboration between us
and the things that can be produced are
vastly more than what either one of us
could have done separately now of course
this requires that you have developed a
certain level of discernment I've
developed a certain level of discernment
we're in a relationship that allows us
to actually use that and we can talk
about that means what the requirements
are and then we've also built a certain
of those skillfulness and expression so
that I'm not creating noise and
expressing it I'm actually making it
more signal when I express it more real
more true I'm increasing the truth of
the expression of the quality so it's
pretty like I think pretty concrete
example that many people might be able
to grasp and the idea is that that's
what we're doing we're trying to figure
out how to become real collaborators at
scale and well we're getting better at
it we're actually learning it like we're
noticing for example that our most
natural humaneness has a lot of
capability to separate from non
authenticity from artifice and
authenticity can at least feel true may
not feel good
artifice can do really good I've been
feeling good but art but authenticity
can feel true even when it's kind of a
clusterfuck right even when it's not
done exquisitely particularly it's hard
if it feels really true and authentic
there's something in there that your
basic like deep humanness is like all
right I can work with that where do we
go from here
and by the way I'm interested and by
there with this openness hey you know
we're just figuring this out
I'm trying what do you got and you send
it back to me symmetrically because
we're available and I listen and I hear
you then we've actually created a
relationship that has that feeling of
trust in the relationship which then
creates an open channel to do more of it
now of course we're late we're a limited
preliminary discernment so we're always
going to have to be doing work on
improving the quality of our discernment
in all the modalities that happen to be
happening and we are really limited by
our capacity to express we have to get
better and better being able to express
with clarity with elegance and width I
wanna say it's fidelity meaning we don't
want to put stuff in it that doesn't
belong in it I want to say something
there's also subtly manipulative just
gotta tell the truth
pure truth two degrees in which I can
I'm gonna it up but at least I'm
not it up with stuff that
doesn't need to be there at all so I'm
just expressing it and what happens
about that is very good news and it's
extremely powerful process and the
process of collaboration that's
available now because we're all
connected to each other is unprecedented
and that has the capacity to solve all
the problems we're dealing with that
kind of a decentralized collective
intelligence with high discerning
individuals with it clearly expressing
individuals who are non ego eclis
meaning they are not adding subtly or
intentionally their own into the
signal but are actually simply
endeavoring to share what is
authentically perceived by them to
actually feel true back out with quality
is incomprehensible
capable of making sense and by the way
making choices and doing things so much
so that it's sort of absurd that we just
don't go there and you want flying cars
and going to the Stars this will get you
there it'll solve everything the amount
of bandwidth is available inside that
domain is enormous the problem of course
is that it's hard at an individual level
and it's counter-current now we've been
trained for generations to do the exact
opposite we've been training for many
many many many generations to insert
egoic content in between everything that
we do
we've been changed for several
generations to be simulating thinking
not thinking and so we've got to relearn
all that stuff and we have to be doing
it here first each individual has to be
able to take the responsibility and then
learn to trust their own discernment in
relationship you know if I'm in
relationship with you and you are in
fact trying to manipulate me I have to
be in this really weird widely
vulnerable state of actually listening
but then noticing in myself that is a
feeling this little off and then being
able to respond to that as well ideally
to call it out I do this is a way for me
to exquisitely invite you into a higher
level of integrity in yourself in
relationship but also perhaps sometimes
just to be able to be able to make it
safe for myself and for others that's it
like that's the practice as far as I'm
concerned that is the thing that more or
less everybody should be doing right now
full-time and everybody who's good at it
should be doing it more like it should
show up like if you're if you are good
at it other people should be noticing
that you're good at it and one of the
things that they should be doing is
notice sharing that fact so that the
collective intelligence begins the
process of being able to point its
attention away from say simulation and
artifice and towards truth and towards
capacity-building and growth as opposed
to exploitation and plunder and by
definition if you're attending to people
who are helping you build capacity
you're building capacity so these people
are gonna do better so it's actually a
good choice for
is a better choice for everyone to be
endeavoring to play this new game and
the more people who are playing it
better the more obvious that is because
the more actual visceral capacity is
showing up over here and there's a rate
equation that's exponential by the way
that once it starts to hit it is
stretched to achieve criticality escape
velocity and just blows past this old
structure very rapidly no so there we
are in that metaphor of a four-year-old
where this is if you wanna play
basketball you have an opportunity to
draft LeBron James he's four it'll take
a while before he's able to actually
take you to the NBA championship but the
opportunity exists to have him on your
team right now by the way and Michael
Jordan they're all there they're just on
the playground therefore they're not
that good right now but in a little
while they're gonna be amazing and maybe
even at 12 like if you imagine five of
the greatest NBA players of all time
playing as 12 year olds might actually
be a pretty freakin good team just kind
of that's it that's the story
[Music]