what I want to talk about today is what
emergence is as a phenomena as a
property that's actually essential to
understand the nature of the universe we
live in and it's actually essential to
understand what it means to be human and
that is essential for understanding the
basis for meaning for ethics for
existentialism and then also what that
portends
for the future of civilization and
addressing some of the things that are
concerning and that are exciting okay so
you can consider the next 20 minutes or
however long this is as kind of an
extemporaneous rambling ode to emergence
itself right a kind of love talk about
how cool it is that universe actually
has this property and that we can
understand and participate within so
let's start by defining what is
emergence emergence means something new
arises that wasn't here before
all right we all kind of have that sense
intuitively but scientifically how the
 does that happen how do you bring
particles or planets or anything
together and all of a sudden the hole
has some properties that none of the
parts had like where do they come from
which is why in in the fields of science
that study emergence which evolutionary
theory and biology and systems science
and complexity series study it it's
considered the closest thing to magic
that's actually a scientifically kind of
admissible term but it's still sketchy
right in terms of the really
understanding how this thing works and
because how do we get fundamentally new
things out of relationships of things
where that didn't exist before this is
fascinating how do you have a cell that
respirate s-- made up of molecules none
of whom respirate and so it's just
really interesting when you actually
think about this right we we have a coin
a paired term does anyone know what the
term is that is key and understanding
synergy in emergence is synergy synergy
and emergence are two sides of the same
phenomena synergy means whole that's
greater than the sum of its parts
emergence is what is that greater it is
what is the new stuff that emerges out
of bringing things together
and so synergies more formally defined
as properties of whole systems that
aren't found in any of the parts taken
separately which also means that are
fundamentally unpredicted by the parts
taken separately which portends a future
that is fundamentally ontologically
unpredictable from the current state of
the future which is very different than
a mechanistic clock unfolding Newtonian
understanding of the future and yet
still actually makes sense in terms of
scientific laws super interesting right
so synergy is this property of
relationship where the whole has new
properties that the parts didn't have so
emergence is a result of synergy synergy
as a result of relationship does that
make sense and relationship is a result
of attractive forces there are some
kinds of attractive forces whether it's
gravity bringing dust together into
planets or planets the other into solar
systems whether it's electromagnetism
bringing subatomic particles together
into atoms or the strong force bringing
quarks together into protons each of
those are emergent properties driven by
synergy driven by relationship driven by
attraction or whether it's bringing
these people together via pheromones or
love or intellectual affinity or a topic
that we're all interested in like
creating a better world there's some
attractive forces and so Bucky fuller
called love metaphysical gravity in the
same way that gravity and physical
forces act on physical bodies to attract
them we have medical physical forces
that act on metaphysical bodies to drive
attraction but think about so imagine if
you think about all of the attractive
forces as expressions of a fundamental
principle of universe of allurement that
there is a principle by which separate
things have reason to come together that
offers advantage that being separate
doesn't have and you think about all of
the forces of special case applications
of that imagine if that wasn't the case
imagine if we had a universe where
allurement wasn't a fundamental
principle of it and the whole thing
would have stopped at quantum foam right
you have quantum foam emerge you don't
even quite get to the point of subatomic
particle and it's it because nothing
attracts to then halves energy and
emergent properties
I have a friend and collaborator Marc
Gaffney who calls this Universal love
story why at the heart of the
evolutionary story is this love story
which is that it's actually attraction
driving the whole evolutionary
story right attraction driving
relationship driving synergy driving new
emergent properties driving net novelty
and new creation and the arrow of
evolution so we can actually understand
the arrow of evolution itself in terms
of this set of phenomena together does
that make sense
so then evolution in complexity theory
is defined most generally in terms of
more elegantly ordered complexity that's
actually the best definition we have in
terms of mathematical complexity theory
coming out of Santa Fe Institute the
definition has the word elegance built
right in it because it's again one of
these actually fairly mysterious
properties but that's key to it which is
bringing things together doesn't give
you emergent properties bringing them
together in a particularly elegantly
ordered way does so think about think
about all the parts that make up a cell
right you've got all these nonliving
parts DNA and cell nucleus structures
and all the different organelles and
cytoplasm and they're all not living and
then the cell is living but if you
brought all those parts together but you
didn't arrange them as a cell it was
just a bunch of molecules it wouldn't be
that interesting right just be goo if
you took the 50 trillion cells that made
you and you didn't arrange them exactly
this way and you just had like 150
pounds worth of cells it would be much
less interesting even though there'd be
just as much complexity you wouldn't
have an order in the complexity where
the emergent property comes that's
actually the relationship it's not just
heaps coming together it's not just
complexity it's holes and the difference
between a hole and a heap is order and a
specific set of patterns of order this
means not every relationship is
synergistic some relationships are
entropic they actually create the
opposite direction of new emergent
properties they destroy some properties
that were already there right almost
everyone has some examples
but you can bring chemicals together
that rather than self-organizing to
create higher ordered molecules with new
thermodynamic properties they have an
exothermic entropic reaction and they
drop to lower levels of organization
right this is true at all levels so it's
not just relationship it's specific
kinds of relationship that maximize
synergy this is a key thing to
understand about the nature of universe
it's also the case that if you bring the
same thing together a bunch of the same
thing you don't get very interesting
synergies you get very interesting
synergies when you bring different
things with different properties
together in the right format where then
you have the properties of each of those
things and then the properties of the
relationship between those which is the
new stuff and you get emergent so you've
got hydrogen and you've got oxygen which
are different things and you bring them
together and you get water in the basis
for life but neither hydrogen or oxygen
at room temperature or liquids right and
so this is a fascinating thing so we're
actually very interested in having deep
synergistic relationships with
differences that lead to fundamentally
new emerging properties so it's not just
net complexity it's ordered complexity
and it's elegantly ordered complexity
and then when you get a new property
then universe selects for that right
that new property offers some
evolutionary advantage to that system
that a system that didn't have that
wouldn't have so things can come
together all kinds of ways but the ones
that come together most synergistically
offer and confer the most advantage and
Universal export so universe is actually
selecting for more differences right so
it's selecting for diversity and then
more synergistic combinations across
those differences that and it's both of
those more diversity and more
unification across the diversity right
more agency and more symbiosis at the
same time is what defines the era of
evolution does that make sense
things that are separate autonomous
agents right so like a cell you can
think of as having its own agency right
its own ability to act and its own
boundary and periphery but you bring a
bunch of cells together and this
collection of cells can reflect on
consciousness and existentialism and
have a conversation like this even
though none of those cells on their own
do that right and it's different kinds
of cells you couldn't do that with just
neurons it takes neurons and glial cells
and immune cells and stem cells etc to
all come together so more agency more
differentiation more orderly
relationship more synergy all of that
comes together and the net defining
thing is emergence how much fundamental
new advantage arises and that's what
evolution selects for and so if it
wasn't for this whole combination of
things together is this the message that
says five minutes left
fascinating so so I I'll see if we can
go very quickly through that was the
first 1% of what I hoped to discuss so
I'm going to just skim over the top of a
bunch of topics and hopefully paint a
gestalt at least of an arc that's
interesting so the evolutionary universe
story the kind of noobest story of
universe we have emerging from the
intersection of all the sciences is that
we have an evolutionary universe that
doesn't require a creator agent deistic
were theistic God to create but is also
not just random highly improbable set of
movements to get us here but there is a
set of properties that give us a
self-organizing rather than creative
agent creative principle universe that
is moving towards more elegant ordered
complexity and with that story on the
physical you also have the evolution of
consciousness structures themselves
right well as you move from a reptilian
nervous system to the increased orderly
complexity of a mammalian and then an
eel cortical and then a prefrontal
nervous system you move from the kinds
of sentient that map to that of pain
pleasure at reptilian to emotional to
cognition to abstraction so we have a
universe that's moving in the direction
of not only more elegance but greater
depths and
of consciousness itself now this defines
an era of evolution that reifies meaning
in a very interesting way and one of the
things that's so interesting is with our
capacity for abstraction we cannot just
think about our experiential self of the
moment but we can think about ourselves
in abstract terms we can think about
time abstractly deep past and deep
future right and that is what allows us
to actually understand evolution itself
it's an understanding of deep past and
fossil record and astrophysics they give
us a sense of the ability to abstract
laws that of how that change occurs over
time that allows us a deeper insight as
to how we got here and then also the
ability to vision a future fundamentally
more beautiful and more interesting and
then be part of that creative process so
it's it's worthwhile just noting that
our prefrontal cortex and our capacity
for abstraction is a pretty new
phenomena evolutionarily right and it's
also very powerful set of capabilities
and when you have a new phenomena that's
very powerful you're not going to know
how to use it that well many of its
applications will be destructive until
you figure it out so we can think about
the future as worried we can think about
the past as regret we can think about
self abstractly in terms of negative
self comparison so then we have
spiritual ideals emerge that basically
say this is all bad right mind and the
ability for abstraction like this is bad
we should not think about the future at
all or think about the past and just be
in the moment like the other animals and
children are see how happy they are but
it's an it's a regressive spirituality
that is actually rejecting the
fundamentally novel human capability
that emerged rather than say let's learn
how to use it well for its evolutionary
purposes in a fundamentally evolving
universe so if we learn how to use it
well then we say how can we learn from
the past how universe works to be able
to imagine a future in an omni
considerate way that is has
fundamentally less suffering and higher
quality of life across all meaningful
quality of life metrics for all life
right this is Omni considerately true
good and beautiful then how can we apply
all that learning now to actually help
create that world and in doing so we
stop just being a part of the whole but
in our ability to think about the whole
and think about the direction of the
whole we
actually become an agent for the whole
this is huge right the bee is
serving this huge role in evolution by
pollinating the plants that make the
atmosphere that make us but they don't
know they're doing that and they can't
consciously figure out how to do it
better but we actually have the
capability of looking at what the whole
story is and identifying as well the
whole evolutionary impulse of universe
brought me about and then woke up to
itself in me and so in a meaningful way
I am actually the evolutionary impulsive
Universal woke to itself in a form that
has adequate ordered complexity to
contemplate that and then get to
consciously choose how to participate
with it
to be in a not just not just a aboard
Spaceship Earth but crew right to help
steer the direction of evolution and
cosmos and so we move from evolution as
a mostly unconscious algorithmic process
that selects for dominance now to a
process that can be mediated by
conscious agents they can actually
forecast a more beautiful future and
select to help create that does that
make sense so when we don't identify as
evolutionary's then we can be actually
kind of we identify as nouns rather than
verbs and we stay stuck where we're at
and then we need pain as an evolutionary
driver and then emergence through
emergency is how we grow as soon as we
identify with the inexorability of
evolution and ourselves as evolution
incarnate we stopped needing pain to
push us because our whole
purpose for being for becoming being
becoming our actually matched their two
sides of the same thing is the lure of
the becoming is the bringing about more
of the timeless properties of the
infinite in time right more of the
infinite through the finite this
actually becomes the basis of our
existence that everybody knows that when
you are in the experience of creating
beauty that didn't exist before in
universe that adds to universe it's
uniquely yours to create you feel a kind
of aliveness it's not matched by
anything else
in lieu of not doing that
the emptiness causes all kinds of
addiction right because that's
fundamental to what we're actually here
to do now when we all identify as
evolutionary's we obsolete the
as paying for a driver does that make
sense because we have a pull driver
rather than just needing the push driver
when we also identify as fundamentally
interconnected parts of a interconnected
universe rather than separate things we
stop thinking that there is any
definition of success for self that
isn't the definition of success for the
whole and we stop thinking that the idea
of advantaging ourself at the expense of
something else we're inexorably
interconnected to make sense at all so
we are all agents for an interconnected
whole where our sense of self is our
self is actually an emergent property of
the intersection of this system with the
rest of universe it's actually key in
terms of emergence yourself as an
emergent property of the whole universe
because even though you wouldn't exist
in the same way without your brain and
your body you also wouldn't exist
without the atmosphere and the trees
that make it and the plants and bacteria
that make it and the gravity and
electromagnetism and foundational forces
like the concept of I separate from
universe is a misnomer does that make
sense so the concept of a life path for
ourself that isn't a life path for
universe as a misnomer or advantage for
self so when so then we get in the
deepest sense when Einstein said the
idea that there are separate things is
an optical delusion of consciousness and
in reality there is one reality that we
call universe of which we are all
inextricably interconnected facets and
your experience of self is a facet of
that now what's so fascinating
is that it is interconnected with all of
it it's an expression of the foundation
of all of it and it's also completely
unique in all of universe it's a unique
facet non fungible unique right what
that means is you have something to
offer universe in your experience and
your creativity that no one else has to
offer exactly that way which means if
you don't offer it like if Salvador Dali
hadn't done Dali
Michelangelo didn't do Dali I sure
wouldn't have done Dali Dali just
wouldn't have happened and so universe
would have been fundamentally less
so when you get that your own
self-actualization is compulsory right
you have an obligation to it but then
when you get that everyone else if they
don't self actualize universe is less
your participation with helping everyone
else self actualize is also compulsory
so competition is an obsolete concept
symbiotic to remember universe moves
towards more differentiation more
novelty and then more symbiosis across
that novelty for more emergence and what
we're moving towards is a civilization
where everyone actually identifies this
way as a emergent property of the whole
as an interconnected part of universe
with a unique role to play with unique
synergies with all the other unique
roles to play and then with that synergy
with that human participation then
humanity actually becomes a thing it
actually becomes an emergent property
right now it's an idea but we don't have
humanity we don't have civilization we
have humans bumping right it's we have a
bunch of organelles that haven't
organized as a cell that starts
breathing right you don't have behavior
of the whole that is centrally
unconsciously self-organizing but we can
and I would actually say and and this is
what I wanted to have more time to get
into but to just foreshadow quickly if
we cherry pick from the huge data sets
about where Humanity is going right now
we can see that things are exponentially
changing which means changing it more
and more rapid and more and more
significant rates and you can
cherry-pick metrics where things are
getting exponentially better and that's
true and other things we're getting
exponentially worse and that's also true
which means the future that you predict
if you just follow any of those curves
is not happening if things are getting
exponentially better and worse at the
same time does everybody kind of get
that that's happening on different
metrics then that doesn't mean things
are getting better or worse it means the
current system is destabilizing
and that means self terminating and then
we either have a discrete phase shift to
a lower order entropic system or the
emergence of a higher order system that
is foundationally different than the
current system we have in every in every
way so the things getting better
are the pieces that can be reorganized
to create a new civilization with a
foundationally new structure right
biosphere metrics are getting
exponentially worse from misapplication
of technology technologies right
application are making things
fundamentally better but technology is
giving us the capacity to do things like
have data analytic capabilities to
inventory all the world's resources to
then be able to allocate all the world's
resources to meet all the world's needs
with optimum efficiency we never have
that ability before like the
transportation and communication
technologies it can actually make us a
global civilization we never had that
before right and so the technological
capacities that require us to step up
otherwise we you know self extinctions
very real thing also make possible a
discrete phase shift and evolution
that's characterized by three major
things and this will be where I end at
the level of social systems primarily
economics the key shift we're going to
move to is a moving from a differential
advantage economy it's defined by
private ownership valuation based on
scarcity and differential advantage to
an economic system that is defined by
making sure that the incentive of every
agent and the well-being of every other
agent and the Commons is perfectly
aligned with no externality meaning we
actually understand that it's an
interconnected system we identify all
the externalities and internalize them
so the system is actually defined by
systemic advantage for the whole this is
not communism or socialism or capitalism
it's something that was not possible
before to even anticipate but it is how
your body works where none of the cells
are advantaging themselves at the
expense of the other they're doing
what's best for them what's best for the
whole symbiotically at the same time
right and so that's the key net shift at
the level of macroeconomics and
correspondingly governance and all of
our social structures at the level of
infrastructure in the built world were
moving from a linear materials economy
where we extract from the earth at
ever-growing rates unsustainably from
finite resources and then turn it into
trash to a closed-loop materials economy
where the trash is the new stuff we stop
extracting from the earth stop producing
waste and we actually have a post growth
negative entropy closed-loop materials
economy where we can live ongoingly at
progressive
higher and higher quality of life
sustainably with the biosphere so that's
the infrastructure shift that's the
social structure shift and the
superstructure the mimetic shift is this
awareness of all of us as facets of one
integrated self evolving reality where
the well-being of everyone the
well-being of everyone else the
well-being of the Commons are not
meaningfully calculable separate from
each other now what's so interesting is
there used to be such a thing as local
problems when Gandhi was working with
the home rule for India it was largely
in thought of as an Indian problem and
it didn't directly affect everybody
right when people in the u.s. wanted to
or who founded the US wanted to leave
British Empire there was somewhere else
to go
and it was a you know a local problem
right now when we deal with species
extinction and ocean acidification and
peak nitrogen peak phosphorus they're
all global issues and you can't solve
them without China and without India and
without the u.s. without everyone
participating so the idea that we have
local issues is gone our level of global
infrastructure and technology is made to
where we have all global issues and they
are actually existential they are
threatening of the biosphere no no one
has ever had issues in the history of
humanity that threatened the ability of
the species to continue nor did they
have ones that they had to face
eminently in short-term nor do they have
the capacity to actually face those
kinds of things the data science the
technology that could build something
fundamentally new what that means is we
have the most significant work that
humanity has ever had with the most
significant capabilities which also
means the most potential to impact the
biggest picture that any humans have
ever had and it's easy to think about
that and then get caught back into like
 you got to do next as part of to
win at the current system that is going
extinct but winning at a system that is
obsoleting the capability of life on
earth to continue winning at a dying
system is not an interesting win if you
ever think about the definition of
heaven where you're in heaven and there
are people in hell and you're happy you
have to be a psychopath
you have to be able to separate from the
experience of other sentient things
enough that you can be totally stoked
with that level of suffering
well the idea in this world that the
level of intensity of suffering that's
happening can be happening and you can
just be stoked because you're killing it
in your life you have to be mildly
psychopathic if we want to not be
Psychopaths then there is no definition
for success for ourselves it is not
definition of success for everything and
now when we start really taking that
seriously everything changes and
then you start saying well what can I
actually do to make my life of greatest
use to all life and then your answer to
that question if you take it seriously
and really study and really work on it
and don't just like ask the question get
overwhelmed give up and go back to
current stuff your aunt your
progressively better answer to that
question will lead to the emergence of
your life meaning and Dharma and path
and correspondingly the emergence of
civilization making it that's it
[Applause]