[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis this is episode 29 so
last time I went through with you a
series of arguments trying to show you
the centrality of the issue of relevance
realization I want to review that with
you and then try and begin an account of
how we might come up with a naturalistic
explanation of relevance realization and
then build that into an overall a
plausibility argument about using that
notion of relevance realization to
explain many of the features that we
consider central to human spirituality
meaning making self transcendence
altered states of consciousness and
wisdom before I begin that I want to
remind everybody of how much the work
I'm talking about now has been done in
collaboration with other people
especially the the work with Tim little
clap and break Richards in 2012 the
article we published the journal of
logic and computation with Leo Ferraro
in 2013 some current work with Leo
Ferraro Anderson Todd
Richard woo current work I'm doing with
Christopher mah stoah Pietro and some
past work with Zachary Irving and Leo
Ferraro on the nature of intelligence so
you want to take a look at what we did
last time we did very quickly to remind
you a series of arguments a series of
arguments that pointed towards how
central relevance realization is we did
arguments around the nature of
problem-solving and remember we saw the
idea there of the search space as
proposed by Newland Simon and we faced a
couple of important issues there we
faced issues of combinatorial explosion
and what we need is right problem
formulation or problem framing
that allows us to avoid combinatorial
explosion by zeroing in on relevant
information I also propose to you and
I'll return to this later that
problem-solving is our best way of
trying to understand what we mean by
intelligence your capacity as being a
general problem solver also we noted the
problem of ill-defined it nests very
often a problem formulation is needed in
order to determine what the relevant
information is and what the relevant
structure of that information is so that
again points us into relevance these two
together also pointed towards a
phenomena we have we have already talked
about insight and the fact that you
often have to solve a problem by
altering your problem formulation and
re-determine in what you consider
relevant we then took a look at
categorization I'll come back to this
again in another way a little bit later
in this lecture but we took a look at
how categorization ultimately depends on
judgments of similarity and we can get
into an equivocation there we can
equivocate between purely logical or
purely logical notion of similarity in
which case any two objects are
indefinitely similar or dissimilar to
each other and if we mean instead of
logical similarity which would not help
us to categorize psychological
similarity then we're talking about
making a comparison of two things in
terms of the relevant features of
comparison the relevant aspects so we're
in two relevance and we're also
introducing an important idea I want you
to remember this notion of an aspect a
set of relevant features that cohere
together and are relevant to us
especially in projects like
categorization
all right so we keep getting this of
course I mean if you remember doing good
 I I do a convergence argument to
get a trustworthy problem or construct
and then I basically do a divergence
argument to show how it has the
potential to explain many important
phenomena and establish a relevant
balance between them and so that's what
I'm building you right now we're on this
side how all these things are converging
on relevance realization and then as I
said can we use this to explain many of
the features that seem to be central to
human spirituality meaning making self
transcendence altered states of
consciousness and wisdom we then took a
look at communication I don't know which
order we I think we did we might have
done the robot first doesn't matter we
did communication and we saw the issue
here there is the fact that you have to
convey more than you can say and then
that led us into the work of grace and a
series of Maxim's that make
conversational implicature possible and
that got us into write that all of the
Maxim's collapsed to the rack maximum of
being relevant we then did or we can now
remember are doing the issue of robotics
the actual interaction with the
environment here's the idea of being an
agent and we saw the robot was trying to
pull the battery that also that's on the
wagon and that wagon also has the bomb
on it and what we saw is the problem of
the proliferation of side effects
you can't ignore all side effects or
you'll be grotesquely stupid you can't
check all side effects or you'll be crow
testicle incapable and so therefore you
have to zoom in on their relevant side
effects so again and again and again
everything is centering on this I want
you to I want you to also now remember a
couple of other things from previous
lectures how we talked about the
convergence argument this is an
independent convergence
argument when we talked about
consciousness not the nature of
consciousness but the function of
consciousness all the convergence
arguments that what's going on in
consciousness is doing relevance
realization especially in complex
ill-defined situations in which our
agency is directly involved right so
consciousness seems to be bound up with
relevance realization and we also talked
and how this overlaps with how working
memory the work of Lin hasher the job of
working memory is to be a relevance
filter and to to screen off your
relevant information and allow into
processing deeper processing more
relevant information and I also pointed
out I want you to see how all these
connections are forming that there's
deep connections between working memory
and your measures of your general
intelligence how intelligent you are so
we see that we've getting actually a
very powerful convergence argument
towards the centrality of relevance
realization as how do I want to say this
as constitutive as constitutive of your
intelligence your cognitive agency has
significantly contributory towards your
existence as a conscious being and then
I also suggested to you last time that
this notion of relevance realization and
this is what we're going to develop
today may be a way of explaining that
sort of fundamental aspect of meaning
the kind of meaning that was lost in the
meaning crisis that's expressed in the
three orders that in which we're
pursuing coherence and significance and
purpose that that sense of connectedness
connectedness and I'm going to try to
argue that as we understand what
relevance is that relevance is exactly
that sense of connectedness so there
will be deep connections between meaning
and relevance and of course we this will
make sense right see what I'm arguing
here there's deep connections between
meaning and all this relevance right
there's deep connections between
relevance and agency that's the whole
point about the robot and communicating
right and there's going to be deep
connections we've already seen between
of course meaning an agency that one of
the whole things about agency is its
relationship to the arena the agent of
arena relationship and how that grounds
how that's the meta meaning grounding of
all our other more specific meaning
making projects alright so I hope I've
made at least a good convergence
argument for you that many things
converge upon many things that were
interested in many central defining
features of intelligence and agency and
aspects of the functionality of our
consciousness everything is sort of
converging on this relevant realization
what I want to try and show you now is
how you might move towards and this has
been sort of the core of my I guess
you'd call it my scientific work how you
move towards trying to offer a
scientific explanation of relevance
mm-hmm and what that would look like in
the difficulties you face doing so I
also want to try and argue that there's
good reason to believe that we're
talking about a unified phenomena a
unified thing here relevance that this
isn't just a family resemblance term for
a lot of disconnected things that
there's reason to believe this is a
central thing let's start with trying to
offer theories of relevance and there
are good ones out there there's the work
of Sperber and Wilson and others and I
will refer to some of that work as we
move along but let's let's let's try and
work towards sort of a bit of a at the
meta level what do we need for a good
theory of relevance to do what kind of
mistakes do we need to avoid when we're
trying to explain relevance the main
mistake that I want to point to is a
mistake in which we are arguing in a sir
call if you remember this is part of
what goes into things like the
homunculus II remember when I try to
explain vision with the little man in my
head having vision I don't want to use
whatever I'm using let's put it this way
whatever process or entity that I'm
trying to use to explain relevance
should not itself require relevance but
what I mean by that but if I have
something X and I'm using that to
explain relevance what this cannot this
cannot itself cannot presuppose
relevance for its function because if it
does that I'm ultimately arguing it in a
circle I have to find processes that are
themselves not processes that realize
relevance if I'm going to explain though
I'm ever going to explain in terms of
those processes relevance realization
itself another way of putting this is I
ultimately want to explain intelligence
in terms of processes that are not
themselves intelligent because if I
don't if I'm always playing explaining
intelligence in terms of processes that
are themselves intelligent that is no
different than the homunculus fallacy of
explaining vision in terms of internal
processes that are themselves visual
processes okay so that's going to be a
guiding methodological principle all
right now that turns out to be very
powerful and as many people have pointed
out Fodor famously has pointed out in
repeated places it's actually very
difficult to explain relevance without
presupposing relevance in the machinery
that you're using to explain it let's
take a look at some candidates we might
think that we could explain relevance in
terms of how we use representations this
is very powerful way we think about the
mind that there are things in the mind
ideas pictures right that
stand for represent the world in some
way we might think that perhaps it's
much more that relevance is a function
of computation computational processes
or we might think that we explain
relevance in terms of what's called
modularity that there's a specific area
of the brain dedicated to processing
relevance I want to take a look at each
one of those and I want to try and argue
as to why I think they're inadequate and
what that helps us to see and what I
want you to see is that and I'll try to
show this along the way that as we come
if if and I'm trying to make it more
than an F but if relevance realization
is so central to our our meaning making
our cognition and our consciousness and
our self transcendence etc right as we
learn about how we have to best try to
explain or understand it we should
garner lessons about how to best think
about and reflect upon human
spirituality at least in terms in the
terms that I have defined it for us okay
so representation now this is just a
terrifically hot issue both in in terms
of interest and controversy within
cognitive science in general
and I'm not going to try and completely
decide this issue right now although I
think I'll say things that are pertinent
to that debate but let's take it that
what we mean by a representation is
something as I said some mental entity
that stands for refers directs us
towards an object in the world that's
all I need whatever else representations
are in all that controversy that's all I
need for the point I want to make
because I want to show you something
very important about a representation
and I mentioned it a few
it's ago and this is a point that John
Searle has famously made representations
are a spec xual okay so I hold this
thing up and you form a representation
of it right remember all the things we
talked about when we talked about
categorization we talked about
similarity etc so when you form a
representation you do not write grasped
all of the true properties of this
object because right all of the true
properties the number is combinatorial
explosive you've already seen that so
out of all of the properties right you
just select some subset and what subset
do you pick well you pick a subset that
is here it comes relevant to you are
they just a feature list no we've
already seen that a long time ago
they are right to have a structural
functional organization they're made
relevant to each other so here's what
we've got a set of features that are
relevant to each other and then a set of
features that set of features that have
been structurally functional organized
so that they have Co relevance is then
relevant to me that's what an aspect is
right so whenever I'm representing
anything this is a marker however I
could change its aspect you a Latino
weapon alright and we do that all the
time in fact one of the ways we check
the people's creativity is to do exactly
that we will give some object and say
how many different ways can you use it
how many different ways can you
categorize it
how namely how many different ways how
flexible are you in getting different
aspects from the same object so
representations are inherently a spectra
but notice the language I was using
zeroing on relevant properties right out
of all the possible properties you're
structuring them as how they're Co
relevant to each other and then how that
right structural functional organization
is relevant to you a spec shoe allottee
deeply presuppose is maybe that's an
incorrect arrow
let's just put presupposes deeply
presupposes the ability to zero in on
relevance do relevance realization that
means that representations can't
ultimately be that generators of the
creators of relevance they can't be the
causal origin of relevance now can our
representations feed back and alter what
we find relevant of course nobody's
denying that that's of course why we use
representations but what they can't
serve they can't serve as the
ontological basis the the the stuff in
reality that we're trying to use to
generate a non-circular encounter
relevance realization now that's going
to tell us something really interesting
it's going to tell us that if this
meaning and this spirituality is what is
bound to relevance realization that the
place to look for it is not going to be
found at the level of our
representational cognition the level of
our cognition that is using ideas
propositions pictures etc once again I
am NOT saying that those things do not
contribute or effect what we consider
relevant what I'm saying is they are not
the source the locus of how we do
relevance realization I want to show you
how this cashes out even in an empirical
manner this goes to some really
interesting work done by Zen and
politian right on what's called multiple
object tracking and multiple object
tracking is really interesting so
basically what you do is you give people
like a bunch of objects on a computer
screen let's say I have X's and O's and
they'll be different colors they can be
different shapes right all kinds of
things like this and what I do is I have
the objects move around and let's say
this was the red X and then after it
moves around I ask you where's the red X
and you have to point
I may ask you a where's the green circle
where's the blue square you get the task
now what's interesting is how much you
can do this you can track about eight
that's on average objects reliably
what's really interesting about them
what's really interesting is the more
objects you track the less and less
features you can attribute to each
object what do I mean by that
suppose I'm tracking that that's six but
suppose it was eight I was tracking the
red X and I have to keep it right if
right I can I can after lots of
movements say oh it's there now it
started there and it's there now what I
won't notice during that is that the red
X has become for example a Blue Square
so all of its content properties get
lost all I'm tracking and I need you to
remember this is what you might call the
hereness where is it and the nowness of
it where is it it's here now it's here
now it's here now it's here now it's
here now it's here now everything else
its shape its color its categorical
identity all gets lost so he calls this
he calls this fin sting this stands for
fingers of instantiation his basic idea
is like this your mind has something
equivalent to putting your finger on
something I don't I don't know what this
is suppose I didn't know what it was I
put my finger on it I don't know what it
is I just know it's here nowness it's
here now it's here now here and now our
indexical x' these are terms that just
refer to the context of the speaker so
here now right and it moves around and
my mind can keep in touch notice my
language in touch and contact in touch
with write something but that's all
that's doing it's just tracking that
here nowness well that's really cool now
what why do we have this ability well
first of all I'm going to propose a way
of thinking about this he doesn't
this language but I think it'll be
helpful I don't think it's in any way
inconsistent disability to do this is
like salience tagging okay when I touch
this I'm making this here nowness
salient to me this here now is salient
image not the bottle not even the flat
surface because remember I lose all of
those particular qualities all I have is
the here nowness is salient to me right
and we do this with demonstrative terms
like this notice the word this is not
like the word cat cat refers you to a
specific thing we add meow the animal
that pretends to love you actually I
know some cats now that I'm actually
convinced you know I do love me so I
have to I have to amend my usual
comments about cats right but this isn't
like cat this can go watch this this
this this okay it doesn't refer to a
specific thing it picks out it does
assailing it makes something it doesn't
make something it just makes some
hearing this and nowness sorry for
talking about this but this is how we
have to talk
salient to you now I want you to pick up
on something I just said with this terms
like this and here and now but
especially this these are linguistic
terms and they do what's called
demonstrative reference they do not
refer to a particular thing they do not
refer to the bottle or to the marker or
to wall but this this this this okay all
they do is salience tagging this and
that now why is that important well
politian wants you to understand fin
sting it fin sting is obviously not a
linguistic phenomena I'm not speaking in
my head when I'm doing this in fact if
you try and speak in your head you're
gonna mess yourself up so he's
demonstrative reference as a linguistic
analogy for something you enact so I'm
going to try and draw that out by
calling it inactive demonstrative
reference rather than linguistic
demonstrative reference so inactive
demonstrative reference which I've tried
to explain to you with this notion of
the salience tagging of hereness and
nowness why is this so important well
here's where the analogy can help me
right I need demonstrative reference
I need inactive demonstrative reference
a before I can do any categorization
look if I'm going to categorize things I
need to mentally group them together
this is mental grouping this this this
this this that's what mental grouping is
mental grouping is two salient stagg
things right and bound them together in
a salience tagging so what am i showing
you what am i trying to show you is any
categorization you have depends on
inactive demonstrative reference an
inactive demonstrative reference is only
about salience and here nowness you see
all of your concepts are categorical
that whole conceptual representational
categorical pictorial all of that
depends on this but this depends on
something that is pre categorical
pre-conceptual and you say but you're
using concepts to talk about it don't
confuse properties of the theory with
properties of what the theory is about
of course I have to use words to
talk about it I have to use words to
talk about Adams that doesn't mean that
atoms are made out of words or dependent
on words I have to use words to talk
about anything and I don't want
properties of my theory and properties
of the phenomena of the theory to be
confused
I want a theory about for example
vagueness to itself be clear I want a
theory about illogicality to itself be
logical
I want a theory about rationale
irrationality to itself be rational do
not confuse properties of the theory
with properties of the thing being
referred to yes I have to use language
and concepts to talk about it but that
does not mean that the thing itself is
made out of or dependent on concepts and
categorization I've given you an
argument and I've given you empirical
evidence towards this claim and they
massively right they massively converge
together now notice this is a
fundamental connectedness to reality
you're getting with the fence thing with
the inactive demonstrative reference
when you're getting that initial
salience tagging because it's like the
mind being in contact with the world
that's why politian even uses the
metaphor of contact
all right so the representational level
is not going to give us what we're
looking for in fact we need to think
about ways in which we need to pursue
something that is sub representational
so this is in the cog side we would call
that the the representational level is
called a semantic level because this is
the level at which words have meaning or
by analogy at which representations have
representational meaning so we have to
go sub semantic we have to go sub
categorical we have to go sub conceptual
now is that such up as our claim we saw
in higher states of consciousness that
people claim to have the most profound
sense of meaning and it is precisely
ineffable they reliably across
traditions across historical contexts
claim that it is not conceptual it can't
be grasped categorically and they use
the language of hereness and nowness to
describe it it's fully present it's like
you know eternal hereness and nowness so
this is actually not a bizarre claim to
consider now it's difficult for us
because we habitually identify with
that's our ego structure I would say
tends to we tend to identify with the
way in which we are running
representations in our mind in her
pictures in her speech etc alright so
perhaps we could consider the
computational level as the level in
which we could explain
relevance realization because we have
found that the semantic level of
representations is inadequate this is
often called the syntactic level
semantics is about how your terms refer
to the world syntax is about how your
various terms have to be coordinated
together within some system so for
example you know that there's our
grammatical rules in English about how
you can put certain things together
that's the syntax so in computation what
we're usually doing is we're thinking
about the relationship between our
symbols I don't mean symbol in the
religious sense I just mean the things
that we're using within for example a
code in program or something like that
we're talking about the relationship
between them now there's been a lot of
issues around this and I want to point
to a core argument by one of the
strongest defenders one of the
originators and defenders of the
computational theory of mind so this is
a tradition and you remember it goes
back to Hobbes of the idea that
cognition is computation that right we
talked about this the manipulation of an
abstract symbolic symbolic system like
generally logical or mathematical
symbolic system the manipulation of that
is what it is to think to think is to do
computation now Fodor has pointed out
and I think these are arguments in many
ways analogous to to Vic in Stine and
you have to remember he's a defender of
the computational theory of mind
he's one of he's considered one of its
founding figures within cognitive
science so and he criticizes it we have
to first of all do two things he died
not that long ago but we have to
congratulate him on his honesty as a
researcher his the capacity for
self-criticism is for me a you know a
demonstrative measure of how good a
researcher is if you finding people that
are incapable of self-criticism in their
intellectual pursuits then I suggest you
get
quite a wide berth in how much
confidence you place in their work
so the fact that he does that is
important and the fact that he launches
into that self-criticism means he's not
being driven he's not being motivated by
his own particular theoretical bias all
that being said what's the nature of the
criticism well the nature of the
criticism is Right you have to make a
distinction ultimately you have to make
a distinction between implication right
and inference people sometimes confuse
these together so implication is a
logical relationship based on syntactic
structures and rules a logical
relationship between propositions so
here's an abstract symbol so if I have a
and B and I know that's true I can
conclude that B is true I don't know
what B is C I don't have any semantic
content it is purely syntactic but I can
derive that now when we try to think
about implications what we have to
remember is an inference is when you are
actually using an implication relation
to change your beliefs okay the thing
about beliefs is that they have content
right so when I'm making an inference
I'm not just making an implication I'm
using implication relations in order to
alter belief changing belief okay you
say well why does that matter because
changing believes to us brings up the
important issue right away right the
important issue right away is what
beliefs should I be changing what
beliefs should I be changing let me try
and show you what I mean
any proposition technically it's defined
in terms of its logical syntactic
structure by all of its implication
relations and depends on I mean you know
just can get we can get very technical
here about where whether or not negation
and the implication or identical blah
blah blah I'm just going to speak very
broadly here because that's all I need
so a proposition it's logical its
computational identity is defined by all
of its implication relations to other
propositions so for example part of the
identity of this a and B is that it
implies B it also right implies a all
kinds of things now the issue that we
have and this is a point that was made
also independently by chair niak is the
number of implications logical relations
between any proposition and all the
other propositions is combinatorially
explosive and combinatorially explosive
you cannot ever make use of and we
talked about this in one how you can't
be comprehensively logical right you
can't make use of all of the
implications of any proposition ever you
cannot be completely logical ever what
you do is out of all of the implications
you decide which one of the ones you
select right which one of the ones are
going to be used in an inference right
folder and charniak both independently
talked about this as a kind of cognitive
commitment which of the implications are
you going to commit to and this matters
to you it matters to you because
commitment is an act that makes use of
your precious and limited resources
attention memory time metabolic energy
you cannot afford you cannot afford to
spend them on all possible ones you
cannot even afford to spend them on
inferences that are not and here's what
you knew I was going to say relevant to
the context which beliefs do I need to
change and that can mean strengthened by
the way which beliefs do I need to
change with right in this context so
notice what out of all of these what am
i doing I'm choosing and this is what
charity Act specifically argues this is
his term not mine
right what makes according to charity
act somebody rational will come back to
whether or not this is a good definition
of rationality but it's the least what
makes you intelligent as a cognitive
agent is right that you select out of
all the possible implications the
relevant ones because those ones are
relevant to the context because they're
going to affect the beliefs that you've
already done relevance realization on as
applying to this situation or
representing the situation well so
inference massively presupposes
relevance realization now you may think
well but I can get around that because
logic you know logic isn't just
implications it's the rules governing
the implications and maybe all I need to
talk about is the rules and then here's
the argument that comes from Vic and
Stein but I think ultimately goes back
to Aristotle
is how rules work right and this is an
argument that Brown and others have made
made very very clear rules
rules are obviously there propositions
they're not just propositions they're
propositions that and this is perhaps
while you're considering them
propositions that tell you where to
commit your resources now the problem
with that is that of course every rule
requires an interpretation every rule
requires a specification in its
application let's just use a moral rule
because those are easy the easiest for
people to have right a connection to I
assume that many of you have this rule
be kind which means in a situation right
I will derive inferences and sorry I
will use inferences to derive actions
and changes of belief and those will fit
together in a certain way that will
result in me achieving kindness towards
others so I have this rule it tells me
which implications to pay attention to
which beliefs
I should make salient etc now what's the
issue about this well think about being
kind what do I mean by this problem of
the interpret interpret interpretation
by specifying the application of the
rule the way I'm kind to my son Spencer
what it means to be kind to Spencer
should I use that in how I'm trying to
be kind to my partner Sora no that would
be inappropriate
it could be condescending could be
patronizing now I want to be kind of
both of them in fact I love both of them
deeply but I'm not gonna be kind to them
in the same way most of the time
well what about how I'm kind to a friend
should I be kind to a friend the way I'm
trying to either Spencer or Sarah that
doesn't seem right either
what about how I'm kind to my student is
should I should that be like I'm kind to
a friend know how I'm kind to Spencer no
I'm
to saw know what about how I'm kind to a
stranger should be like I'm kind to my
students
no how about when I'm kind of myself
should it be like any of those well so
here's the thing and this is bound up
with the fact that we have to always
convey more that we can say you can
probably see that I cannot specify all
the conditions of application of the
rule in the rule because the rule always
has to convey much more than it can say
if I try to specify it in the rule the
rule that we become write unwieldy
because it will become combo Lee Hamid
Oh totally explosively large it will it
will no longer serve well you say well
what you might do is put in a rule on
how to use this rule a higher order rule
that's not going to work because the
same problem is going to happen here and
this was victim Stein's point you can't
ultimately get an explanation of how you
follow rules in terms of just the rules
your ability to follow rules is actually
based on something else Brown calls this
in his book on rationality in 1988 the
skill of judgment notice what we've
moved here we've moved out of the
propositional language right of a rule
and we've moved into the procedural
language of a skill the skill knowing
how to judge what is relevant pertinent
in this situation now again notice how
we can't even maintain the two things
that are supposed to be central to
computation we can't use inference
because it presupposes relevance we
can't use rules because
what is this procedural skill of being
able to determine what's appropriate or
what fits in the context what fits the
people or the situation what fits the
problem or task at hand well that's the
skill of relevance realization so we're
seeing that the computational level
isn't going to do it for us I want to
stop here before we go code to this
modularity issue and point out something
really interesting notice what we got
with Fodor and with Vic and Cheyenne and
like I said I think this ultimately goes
back to Aristotle right notice how the
propositional and this was one of the
concerns famous arguments right
ultimately depends on the procedural one
of my favorite quotes from Victor 9 is
exactly what this he said even if lions
could talk we would not understand them
even if they could use all of our words
we would not understand them because
their skills of what is relevant or
important or central to them would be
are very different from ours he called
this a form of life their form of life
that the way they exercise across many
contexts the skill of doing judgments of
what's relevant
what's salient and important to them is
fundamentally different from ours
because they're cats rather than humans
and therefore even if they spoke we
would not understand them so we see that
the propositional actually depends on
the procedural but notice and this is
really important if I'm exercising a
skill so it's not something I've got to
throw this or you know do a martial art
block or something right that depends on
what's called situational awareness if
I'm a good martial artist I don't just
have my skills and just apply them
mechanically it's a great thing if you
spar with somebody that's fighting
mechanically because they don't have
situational awareness now what is
situational awareness right when I'm
exercising a skill it depends on my
situational awareness
what is situational awareness well you
know what it is we've already talked
about it it's your perspective all
knowing it's your ability
ooh salience landscaping its ability to
foreground background right formulate
the problem while it's all that
perspectival stuff
so my situational awareness is how is my
salience landscaping for grounding
what's most right relevant to the task
how its how is it is it and is it back
rounding what's irrelevant how is it's
adjusting as the situation is changing
so that the way I'm applying my skill is
more adaptive and more fitted to the
situation so your procedural knowing
depends on your perspective oh well you
know what I'm gonna go with this right
your perspective of knowing ultimately
depends on how well the agent and arena
fit together and generate affordances of
action and affordances of at of an
intelligibility if the the agent and the
arena need to be in a conformity
relationship they need to be well fitted
together you've seen lots of arguments
to this in order for my salience
landscaping to function appropriately so
the perspectival ultimately depends on
the participatory now of course it goes
this way right they they affect each
other in multiple interactions so I was
not originally drawing the arrow of
causal interaction I just did that but
what I was trying to draw originally was
the arrow of dependence asymmetric
dependence this depends on this and this
depends on this and this ultimately
depends on this so we're getting a lot
about how we should think about
relevance realization where we should
look for it and notice it's starting to
give us a way of connecting and thinking
about the four kinds of knowing
what about modularity what about
modularity well
the idea would be something like this
right and and to be fair this comes up a
lot the idea you know here's the mind or
the brain right here's something like
here's the central executive or
something like that it's weird we use a
business term for an aspect of our
cognition this is used in psychology and
the idea is that central executive is
making all kinds of important decisions
well maybe the central executive is
responsible for relevance realization
and and and and a lot of people and I
know this because I interact with
psychologists there so oh yeah that's it
that's the answer well it's not an
answer it's not an answer at all because
if it's right it's ridiculously
homunculus what does the central
executive have to possess inside the
central executive is a capacity for
relevance realization I haven't
explained it I've just pointed to a
place the problem is you shouldn't okay
so first of all I haven't explained it
it's a marketer and secondly you
shouldn't point to a place look
relevance realization can't be in any
one place it has to simultaneously you
know this we've talked about this with
how attention works remember you know
that you're always going from feature to
Gestalt and from Gestalt to feature
attention has to be moving out towards
the gestalt and down to the features
relevance realization has to be
happening both at the feature level and
the Gestalt level in an highly
integrated interactive fashion you can't
point to one place and say that's what
relevance realization is going on
because relevance realization has to be
happening at multiple levels of
cognition in a simultaneous
self-organizing fashion that's why it it
it can lead to insight and as I said
pointing to any one thing and then
labeling it is not an explanation
it is a homunculus right it's a home
ocular diversion that's all it is
okay let's try and draw this all
together what are we learning well I'm
trying to show you we're already
learning something very interesting
about meaning-making
but we're learning what we need the
kinds of properties and processes we
need in order to explain relevance
realization first of all our account of
relevance realization and bear with me
on this because there's an important way
in which I'm going to modify this right
but are an account irrelevant
realization has to be completely
internal now what do I mean by that it
has to work in terms of goals that are
at least initially are internal to the
brain and emerge developmentally from it
why look any goal in which that's in
which the brain is representing or
referring to something in the world
can't be the place where we can generate
an explanation of relevance because
insofar as I'm representing a goal to
myself I've already got the capacity for
relevance realization the goals that are
the originating source of relevance
realization have to be internal to the
relevance realization process now what
does that mean the goals have to be
goals that are constitutive what a
constitutive goals constitutive goals
are goals that a system or process have
that help to constitute it for being
what it is and this is especially the
case for autopoietic systems we've
talked about this living things are not
only self-organizing living things are
self organized because they have the
constitutive goal of preserving their
own self-organization to be alive is to
have maybe even better to be the goal of
preserving the self-organization that is
giving rise to you
it's a constitutive goal autopoietic
things are self-organized such that they
can protect and promote their
constituted to protect and promote their
own self-organization which means we
should see that there's going to be a
deep connection between your ability to
do relevance realization and being an
autopoietic thing because relevance
realization ultimately has to work in
terms of autopoietic systems systems
that have goals that are completely
internal in the constitutive sense now
that's important because that means
there's going to be a deep connection
between the doing relevance realization
and being a living thing next so when I
say internal I mean Otto poetically
internal relevance theory of relevance
realization has to talk in terms of
processes that are scale invariant
relevance realization has to act
simultaneously at multiple levels local
and global featural digital and it has
to do it in a self-organizing fashion
such that it is capable of insight self
correction and that means of course and
that ties in again with being
autopoietic that the relevance
realization process has to be
fundamentally self-organizing in nature
okay now we hit a problem here and it's
a problem that might derail the whole
project and might make it might make it
sound like the attempt to give a
scientific explanation of relevance
relevance realization is impossible now
notice I've been sort of playing between
those and treating them as synonymous a
theory of relevance and a theory of
relevance realization that's ultimately
because I've been dodging an issue
because I'm gonna argue can't identify
them because here is what I want to
argue or at least I'm going to state
what the argument is going to be and
then we're going to pick it up in the
next video I'm gonna argue that we
cannot have a scientific theory of
relevance we cannot have a scientific
theory of relevance I'm going to try and
argue that that tells us something very
deep about the nature of relevance and
therefore something deep about the
nature of meaning and our attempts to
explain articulate and celebrate our
meaning-making capacities but I'm going
to ultimately argue that that is no
reason for despair as what I'm going to
argue is that the fact that we don't
have a theory of relevance doesn't
preclude us from having a theory of
relevance realization in fact it will
give us a good understanding of what a
theory of relevance realization is and
that will help us because we were we
will realize pun intended
that all we ever needed was a theory of
relevance realization thank you very
much for your time and attention
[Music]
you
you