[Music]
so I hope this is going to be the last
film about the London real situation I'd
much prefer be making films about the
wider issues raised by it kind of free
speech censorship but it is such a good
story and I feel that it's worth ruining
it off and I thought the best way to do
that would be to have a dialogue with
coffee Zilla so coffee Zilla is an
American youtuber who's also been
following the story so I want to play
the whole conversation and in it we
talked about the recent meltdown on
YouTube and how the London real army
seems to be turning against Brian Rose I
can't imagine a bigger trainwreck with
your audience because basically he was
getting all these questions all this
pressure and it's like one day he just
snapped
he's cursing at his audience calling
them fools it was insane it was
absolutely insane I've never seen a
meltdown quite like this and I was just
waiting for it to be deleted and it was
up for at least 24 hours and just to be
clear it was deleted eventually yeah and
also the central question of whether the
entire fundraising scheme makes any
sense at all it's the it's the funniest
thing in the world to me because it
makes zero sense
as soon as Brian rose said that I was
like okay your whole thing makes zero
since you've raised all this money for
nothing other than yourself and your own
ego about having your own platform so
we're gonna record an update to the
London real investigation London real
situation I'm joined by coffee Zilla
who's been doing his own follow ups on
the London real situation thank you
travelling coffee Zilla Steven Steven
I'll say Steven from now on and so I
think both of us we've talked a little
bit offline before recording this and I
think both of us feel a little bit torn
like we don't want to keep returning to
this story but it's also such a great
story I'd spend a bit of time just kind
of unpacking some of the the wider
issues what we've we've both been
contacted by other people who've got
knowledge of the situation there's lots
of stuff that's been going on I think
it's worth unpacking and revealing to
people and also just some of the it's
it's an absolutely compelling story just
to see it unfolding in real time just
before we kind of get into the detail
where are you at with it at the moment
I'm where you are I'm sort of tired of
this piece but also I can't stop looking
it's almost like a horrible car crash or
something like that full disclosure I've
what I was watching landed real before
this whole thing happened and I saw his
content it was going in a certain
direction and I feel like I felt and a
lot of people felt that recently he has
completely shifted into a new direction
and there are a lot of questions about
you know this fundraising he's been
doing how transparent he's been and yeah
I feel like at this point I'm so far in
that I I have to at least wrap the bow
tie the bow whatever before letting this
thing go finally yeah I feel similarly
I've been trying I mean I was primarily
interested in it for the wider issues
that it put put out there free speech
censorship but the weaponization of free
speech is just a huge in huge thing as
well like playing the censorship cloud
playing the free speech card and for me
I feel that those are such powerful
cards and such important cards that
we've got to be kind of very aware and
very careful about kind of how that's
used and how that can be abused and I
think just to bring people up to date
there has been something of a backlash
which we'll get to soon like the
audience his own audience people have
donated money especially have kind of
been asking some pretty tough questions
and also there's another angle that
you're much more familiar with than I am
which is other sort of business
practices he's brought in this five
coins to five million with with ticket
akari
ticket owari tickity Tiwari tiga Tiwari
and another another business guy and
you've you've actually focused really
carefully on that in a lot of the other
films that you've put out yeah I think
it's like a it's it's a massive question
a massive problem when you have someone
you know raising raising all these funds
for in the name of freedom but also
collecting all these emails also getting
all this attention and saying like I'm
the guy that you guys can trust to give
you the truth but then you're selling
some crypto what I characterizes a scam
and that becomes all of a sudden a
problem I I think what you said is true
weapon
freedom of speech because it's such a
powerful motivator it's of course a
universal human value so when you hear
hey I'm the freedom of speech guy who's
gonna say no to that
right like everybody is a freedom of
speech guy almost so so I think it's
important to say that look I don't agree
with YouTube's you know censorship here
I said that from day one of even about
David Icke day one I said you know what
I don't believe with them just taking
him down I think there needs to be a
broader discussion but what's happened
is he's weaponized that and turned it
into let me fundraise four million
dollars because I'm the guy that's gonna
protect free speech and that's just
simply not the truth yeah and I think
the thing that sort of sent me over the
edge to record something else was the
declaration that he put out and that
seems to have pushed a lot of people
over the edge well one thing is that he
said he was going to stop the
crowdfunding at a million and then he
started rate trying to raise another 250
thousand a month so an extra three
million and then it was this declaration
that got put out which was basically
sign here and we want to get a hundred
thousand signatures of course you have
to give your email address to sign up
and why that really so within that he's
also framing himself as like the whole
thing is centered on him I've been
battling for free speech they've been
doing this to me it's all about me it's
like and what kind of pushed me over the
edge was that in the UK we actually have
a petition that we have a function
whether if you get 10,000 signatures on
this petition it will be considered to
be debated a hundred thousand signatures
it will be possibly debated in
Parliament so there's actually a way of
doing that that's an ethical way that
doesn't mean you're giving someone your
email address that they're then using it
to market to you so that just that kind
of pushed me over the edge of just kind
of transparent email harvesting in the
name of this kind of what like like
genuine I think is a sacred value I
think this is a sacred value and it
really yeah I feel I feel very energized
by when when that is is weaponized and
then it gets caught up in
we're in we're in a struggle with the
tech platforms a lot of us feel like
we're in a struggle with the tech
platforms we're worried about being
demonetised were worried about worrying
about we're worried about having some of
our stuff taken down so I think we've
got a basically clean house we've got to
kind of call out the people who are
using those really powerful arguments
for their own benefits
yeah for sure I think the question here
is what's the intention behind the
digital freedom platform I think that's
a large question I mean whether he's
spending the money poorly or not
what are Brian roses intentions because
for a long time he's been saying oh I
just care about free speech I just care
about this I'm being silenced bubble
over one thing I brought sort of to
light though in one of my recent videos
is that Brian roses channel has never
been doing better
he has seized an opportunity and his
views went like this he was like kind of
stagnant and then all of a sudden he
starts talking about censorship he's
like this in terms of views in terms of
subscribers in terms of people backing
him in terms of donations in terms of
people for his email list in terms of
his own audience pool within his
audience that was already there all of a
sudden they care a lot more and so you
have to wonder with each thing he's
doing is he doing it because he wants
freedom of speech or is he capitalizing
on what could be characterized as an
extremely lucrative situation yeah and
let's recap I mentioned a few things in
that little spiel before one of which
was the the fact that he supposedly
raised a million it's hard to know
because that the counter was actually on
the London real site I was skeptical
that he actually had but you you think
that he may well have done which I think
is worth unpacking in itself but also
what happened next cuz then there was
this stage 6 or phase 6 money-making
thing which was we need 250,000 a month
to keep this thing running yeah I think
it's worth going back a little bit
because it's all happened so that now if
you weren't present for each subsequent
stage you could think oh it was always
planned out to be forfeit six phases and
this is one of my biggest criticisms of
lended reel so it started with phase one
oh I'm gonna livestream a million people
then right after he reaches his goal all
of a sudden he introduces phase two and
three he didn't even have four or five
and four or five
six yet that's all came on later so then
he goes okay all I'm raising for is now
more controversial voices and blockchain
where he got blockchain from nobody
knows cuz nobody really understands why
it's necessary it's not so then he
raises that money then he goes okay well
now I need to raise more money and the
the logic there was that okay David give
me money because really the intention is
just to fundraise to the end of our
fundraising date and then I'm shutting
it off the only you know rationale for
putting more and more stretch goals was
always well we're just gonna continue
fundraising continue taking your money
until we go to the fundraising date that
was always the plan that was the whole
rationale for creating nine hundred
thousand dollars in stretch goals I want
everyone to remember a hundred dollars
and he said repeatedly that that would
be the end let's just play it play a
clip where he says that this is gonna go
on for another ten days until Rose Ike
and we're shutting off we're we gonna be
closing down this fundraising campaign
very soon so again we're closing this
thing out on May third perfect and then
all of a sudden the fundraising ends he
raises over million dollars I believe he
did I believe he did and I'll explain
that in a second but then he all of a
sudden moves on without missing a beat
without any kind of explanation it's
okay well now we need running costs and
he hikes up the price to another three
million dollars over the calendar year
but why I think he actually raised the
money because it doesn't make sense for
him to put I think the donation fatigue
that it creates in your audience when
you if you lied about raising a million
dollars is not worth the press of
raising a million dollars like who wants
to raise who wants to donate to a guy
who's already has a million dollars like
nobody so I think of anything if you
were to lie about a donation you would
probably under underrepresented but I
just generally think I don't know one
way or the other I think it just if we
just think in terms of rational actors
he probably didn't lie about it yeah I
mean I think it's worth digging into
that because my sense was that the that
he probably didn't raise a million I
mean that the count was on his website
it was hard to verify there was no
verification but you've looked at these
kind of tactics before and you fit you
think that people have raised that kind
of money doing this kind of thing before
is that without
be fair summary oh yeah if the
skepticism is a million dollars it's a
lot of money fear not because the the
tactics that's he's employing here or
what I see all the time among fake gurus
and it's the persuasion tactics that I
see all the time among internet
marketers and in London real actually
has been leveling up I mean he's been
improving his game quite considerably
because for a while you know he didn't
name his his audience all of a sudden
with this thing came along he goes oh
you guys are the London real army right
now
that's brilliant it tribe Eliza's your
audience and all of a sudden there's a
bad guy because what does an army do it
fights I jokingly call my my followers
the coffee Zilla army as like a play on
what all these gurus do but like
seriously it's a great way to try belies
your audience and go oh we're standing
for something we're a team we're
together right so he gets his audience
together and then who's the enemy well
you have to get him an enemy oh it's the
big tech platforms who censored me and
we're going to war with the big tech and
it's a bit of a David Goliath story
let's be real which is also super
powerful persuasion tactic everyone
believes in the underdog right everyone
will fundraise for the underdog so then
it's poor poor Brian
censored Brian he just needs your help
and he's gonna go to war and we're gonna
be the brave underdogs who are gonna win
the day and win free speech back it's
this whole message that's so powerful
easily can MIT can raise a million
dollars and in fact I think it's very
evident the fact that he's putting
stretch goals beyond that I think he
believes and I think he's probably right
if his audience doesn't turn against him
as it kind of is that he could have
raised more yeah let's come to that
because that that was the most
astonishing thing I mean we both saw it
on Sunday night so he initially posted
the a community post on YouTube saying
with a link to the kind of statement
come and sign up and declare and that
got really really bad comments a lot of
really negative comments I I took a
screenshot before he do it he deleted
that post and then a couple of days
later and then he posted another one
basically basically criticizing his
audience saying losers focus on winners
winners focus on winning
what have you been doing and that got an
even more kind of negative response from
people who've been who'd actually given
him money and then Brian rose himself
was in the comments arguing with his own
audience basically and will show some of
this basically saying you didn't donate
I guess you didn't donate I mean you've
got some of those comments in front to
you what was what was your favorite oh
my gosh I mean there's it may be worth
reading off a few because they're
beautiful like I can't imagine a bigger
trainwreck with your audience because
basically he was getting all these
questions all this pressure and it's
like one day he just snapped the weird
thing was the whole post was about
explaining the London real platform in
like a really passive-aggressive way but
then in the comment section any follow
up was met with I don't have to explain
myself so it's like this weird thing of
I'm explaining myself but I don't have
to explain myself because you're a loser
if you're questioning me and like the
way he went off to his audience was
insane winners focus on winning ciub of
scammers this guy says scammers focus on
scamming and London ryoko's like you let
me guess you didn't donate here's
another one number one ask for money
London real money gets shit done fool
let me guess you're broke so let's
unpack that he's cursing at his audience
calling them fools that that may have
donated may have donated we don't know
in this case and then he goes let me
guess you're broke
so he's belittling his audience he's
calling them dumb and then it was it's a
it was absolutely insane I've never seen
a meltdown quite like this and I was
just waiting for it to be deleted and it
was up for at least 24 hours
this guy says David Icke and Brian Rose
are controlled opposition sorry if you
don't see it London real you are a
controlled idiot sorry if you don't see
it and just to be clear it was deleted
eventually yeah I mean I think both of
us looked at and I was genuinely
concerned I I was kind of like wow this
is this is kind of extreme and then
yesterday he brought out another very
sort of slickly produced
piece that was clearly in response to
that but he obviously didn't mention it
he didn't mention that he done anything
he didn't mention any of the argument
just just sort of I need to be more
transparent clearly I have a problem
with communicating and I need to do
better
hey it's Brian rose from London real and
I just wanted to take a few minutes and
talk about the digital freedom platform
and hopefully talk about some of the
questions and some of the
misunderstandings that have been kind of
flying around out there and hopefully
give you some clarity as to what's going
on so I made some notes and I'm just
gonna go here kind of off the cuff and
stream-of-consciousness as far as what's
been going on first of all I just want
to say that I am notoriously a bad
communicator and so that's what today is
all about
I got an unsettled feeling watching that
extremely unsettled because the
difference between what he said a day
ago and what he said the very next day
was so far apart it seemed like I was
watching I don't know what I'd say like
a chameleon something changing colors
purely based on environmental factors
which made it totally unbelievable you
know because one second he's calling his
audience idiots and then the next second
he's sitting in front of a camera saying
you know what I was bad at communicating
I want to explain this whole thing to
you guys I want to be open to criticism
it's like wait this is not the same
person we saw just yesterday and he
didn't address it at all either like he
deleted it
he won't address it he won't address the
fact that he was belittling his audience
whatever and so I think it's extremely
strange and like I think Brian just felt
trapped and I think it shows how much he
can sort of put it on you know like one
second he totally believes he doesn't
need to explain himself the next second
I really care about you guys and I
really want to do better and edit it up
very weird yeah and I think it's worth
kind of flagging up some of the other
stuff that we there's kind of happening
in the background as well and then I've
been sent so we know that they delete
some comments off the YouTube channel
they also have their own internal London
real messaging system that is
pree flagging certain certain work
keywords and certain topics that you
can't post so that includes like someone
someone sent me some screenshots that
that includes dailymotion that includes
snake oil so anyone trying to discuss
the stuff internally is not allowed to
so I think this is worth flagging up
which is another thing about sort of yes
free speech we can talk about anything
but don't question me I mean that's
that's really quite astonishing and then
another thing that we found out from
quite a few different places is that
there was a big a lot of his staff were
not happy about him doing the the David
Icke interview they thought it was not
the right interview to do in the current
situation they didn't want they didn't
think it was responsible
they knew what David Icke was gonna be
saying when he came on so a lot of his
staff objected to the David I continued
happening it at all and subsequent to
lap 2 that a lot of them were either
sacked or made redundant quite quite a
large number of London real staff he
went he went from sort of what 14 or 15
staff down to a very very small number
of staff that was before any of this
fundraising happened I think something
worth highlighting here is that we've
had people coming to us from behind the
scenes we haven't talked about this in
either of our investigations but with
some knowledge of the London real
situation we've got a much clearer
picture of what's going on that do raise
inconsistencies maybe hypocrisy is
because while you can make the free
speech argument like you said about
David Icke I don't even think you have
to I think you can simply point out the
fact that Brian Rose wants it both ways
he wants to on the one hand say he's all
about free speech free speech free
speech you can say whatever you want I
fight for free speech but on the other
hand he also wants to censor comments at
a critical of him like how can he want
you to to not censor anything of his but
he wants to censor his audience himself
he wants the control goes on his on his
digital freedom platform in his own
terms of service on the platform that he
says is so much for free speech it says
that long-stem limited at any point can
just remove anything they find objects
aníbal if that isn't a Community
Guidelines I've never heard of one
before like that it's just Community
Guidelines repurposed for Brian Rose it
it seems like this
Brian Rose is unhappy with YouTube
calling the shots and so he wanted to
make a platform where he called the
shots but that doesn't get a lot of
press who's gonna build Brian Rose his
own platform well if all of a sudden you
call it the digital freedom platform you
get a lot more traction and to speak
about this as this skeleton crew of
employees for a second I think it's
worth talking about only in the context
of look Brian Rose wants to use your
fundraising and I'm talking to the
audience here the people who you know
donated to Brian rose he wants to use
that to hire more staff look look at his
face six it's higher 20 people for
digital blah blah blah blah blah he just
fired people like that hasn't been
brought brought to light at all after
right after firing people
he's fundraising to hire people so he's
just moving people off his payroll and
moving it right on to the audience's
payroll and I think people should be
upset about I think they have the right
to be upset about it because things
aren't being transparently communicated
here yeah I wanted to also just ask
because something you said yesterday
when we when we chatted before this made
a lot of sense and I don't think it's
been spelled out and that is just a
major kind of issue with the whole thing
because also in his in his latest
message he said yes I used dailymotion
which was a part of the the initial film
that I put out like actually he's using
dailymotion it's not a it's not a
private streaming and it was funny
because a lot of comments are like
you're using dailymotion because it's
free and I was like yeah I don't want to
spend your money I'd rather it be free
until I have to spend it now we've gone
to a dedicated provider for all the
controversial service but I will
continue to use free means and free
software because I don't want to use the
funds of this platform but when we have
to spend I will spend but I will spend
frugally but you you actually kind of
flagged up that there's no real reason
given that he's already said look I'll
use free platforms and save your money
if like if I can because I'm caring
about how I'm spending your money
there's no real reason for him to be
doing any of this because I'd be using
bit suit
it's the it's the funniest thing in the
world to me because it makes zero sense
as soon as Brian Rose said that I was
like okay your whole thing makes zero
since you've raised all this money for
nothing other than yourself and your own
ego about having your own platform
because listen guys listen to me for a
second okay think about it this way what
costs all the money livestreaming why
not just do like put it on bit shoot
right they're not gonna censor you this
thing already exists you don't have to
pay for it your your supporters sure
don't have to pay for it embed it in
your platform and then all of a sudden
say this guy's we're not gonna do it
live what's so hard about that why does
he need to do it live it's not like he's
he's a twitch streamer who reads off
donations it's not like he interacts
with the audience give me one rationale
for why live-streaming is so critical
when it's the most expensive part and he
says in his little thing right I'm
extremely frugal I would never spend
your money if I don't have to but all of
a sudden there's this ego trip about it
has to go up like why the majority of
people who watch content are watching it
pre-recorded like that's just how it
works
it's fine and also you can pre record
and do a premiere like people do on
YouTube kind of simulate the liveness of
it I mean I always rag on people for
doing pre-recorded webinars and
pretending it's live but this would be
the one instance where I would I would
give Brian Rose full permission and I
wouldn't rag on him for doing a
pre-recorded live webinar if it was to
save people millions of dollars in
pointless live streaming costs that
ultimately again what does it serve
except for Brian Rose's ego to think
about to two possibilities one he builds
his digital freedom platform for
millions of dollars and you get a live
stream the other is he just embeds it on
bit shoot where costs $0 tell me the
difference in actual like practice if
you if I don't think Brian Rose can do
it it makes zero sense it's gets me
fired up because this is the whole thing
this is the entire thing is he keeps
saying I'm frugal I'm doing it for you
guys that it out we don't have a digital
freedom platform the most egotistical
thing I ever heard was we're creating
the first ever ever digital freedom
platform and we have decided to create
the very first digital freedom platform
it's not
except in name only like people like
bitch shoot have been doing this forever
there's a bunch of other platforms as
well who are freedom of speech like
platforms this is just Brian's own
spin-off and his own egotistical you
know ramblings about yeah this is the
first one ever absolutely not
yeah and this is this is a slight segue
but it's why so you go back to a lot of
the platform wars patreon for example
there was a whole thing I think around
Christmas last year or the year before
where patreon kicked off sargon of akkad
and sam Harris left Jordan Pederson left
we left rebel wisdom left we we now only
have to sign up on our website because
we're like we don't want to be at the
mercy of these big tech platforms just
making decisions on who who gets to be
who's who's a person and who's a nun
person and so a lot of us dealt with
these issues back then we thought about
these questions and obviously Jordan
peed and went Peterson went off and
creative think spot the platform because
if you go and create a platform you have
to wrestle with actual issues like if
Bryan Rose had gone off and said look we
need to create a digital freedom
platform and now are now aligned with
other people who wanted to do this
because we're all worried about this
issue that would have been a completely
different dynamic because in that but in
that dynamic he would have actually had
to face some of the problems that
everyone else has had to face when they
when they deal with this which is one do
you allow Nazis on your platform like
are you gonna have any gatekeeping
whatsoever who's gonna make those
decisions like we all you deal with
those questions if you actually deal
with the problem properly but he didn't
deal with the problem properly you just
basically said okay I'll create this
thing called the digital freedom
platform that's gonna be independent of
London real even though it's not it's
fully owned by him and it's embedded
within the London real website did you
talk about that for a second because I
think that's like the weirdest thing
that he calls it a dependent when it's
not um I think it's worth just playing
the clip just to sort of back up that he
did definitely declare that was gonna be
the case and it's about something that I
want to separate from London real and
have it is this separately funded
platform so again the
freedom platform is a completely
separate entity that's the thing that I
can't get my head around is why he ever
said that if it was always going to be
hosted within the London real website
and I think you mentioned something that
because you you called the cast to find
out how much the the stream was going to
be or the stream had been for the IKE
interview and they said so you got a
figure for that and you also he kind of
conceded that the cost of the streaming
alone for Roseate three was sixty two
thousand five hundred dollars you also
worked out with that that was a tacit
admission why wouldn't you explain that
sure yeah I'd love to first of all let
me take a big W on this because everyone
in my comment section was saying that I
was wrong about how much it cost and
like I was incorrect because of like
some technicality about what they said I
said it was 60 mm the real cost was 61
thousand or I might have that flip so I
was dead on okay let me let me hold that
real quick okay I'm done but the second
thing was about concerning the the rest
of the money right because he goes oh no
it really did cost 100,000 odds was well
over a hundred thousand well over well
why if it only costs $60,000 to live
stream let's just recap I think you've
said a lot that maybe people weren't
aware they might not be following oh
sure basically he claimed it was going
to be a hundred thousand dollars to
stream like three yes it was found out a
few people found out that it was done
through day cast you called a cast and
they said oh hang on you said I want to
stream to a million people how much
would that cost and they said oh
actually we've just done that this
weekend and it cost sixty one thousand
dollars that's correct
yeah and so Brian Rose later concedes
that point in in his little update or
whatever but then he quickly follows it
up with hey whoa wait but we had to
upgrade the servers on London real in
order to handle the the number of people
on the platform so not only do you have
to have live streaming bandwidth but you
also have to have server bandwidth for
your actual website itself and the costs
of the hosting upgrades and the
additional services which means
everything that we have on our WordPress
every single plug in all the software
grades was well over a hundred thousand
well over but hang on because that's
upgrading London real which supposedly
should be independent from the digital
freedom platform so again the digital
freedom platform is a completely
separate entity so he spent sixty
thousand dollars on the digital freedom
platform forty thousand dollars
upgrading his personal servers for
London real so it's not at all you're
just using money that your donators gave
you that you said wouldn't be used for
London real to upgrade London real
because that's where the digital freedom
platform is and now he's he's spending
some new thing about oh no I had to do
that because there's in such a short
timeframe now moving over but this is
one of a one of many things where he's
trying to like after the fact
spin up new narratives spin up some new
explanation the whole problem is that
the things he's saying turn out to be
lies him saying that he's gonna stop
fundraising he can maybe create a
rational afterwards but it turned out to
be a lie him saying that it's an
independent thing that he's not going to
spend money from digital freedom
platform on landed real that is a lie he
admitted it in a video anyone can watch
right now that he spent at least forty
thousand dollars or more on server space
and upgrades and whatever for London
real it doesn't make sense yeah and I
wanted to ask about the the other kind
of business practices because obviously
he as you can see from the the social
blade stats there's been a lot of
visitors to London real everyone who
signed up to the freedom platform was
given their email address and the very
first emails that people were sent were
for what looks to me like kind of get
rich quick schemes with so tikka Tiwari
I if you actually check him out he's he
is no longer licensed as a broker he was
I don't want to get I don't want to get
this wrong and be very precise with the
wording but you I know that you like
coffee Zilla what you what you look at a
lot is these kind of get-rich-quick
schemes the people behind them and
what's going on so I love your take on
on on all of the
sure thing so yeah to give a little
backstory tika Tiwari is this crypto
guru and he for a small fee of a few
thousand dollars I believe in this case
it was two thousand dollars you can get
his special newsletter where he's going
to break down the five coins to five
million dollars so five crypto coins and
you can make five million dollars if
that's not a get-rich-quick scheme I
defy you to find one but London real
what he did is he gets all these new
followers to his newsletter and then or
his email list and he does what is known
as renting out your list so it's
basically where you have this new and a
lot of people do this and I have a lot
of ethical problems with it but if you
have some product you're pushing so you
say hey Steven I want to rent out your
list so you sell it for me and so I
agree you pay me some sum of money and
maybe some back-end kickbacks for if
people buy your product and I go and
promote you on my email list now the
problem is is if what you're selling is
a scam then I'm promoting a scam to my
followers and I'm making money off of
the scam and so this guy's out here he's
charging thousands of dollars for
information that a lot of people think
can be found online for free he's
charging thousands of dollars for a
newsletter that's run by Agora one of
the largest newsletter manufacturers and
they're constantly pumping out
get-rich-quick schemes I could show you
probably I've like probably a hundred
letters from them saying this is the new
way to make a million dollars this is
this is the undiscovered thing and it's
their whole business model every month
every week every day they have some new
get-rich-quick scheme they get the
suckers to fall into it because who buys
into get-rich-quick schemes well it's
desperate poor people unfortunately I
wish that wasn't the case or old people
you know and and so this is what's
happening so Brian Rose under the guise
of you know I have all these new emails
then sells a crypto scam
well after he sells it interestingly he
deletes the videos he deletes the
evidence of him promoting that scheme
because now he's made his money and he
can move on because the event had
already happened but Danis just thought
let's to stop that because sir I did
see I didn't notice that they have been
deleted until you pointed it out but so
he sent he sent the email out to his
supporters and then had like two or
three videos on London real it was like
four or five it was like four or five is
a lot with with tika Tiwari pushing this
this scheme and then afterwards deleted
those videos which in itself is kind of
bizarre thing to do I mean he probably
claimed that YouTube took them down
maybe but that wouldn't make any sense
because you know there's a bunch of
other ticket to worry videos up so
they're not taking down ticket to where
he videos no Brian took them down I feel
confident saying that and it's because
he got a backlash on it he'll talk about
like freedom and not give transparency
right up to the point when he's
criticized and then he will change tact
right he go he promotes this crypto
thing right before he's criticized then
all of a sudden deletes the videos he
says oh you guys are losers at you're
sorry you're it he says you guys are
idiots
you know you you can't question me I
don't have to explain this to you right
up into the point where he gets
criticized then he turns around and says
no no actually I'm ready to be
transparent with you guys I'm ready to
tell you the truth and to be clear he's
not done promoting these types of things
because now he's promoting Tim Sykes you
know a somewhat infamous penny stocks
trader who has some really expensive
courses newsletters etc as well yeah
it's and I'm also interested to hear a
bit more about some of these tactics
because they seem very like there's real
similarities between that and sort of
quite kind of culty dynamics like
creating in-groups and out-groups not
accepting criticism like all of these
things we actually put out a film with
Jamie wheel where he talked about I
think we called it how to how to spot a
cult and he said well obviously you've
got kind of cult II cults which are kind
of spiritually oriented but you also get
kind of lots of sales tactics lots of
sales techniques a kind of in that same
ballpark and we'll play with those same
same techniques the silencing of
criticism is huge I cannot first of all
I've been legally threatened to you know
stop talking about what I'm talking
about because they don't like criticism
I've had students who get sued by the
people they take their course because
then they speak out and the person
doesn't like what they're saying so they
sue them you know there's a lot of ways
of engineering social proof and
engineering the lack of criticism which
is really common among these things you
have to build this unquestioning
following which is very hard to do on
the Internet but can be done with the
right amount of money for legal to
basically force people to shut up with
the right amount of engineering SEO to
make sure your favorable favorable
results go to the top right so this is
super common which is definitely a cult
aspect was there anything that we missed
out that we were looking to cover I
think I think I have something on a cell
phone so David I want to ask you a
question which is you know London real
is in this very precarious situation
with his audience on the one hand he
wants to tell he wants to be transparent
enough to where he avoids the criticism
that he's not being transparent on the
other hand there's been clearly things
he's been avoiding like his own Terms of
Service the spending of money on London
real instead of you know the digital
freedom platform you know his his
unwillingness to move to platforms like
bit shoot to save all the fees the
likelihood of him being able to win a
lawsuit with $250,000 but he's in this
kind of careful balance tenuous
tightrope walk and it seems like the
house of cards may be about to fall down
but do you think there's anything he
could redeem here do you think there's
something some Redemption arc that makes
sense do you think there's an apology
that basically needs to be made do you
think the project needs to be scrapped
if you're Brian Rose where do you go
from here hmm yeah that's that's a
really good question all the way through
this I've been sort of trying to yeah
just to make to keep in mind that there
is a real person on the end of this and
not to get dragged into because I think
I said in one of my last updates like
the the pattern that I see Brian doing
and many other people doing is what
venkatesh Rao is called the Internet of
beefs which is that the incentive
structure of the Internet is driving
people more and more towards combat and
building armies and getting what what
Rao called
nights and MOOCs which is a brilliant
like it's a brilliant brilliant article
if anyone hasn't read it and I've never
seen a more obvious transparent example
of someone who completely did dispenses
with any of the metaphors and just talks
about creating an army just goes all-out
with the war kind of talk it's it's it's
kind of a how-to so how do you talk
about this how do you pay attention to
without getting drawn into that same
dynamic yourself how do I get drawn into
kind of looking at it making films about
it without just feeding that dynamic and
one of them is this sort of and it's the
morality tale like the psychological
dimensions and the morality tale of it
is also just such a fascinating thing to
look at like what must it be like right
now to be in that space what must it be
like to be to have built what looks to
me into you like a kind of a trap for
yourself
like it seems certainly on Sunday and
some of the comments of the latest
videos it does seem like the audience is
really starting to turn and because it's
one thing to put out a film that people
don't like it's another thing to take
lots of money off people and then insult
them for asking you questions like
that's a very different dynamic like
it's hard enough when you're when when
you put out a film that your audience
doesn't like it God knows what it's like
what you've actually taken lots of money
off them for something and they're
asking hang on what happened to my money
what happened to this platform and so
yeah the psychological dimension of and
someone who's been open in the past
about having had addiction problems
about having it's like and I think a lot
of people feel that they know him like
that's that's part of the the journey
with London real is that people feel
that they know who Brian Rose is to some
degree and I think I said in my first
film
my sense is there are two Brian roses
there's the there's the businessman
mentored by Dan Pena who is just this
sort of ruthless shaft II grandmother to
get ahead kind of American we also the
guy who was honest about his addiction
problems and has like those two things
exist at the same time I've had more
than one person who knows Brian Rose has
known Brian rose for a while say that
that was absolutely accurate you can
almost picture him with like the the
better and the worse angels of his
nature on boat on either side and and
he's been more and more swayed towards
sort of the danpei Nia the multilevel
marketing the just kind of use your
gather as many emails as possible and
use it to to kind of get as much out of
your followers as you can and that
that's been a trajectory and I don't see
a way out that does not involve some
kind of miracle per some kind of apology
but human psychology is very difficult
like to actually do that is extremely
difficult and I wonder how I don't know
I and that's part of this as well is
like I don't know when when and if
something like this comes crashing down
what people do and I think realizing
that that's yeah the balance of kind of
rights and responsibilities of do I have
a responsibility to call this out I
think so as I said in my first film I
think the whole double bind of freedom
of speech is that we have to use it and
it becomes a a self-correcting process
or we're probably going to lose it
because the big tech platforms are just
gonna say we're gonna decide who's
allowed to speak and who isn't so yeah
I've kind of wrestled with with this
from the beginning of like how can you
do this in a way that is honest is a
authentic is not not seeing someone as
an enemy that needs to be attacked but
as someone who is like in some ways
there go all of us like some of the some
of the other things that this brings up
to me is like the weird incentive
structures of alternative media sure
like that there's lots of these so
basically this whole business model of
you have two million YouTube subscribers
there's a lot of there's a lot of places
like this now which have I find in
different ways to monetize attention
they have attention through the people
they've got on they get more people to
go on because of the all the other
people they've had go on so that's
there's a lot of those around there's a
lot of those around and the temptation
to like I mean rebel wisdom has
something like that as a business model
in that it's a it's a media channel
first and foremost but we also have to
pay the bills we have memberships we run
online courses so those so you can't
just say oh the business model is wrong
it's a much more nuanced conversation
than that it's like how can you know
when you're being authentic and when
you're you're not being authentic yeah
let me jump in here real quick because I
think I think it's fair to say that okay
maybe you know if I were in the same
shoes there go I whatever but I think at
the same time you have to be aware that
what he's done has when you descend into
the particular you can see some
definitely areas where he just went
wrong where he's talking about head
faking his audience you can't do that to
an audience when you're raising a
million dollars you just can't you can't
tell them hey I'm having to lie to you
about certain things you can't tell them
that you're gonna build a digital
freedom platform but then like weeks
later say oh by the way I've been using
free platforms all along and you should
have known that and then not explain why
you're not just using the most obvious
free speech platform that there is you
can't say that you're gonna stop
fundraising and then keep on fundraising
under the name of this value that we all
hold so dear but then really not stand
up to scrutiny when it's questioned do
you really
and up for that value at all I think
there are some very clear areas where
he's gone from okay you can monetize an
audience their ethical ways to monetize
attention nobody works for free but
that's not what's happening here that's
not why people are upset people are
upset because of the lying because of
the duplicity because of the hypocrisy
the gigantic gaping hypocrisy
surrounding this whole thing so while we
can kind of amuse that you know but for
the grace of God there go i all we want
but at the end of the day we can point
to concrete things that concretely has
have been the reason for his sort of
downfall and the reason that he's in the
position that he is I heard a friend of
mine who was talking to about this I
think it really sums up the way a lot of
people are feeling right now he goes man
it's such a shame what's been going on
with lended real because the guy had so
many great guests on he goes I don't
agree with everything the guy said but
he had some really great guests on and
he was building a long-term reputation
that was gonna kind of last and build
into something sort of greater than what
London real currently is and that has
sort of been traded I mean this person
that had a pretty decent amount of
respect for this person who's close to
friend of mine no longer has that
respect he's like yeah I won't watch
another like what am I gonna watch the
guy who's having all the conspiracy
theorists on who's you know sort of
lying about the way he's handling this
money no he's not going to anymore and I
think a lot of people are wrestling with
this London real they had in their mind
like six weeks ago versus the London
real and the actions of Brian Rose that
they see before them today
nice little rant to end on sorry no it's
good it was good I think I think you're
right you're right I'm I'm trying to
hold all of those perspectives at the
same time I think you're right in in
that I'm wary of that dynamic of
unexamined judgment of other people
because that comes back and bite you in
the ass as well it sure does which is
why I think it's important to say and I
said it in my video yesterday but I
think that we should say here we have
both reached out to Brian Rose on
numerous occasions to give him the
chance to respond we have I
I personally emailed him four times
David how many times do you think you've
emailed him six six times so between us
ten times have we reached out to Bryan
in the effort of getting an examined
judgment in the effort of getting an
understood full 360 of the situation it
has not been us that is unwilling to
come to the table unfortunately it has
been Bryan rose for what he may have his
own reasons they might be good reasons
but it's been his decision to leave the
people who are criticizing him out of
the full picture and unfortunately if
that creates a skewed perspective at
some point that cannot be placed on our
shoulders yeah I agree I want you to be
my lawyer if it's ever needed now you
don't I talk a big game but yeah it's
been a lot of fun kind of going through
this it's been interesting it sort of
been heartbreaking I've sort of
experienced the gamut of emotions
traversing this topic it's sort of been
the longest forum series that I've done
and it's been sort of the biggest fall
that I've seen I mean I don't know if
London rails reputation is as severely
wounded as I perceive it to be but it
seems it seems really bad and it's not
something that I relish and I try not to
get too bloodthirsty about these things
but um yeah it just is what it is I
guess yeah and it's all your fault
that's right I'm sure someone will come
on it'll be about the haters you know
the people that the criticizers the
malicious forces yeah it's the
controlled opposition that paying is
enough to don't say that even as a joke
hey it'd be great if I was getting paid
a bunch of money for this I'm doing it
because I love it so so yeah I think
that basically covers it huh yeah that's
really good Stephen thank you and let's
try and get this out as soon as possible
pleasure hey everyone this is a very
quick message about the rebel wisdom
festival at the end of May which was
going to be our biggest ever in-person
event with 400 people in London
obviously that's not happening now but
we've brought it online and we've made
it free for everybody two days of
rebellious ideas and profound
experiences so we still have all the
speakers that we were going to have for
the festival including Daniel Schmidt
hamburger Nora Bateson and we're also
adding new speakers all the time we've
just added Douglas rushkoff from Jamie
wheel plus a load of great facilitators
offering practice and skills to build up
sovereignty sense-making in connection
so sign up at the link and we'll see you
there