so before I get into anything I'm just
gonna slide over here and get my water I
should have had already
I'll see I'm a little more prepared
first people come in and although I
still do no idea how to respond to
people in youtube I just watched a vice
documentary called dying third picture
something like that ALS and I'm gonna
make this about me and I'm feeling just
very inadequate and trying to get this
idea out in the world that's a solution
for everything it is a solution for what
I just saw in ALS both figuring out why
our bodies do it figuring out the best
course of treatment knowing what drug
trials are out there and getting access
to the system through the bureaucracy
with us applaud or take notes then it
all over the freaking place don't you go
expanded access program so if there is a
drug going through but it's like so much
paperwork
and when you're dealing with health
challenges already it's hard to have
more bureaucracy to have more hip work
to fill out like I know how much my
condition has affected my life and how
much it's taught me as well I don't wish
it on my worst enemy
I I'm in pain and exhausted and I don't
know how to not be accept to do this
thing that helps the whole world live
healthier that helps us track the
pharmaceutical companies that helps us
eat better and live better
like I can't medically handle my neuro
system cannot handle stress so I have D
stressed my life as much as is humanly
possible but being Who I am I know too
much what what's going on in the
world and my personality is I just want
to learn more and more and more about it
which would be a problem because I can't
handle stress except that my brain also
when I allow it to do what it wants to
do is able to think of ways to create a
world that not only helps me it's like
okay you can't actually get up and make
yourself a salad and make yourself a
smoothie and eat won't like you can't
with the spoons you have can't
necessarily eat better but you can
create an entire system in your head to
help everybody each other if we create
the technological tools to do so it's
like that seems ridiculous it's like you
can't handle stress so your brain thinks
up a way of distressing the entire world
because what is stressful is that
there's Wars and people dying and people
in pain so in order to save myself I
have to save everybody and that's beyond
ridiculous but it's what is happening
I'm dealing with that while dealing with
health challenges well I'll try to
figure out what it is I can do to get
the idea of the world which is basically
what I am doing this I mean online doing
what I can do with the equipment I have
with
[Music]
and dealing with my own inner and
physical that comes up as it comes
up and listening to you the path that
I'm supposed to take and trusting that
it works because I've seen it work time
and time again it's just doesn't ever
work in the vision that I have for it
works in many in any other amazing way
but in following it it's like okay go on
Twitter it's like I'm gonna get
thousands of followers it's exactly what
the world's looking for it's like no
that's not what happens but I do get in
contact with the odd person who's doing
amazing things and hearing about their
project and able to create that
community from quick that I don't know
how to create community like that's what
I'm having a problem with I don't know
I want to collaborate with the entire
world I can think of the technological
tools that help that because I'm not
going to create a community I'm like oh
I've always wanted or did always want I
don't know if I currently whine like a
group of friends like was on friends
listen calm like I wanted a tight-knit
group of people that got together all
the time and did because it's like yeah
but that's never what I've had I've only
ever had like one best friend and then
if they are the hug that also has
surrounding friends that I've been
friends with surrounding friends and so
being able to say okay well how do if
that is what I want how can I create it
how can I create it when clearly it's
not something I naturally drawn to my
life and there's like all the books out
there on how to you know make friends
and influence people and do what it's
like that's not
authentic that's not me being me and
getting you to have people like me for
me which is the Oh the way that I'm not
willing to be less me to be liked
because there's no there's nothing you
can give me in return that's gonna make
that worth it so maybe my life I'll be
blessed me if my life is on the line but
only so I can be more more me later or
my kid can be more her later I don't
know how to get it out in the world I
know I need a person I know I'm just
supposed to do it to the best of my
ability until somebody else comes up and
this is not at all what I put is the
title written slightly so I got the
health challenge which is what I'm
sitting with so I'm like right you have
your own health challenge you have all
these people in the world like
there's so many people with ALS why are
there so many people with cancer or
where there's so many people autoimmune
diseases and neurological diseases why
are there so many people he brain tumors
for people with like it's ridiculous and
there's so much money for research but
it goes into this for-profit system
which is ridiculous and the health
crisis I'm talking about in the title
was that Canaries in the coal
mine and we're not listening and we
can't handle the number of sick people
right now financially looking after them
wait till the boomers age and my
generation's not healthy every
generation is getting less healthy not
more healthy and so having I can only
imagine what my kids generation won't be
like maybe we've corrected it maybe they
will live longer than us and be
healthier than us but when we're
destroying our planet and creating
misinformation and creating a world is
based on stress and anxiety and being in
competition with each other and being
there's so much wrong with what we're
doing and I know how to solve it get it
out into the world because I'm dealing
with my own interpersonal limitations
and as I work on that I'm more able to
get it out into the world it's like
being able to as an adze an introvert
escape and confuse as an introvert being
coming online and exposing myself in
this way although right now causes zero
stress or I wouldn't be able to do it
getting there under the rule that I
can't have stress meds a year a year of
like not working out for one video that
would have been anxious but like okay
well I can go live on a tiny group video
on Facebook that friends are part of or
I can just share the idea there or I can
just follow the next little guide in my
head it's like the next GPS point and
that I can do because it's fun and it's
rewarding you get the next one and it's
like my own scavenger hunt through life
and I think we all have one and it's
amazing because it's only designed for
you like you can't even explain it to
anyone else it's like and then this
happened and then this happened because
it just sounds like it's just like
that's coincidence and quite possibly
maybe it is it still speaks to me it
still is how my brain interprets it and
therefore is giving me exactly what
needs to give me like it doesn't matter
if it's real or not because it's real
it's happy and designer in effect I'm
getting even happier and happier and
authentically so I'm becoming more
myself and showing up more in the world
that is kinder and both to myself and to
others in the long run though cuz it's
not like I'm kind every moment of every
day I'm not happy every moment of every
day just the over because that's where
it was falling apart it's like okay whoa
I have to be willing when I'm in pain to
be a little bitchy in order to be to
learn how to deal with my sensory input
disorders and my physical pain and be
able to not
River people so like you need to find
ballads you have to find the it's taught
me a lot and take them a lot
[Music]
we cannot handle the shitstorm of health
crisis is that are coming our way now
not with the current system for profit
we need you get everything we need at
all I need it all y'all need it all this
happened tomorrow can you get diagnosed
with something when you find out either
you have a symptom and you aren't
diagnosed yet or you get tech gnosis
then find out there's gonna be symptoms
coming there's a lot that you need
there's a lot of emotion to process
there's information that you need to
have there's power structures and
politics and economics that comes into
play creating the system that makes life
better for everyone also helps us make
our health letter it's one of the big
ways we do it it's one of the best tips
we can give each other is our own
information and what we're doing impact
that has on us I've been able to find
what I want to do is talk from my heart
and learn the difference the feeling
that's in my the sensation in my body
because I don't stumble over my words as
much when I'm talking for my heart I'm
not trying to explain it and not trying
to cram it into somebody's head but
instead not needing to be right or wrong
just like here's the possibility we can
do put it so logic based and database
based on all my expertise it's really
hard not to go into my head well because
I love doing it as part of who I am and
there's nothing wrong with it but also
to be able to bring people in at the leg
heart and soul level is different than
bringing otherwise I'm just gonna bring
all this out of people and which is
awesome I need the data people first I
need the people people and those are
more the other side and we can recruit
the tech people
I need to go war he's gonna be me just
coming on having therapy with myself for
a bit but that's what we're gonna need
to do cuz that's what we're gonna need
to do and we're as important directors
too isn't gonna be too like we need to
be as transparent as possible the more
were willing to go through the process
publicly I'm creating a project together
he ends notes the finances the
legalities all of it before were able to
do that transparently the more were able
to tap into the crowd's essence the like
they're able to offer skills that they
have and ideas that they have and be
able to mitigate that risk and be able
to but we still we have to get over that
like egoic piece it like but I don't
want to be wrong in public like cuz you
can I got over it I had to get to that
place if like a stress free I don't
 care I care more that this
exists in the world I care more about
creating a world that works for all of
you did I do about you guys like Eenie
but understand I'm not willing to be
likable to do it I'm not willing to
change myself up to be universally
likable in order to create this world
I'm going to die for it I'm not willing
to change myself because that's not how
we save it we save it by being authentic
and the more I'm able to be authentic
and I know that I can feel it like but
then there's fear there and challenge
engine so then I go back to my head like
that circo's so stay in there stay with
the emotion stay with the body sensation
staying in the moment and not needy
because my my brain has a TD my heart is
not
my brain starts to have a TD it's
 amazing
but my heart is the GPS my brains like
all the thoughts all the things all the
places where spirit what is going on I
got depressed what is happening don't
make me fight you I don't know if this
is even working anymore because yourself
I think it's the volume of this as
opposed to the volume of this I think
it's the volume here oh oh this is
getting crushed maybe oh it was thought
that was getting pushed is it done now
Oh unsalted salsa Oh genius I could save
the world
oh that my brain is a TD but my heart is
started before I was coming on periscope
before I was coming on YouTube this is
basically what I was doing but on
Facebook where no one else could
possibly come in and see it and then on
YouTube it's like had 12 subscribers
there's literally nobody there I thought
so I'll be talking to myself then I get
thrown off by like smarty when I come in
and I'm not even heart cuz there's the
ego that's very tied to the brain and
it's about looking smart and needing to
present in a certain way and you need to
hope that you would know about with it
so there's a a cover there that's very
light very hard to tell it's a very
subtle feeling between my heart and my
brain and the ego but I'm learning it
and turn a turn
none of them are okay with silence my
arts were okay with it
my heart's absolutely okay it's the
brain that kicks in the end of silence
who knows I'm a card speak
[Music]
there's a world that we can create
together
it's magnificent time
simultaneously understand that I'm not
supposed to explain it to people just to
show people step-by-step how we do it as
we go through it step by step and that's
 cuz I would never do it that
way like I as a person would never fall
to someone else who wasn't able to lay
them out in front of me it's like right
if you don't you can hear me talk you
think I'm intelligent if you think that
those ideas resonates they'll bring in
the right people but more I love who are
okay the fact that I working with me I
personally disrupt them the wrong way my
vocabulary my tone of voice is my or it
does drop them the wrong way and they're
willing to work on that like it's yellow
so the people we learn the most from are
the ones that trigger us especially for
stupid Greece up next as the world
triggers me for stupid reasons I have to
learn how to DN Sayyidi my life when I
see something and then react to the 15
things that are happening the anxiety on
top of that it's like okay I can have
space and I have space did he stress it
in my brain either avoid the stressful
situation you stress it and I'm getting
better and better the distressing part
to the point I've gotten to a medium to
de-stress the world
it doesn't mean no person on the planet
has to have stress we wouldn't grow that
way it means you get to choose your
stress there is no I don't know where my
meals necks coming from stress but if
you want hey I ran a 20-minute mile and
I want to run an 18-minute mile yeah you
can handle that stress you can have that
stress on rip run up
I can't even utter even up there I think
it's a 4-minute mile was the breaking
point
whatever seven-minute mile it's one of
those numbers it's a single digit number
I want to be able to like be the gold
medalist or you just want to break your
own into internal record by all means
the competitions for it's not life or
death it shouldn't be life or death we
excel as a species when we cooperate
we just need to design the tools to help
us cooperate it's all around me everyday
it's people on Facebook who and
someone's goes to the hospital and these
are people who know each other online
they don't know each other but doesn't
matter whether they're new whether you
do know them in real life you bring food
to the hospital and start mule trains
and offer to look after their kids
because they have a job interview and
give them advice on their first date and
in 15 years taking time out to give
emotional support and physical support
and financial support people want to
help people who have Kickstarter's and
all like there's a reason they're
successful person reason that the
GoFundMe pages are successful because
people care people want to help but the
current system in house it's designed
like people shouldn't have to have
GoFundMe campaigns to pay for cancer
treatment and to pay for like the cancer
shouldn't exist in the first place when
you get it we should be looking out for
each other and not needing that and the
money that would end time and energy
that would go to offering that should be
spent on having less and less and less
people get cancer and supporting those
the do through it and in supporting them
through it feeding back into the system
so there's less going on later
sit all the topics on this is our role I
should go back and read a bit I ramble
on there's some talk about health care
[Music]
in simultaneously being like I'm okay if
I go viral I'm okay if there's ton of
people hey someone just came on hello
per se and and also being scared from
people that one person comes on but like
the idea of going viral and also being
like hi isn't this gone viral yet why am
I not able to save the world yet why
don't people want the world to be saved
until I call the interpersonal and
all the light I'll fight AIDS but
food on the table and needing to picture
my kid stays alive and healthy and happy
and grows up and lives in a world that
is worthy of her that is worthy of all
of our children that is what I am doing
I'm creating a world that's worthy of my
daughter
requires creating a society it's worthy
of all of us every single person has
magic inside of them and instead of
fearing everybody else's magic if we
helped each other tap into it and
realize the universal truth that were
not in competition with each other
because nobody can be you
nobody can learn your lessons you're
here to learn your lessons no we can
learn them for you just like don't go to
the gym for you we can help each other
you can build a gym with your figure and
workout pattern we can do create the
tools create the machinery create all of
it but you still have to go to the gym
you still have to do your learning why
not
you're learning my faith that you don't
want to do that yet the moral really to
share who we are and where we struggle
the more we create tools to help with
that because the tools that I'm seen on
Facebook on of people coming together
for almost strangers is the person has
to reach out first we don't know you're
in the hospital unless you tell us we
don't know and so that strength that
comes as well offering people the tools
to be able to do that both to reach out
and to be reached out to to help as
helping getting help is amazing and
helping other people is amazing
especially when you can be on both sides
of that equation
for different reasons in different ways
allowing people to offer the gifts they
have to give the world
to the world easily by allowing them to
say where it's not easy for them and
ever we can create the tools that makes
it easier by people owning where it's
not easier instead of requiring everyone
to be perfect and everyone to present a
facade we can create the tools that help
us do all of it we're going to I'm going
to we're gonna create the Netflix of
apps that is a technology company we all
own together and create the tools to be
able to collect our own data own our own
data and work together to create a
better world from the from the little
projects to the super big project
that's in but it's not at all impossible
because we're not gonna have the
conversation with the people who think
it's impossible
we're gonna have a conversation you're
like how is this possible well still
owning all of the problematic this isn't
unlike don't bring the problem here it's
like well what's your problem that you
foresee not it's just impossible is not
helpful it's not possible because humans
are greedy yes but not all humans are
greedy so we're not working with the
greedy people to begin with we're
working with the opposite people isn't
it great
those are exactly we're gonna draw in
the vegan in the beginning well it won't
work because of all the corruption that
exists on the planet right E which is
why we need to come together to be able
to witness the corruption to be able to
share information to be able to and as
for doing that transparently there's
very little that can be done from the
outside that like it's like there is no
third is right now he's out but like
there won't be one single charismatic
leader that's not what this is this is
because somewhat charismatic since this
is there isn't going to be someone else
who comes in and takes that place the
point is is not to have one figurehead
not to have to have it be a mass
movement to have it be something where
we elevate the best voices on the best
topics not one voice on all the topics
where we allow people access to the
tools that are helping them live a
better life now I prescribe what your
better life is
not you prescribed what someone else's
better life it is everyone gets to
choose their own thing as long as it's
not that you need to inflict pain or be
in hierarchy over other people and it's
okay if that is part of if you don't the
inflicting pain
this is consensual but like that if you
part of what you desire is to be in
leadership to be a hierarchy that might
be part of your colleague but if it's
like that's the only way you will be
happy and it's it's a pathology instead
of like leadership qualities like you
know it stays to be nor am i top at the
moment then it becomes all about your
ego and tantrums everything else that's
very different than like yeah needing to
be in hierarchy leading to be richer
than everyone else so you'd have more
than everybody else if you better than
everybody else is if that's what your
happiness is tied to you might not be
happier everybody else who can be happy
beat their back in competition with
themselves in competition look like how
could I be my best self how can I be my
healthiest how can i and that doesn't
mean zero competition it might be fun to
compute devalues with your local friends
I don't I don't know something i Jam but
to create together to I don't even know
what you would do for that see a point
system that's game apply everything
that's a point I don't need to foresee
everything just like the fact I've seen
a lot of it because what I first seen is
like I was like it hits that I where I
falter where I can't do it other people
can't amaze you not it so that's what we
tap into what I have to give the world
is what I have to give it and I lack in
so many ways that I know other people
have to come in and so and figuring that
out how to get those people in to fill
that position is something I'm doing the
public eye with everyone watching
because it's transparent it's the more
we're able to do that the next it's like
right that sucks that that took you four
years to find the person that could help
you save the world it should not take
four years but the next it's like how do
we create the tools for the next person
to be able to do that easily to find
their people to find how do
we create teams of people that work well
together how do we create what are the
pieces you need on a team that you need
two people personally you need this that
you need that what are the skills we
need and who can meet what one person
might be able to eat all of those to be
their own isolated team but generally
speaking we have to put people together
to equal that because we're not perfect
human beings we do have certain skills
that we excel at and why is that we lack
at and we can fit together to be better
so why not why not to create the tools
to be able to do that because that's how
we innovate that's how we problem solve
an innovator the massive scale we need
to solve all of the interconnected
global problems at the moment and be
able to assess the best ideas and get
them out into the world and have and
then test them and monitor them and see
how how well they're doing and then the
next new idea is it better than this one
not now we have this one and we want to
keep all the other ones out it's like
how do we create the best ideas for
Humanity for our benefit not because
it's my idea and my idea is the best and
you better not destroy it
but how can we make my idea better how
can we make your idea better how can we
feed off each other and create a world
or everybody prospers and every way that
that's not doable it's doable like there
is no way but that's not doable it's
like well meet new people and not
everyone is gonna come on board it's not
supposed to have everybody on board so
you can my heart yes it's supposed to
have the people that it calls to in the
moment it calls to them doing what is
easy and fun and light for them with the
people it doesn't mean every second is
gonna be enjoyable there's gonna be
times where the team's screaming out
each other or the time we're dealing
with stress and I'll be sleepy and like
I say look it's gonna be ridiculous and
in the public eye and it's gonna be the
most amazing experience of any of our
lives because the saving the world
getting to tell our grandchildren
getting to to be part of that getting to
figure out who we are as people and what
we're here to do
and helping other people do that too and
pretty using all of that human ingenuity
together to like show other people this
is amazing like all the great
things called tapped off her without the
bad Vegas cults have to offer because
we're like yeah are kind of a cult if a
cult is that you get to be authentic and
be your real hue and question everything
and there is no one single leader and
you get to help this on your best life
by working with everyone else to help
design their best life and we create the
tools to be able to do that on a massive
scale and we're not in competition with
each other we're in cooperation and what
does that look like and what tools do
you need to live your best life because
I'm gonna be helping myself by helping
you both actually because it feels good
and also like I get access to the art
Ukraine
so the inventions you create to the fact
that your children are raised peacefully
and loving so they don't go out and hurt
my children they you know can be in
community with my children co-working
being in relationship being in like I'm
like one child I don't know why I'm
calling her children my metaphorical
children I'm adopting later my future
children my children's children okay
pick up it on for long enough I'm gonna
go meditate for a while I feel
light-headed
light hearted light something liking
this experience of doing it for my heart
it's a little weird to do it online
where other people can watch it but it's
not stressful so I'll be back more often
as it's not stressful
take care I'm still doing the the weekly
so weekly I'm the daily one for five
minutes
but it's no longer going to be live so
when I'm live people can absolutely jump
on otherwise I'm going to be doing it
recording for five minutes on one take
and then uploading it alright see you
all tomorrow