welcome to meditating with John gravity
you live stream every weekday morning at
9:30 a.m. with Monday's alternating
between the new lesson de Parma day and
the next Monday we will review the whole
ecology of practices which is impiety
today to pilot for joining us for the
first time go to the description for
previous lessons and sits do the first
lesson and then start joining us every
day with and then watch a new lesson
perhaps every Saturday and Sunday please
help me out by liking this stream to
abuse the visibility in the YouTube
algorithm at the end of each sip Monday
through Friday there's a QA please limit
the QA to questions about this course
ecology of practices other more general
questions can be asked every third
Friday of the month so that's this
Friday June 19th at 3 p.m. est when we
do a live stream a general Q&A alright
so today's app ayodhya are first upon a
day and i'm looking forward to this a
lot so please let's sit your phones on
do not disturb
let's get on Fuji position again we'll
begin by embracing the tree for baby
breaths as we do so
and how that yeah
fire in the belly
I Pro cosmic orbit Old Men struck the
beard
reciprocal opening
oh and all
[Applause]
[Applause]
packing the wuji
perhaps widen your stance just a little
feeling the silk and bit soften so
supple smooth supple
you know I think they're very very very
so now so fuse
shining really sink how'd it feel
self-organizing everything moving from
your daunting yet now slow it down when
you can really feel soft and supple
smooth and subtle fused shining sink did
this self-organizing
really not SIL just enough to pull this
out but not too much to bring it okay
come back short your stance a little
bringing down the heavens on the front
on the back through the core
and then all three at once
I can would you position
you sit down you know your posture
prepare to sit we're going to sit for 10
minutes
we will begin what I say again
again
[Music]
slowly come around if you practice
trying as best you can to integrate with
your cultivated in your practice with
your everyday consciousness cognition
character and communicates
perhaps by reciting the five promises to
yourself
prepare to do lectio divina such your
attention reverence for Revelation
trusting in the transformation by Rilke
as once the way in energy of the light
carry you over childhoods dark purposes
now beyond your blood own life build the
great arch unimaginative wonders
happened if we can succeed in passing
through the harshest danger but only in
a bright and surely granted achievement
can we realize the wonder to work with
things and the indescribable
relationship is not too hard for us
pattern grows more intricate intricate
and subtle being swept along is not
enough take your practice powers and
stretch them out until they span the
chasm between two contradictions for the
God wants to know himself in you it's
resonating with me as take your practice
powers and stretch them out until they
span the chasm between two
contradictions it approach not the God
wants to know himself in you God wants
to know himself Aeneas shifting from
being egocentric to reality centric
we're realization isn't about me but
about reality itself that's what I'm
associated what would it be like what my
state of consciousness and my mind be
like stretching my powers out but giving
them over to the God that wants to know
through me
I see the world how to view of world
look how's the world not disclosing
itself to me I feel like that there's
moments where that the fever hunger of
self references let it go for a moment i
breathing open what's demanded from me
what virtue needs to be cultivated how I
need to conform and transformation to
what's being disclosed to me
second is from meister eckhart the prose
the eye through which I see God is the
same eye through which God sees me my
eye and God's I are one eye one seeing
one knowing one love the same eye by
which I see God is the eye by which she
sees me one eye one knowing one love for
me the symptomatic between this reading
in the previous reading is really
singing to me
getting a sense of that it's not just
way I look out the way in which reality
is looking in ultimate this one there's
deep non-logical oneness to it they're
resonating in a sense again what this
would be like to see this way and be
this way what do I need to do to meet
this disclosure
what's the virtue I need I need a
receptivity a kind of silencing so I can
open we chill like Lucas says not
grasping stretching out so that
something could speak through me it's
what the Alexio is doing right now
I'm done a whole set like this I like to
express gratitude thank you for what
it's been realized in this way taught me
to remember and realize it throughout
this day right let's take time for at
least one or two questions
you mentioned slipping this is from
crema
you mentioned slipping into spiritual BS
and meditation what are the signs how
does it different for the pursuit of
gnosis meaning the pursuit of empirical
knowledge pertaining to spiritual
mysteries
I think gnosis to me the deep
participatory in knowing it's afforded
when we're doing reciprocal opening and
that can germinate and come to fruition
and Praja
so that we're getting as I said what
we're getting like in the ends of Lexia
not disclosure and demand to conform and
transform but the doctor does diagnosis
by means of diya gnosis the knowing the
doctors participating in you coming
returning to wholeness interacting and
conforming and drawing out gnosis so
spiritual BS and meditation is Right in
which meditation becomes a vehicle for
narcissism a vehicle for how wonderful I
am how unique I am how everything is but
it's the opposite of what was just
happening in law last year right now I
think of it but that that that so we
have this this either hunger for self
reference for a uniqueness because
somehow that will protect us against our
mortality
we'll protect us from our vulnerability
who will protect us from an errant
premise but it's a lie it won't we have
very little control over the span of our
life but what we can make a difference
is the depth to which we live it and
that the kind of gnosis and love and
understanding but when you've got a
hunger for uniqueness and specialness
and oh what if here I can treasure this
I can put this on the shelf so all can
see or the other the other BS is content
just content
I don't need transformation I'm fine
this is a subtler form of Gnosticism and
really just okay it's all just wonderful
so you see I'm trying to exemplify I'm
not claiming I'm free from this in fact
I'm touching those temptations and I
think of activating that I'm trying to
share them with you
that's the BS that can come up in
meditation anything any site that's a
siren song it's calling you away right
it's calling you away from
transformation it's calling you away
from being right called
to what is ultimate beyond you and
within you that's the BS so I hope that
answered your question Trina it's a
really important question how is the
setting out of the items facilitating
the lecture Davina can you get more
detail on that oh this is this is from
Thea I pick items that are reflective of
the wisdom house which I am committed at
least broadly this is the frog which is
neoplatonism because the fraud starts we
it starts with one world and it goes
through a process of transformation that
conforms it to another world so they can
live in another way and be in another
way so that's the Frog and that the rock
right there rock it suave it's not
perfectly symmetrical although it's very
very beautiful as black and so for me
this represents sort of Taoism and
Buddhism that come together in Zen so
part of Kennedy's around is remembering
to remind yourselves of the positive
you're committed to and then when I'm
setting them down on either side of me
I'm trying to set and by literally so in
when we embody an act all of our
cognitive actions are actually just
acceptations
of our sensory motor actions when I
literally sat there surround me that's
that's an enacted image symbolic of me
setting myself intending to be in this
course and to surround myself by these
pathways and that that reminds me so
that when I'm reading I'm not just
trying to consume and have propositions
I'm opening myself up to how something
will speak to me how the text will speak
to each other how they'll speak to
aspects of my psyche that I'm not aware
of how the speaking will Alexio the
logos will come and so it helps me to
set my intention the specific act of
setting my intention here for the
reading but setting it with them within
the broader setting of my commitment to
my overall paths by which I hope and
aspire to cultivate more wisdom and
virtue so I hope that was helpful one
more from Kelly Meyers I new to this
saying I have been working through your
first lessons as well what shall I do
with my eyes during the standing
exercise open clothes looking at looking
through at excellent question Kelly so
when you're doing the moving exercises
keep your eyes open
it's very important to not close your
eyes