welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
Kord
alright check-ins maybe like 7% nervous
actually no it's zero percent right now
I don't feel nervous anymore there's
sort of like a mature boyish nobility
sort of like on graduation day and yeah
I just and I said that just really
sinking to the moment feeling warm in
the arms
welcome to the stoah stoah place for us
to go here and dialogue about what
matters most a nice edge of this moment
and today we have Bonita Roy and I'm
just gonna hand the keys over to
Beneatha and then hide why do you laugh
like that I don't know when you say my
name I just enjoy it joy I enjoy saying
it yeah okay hi everybody
if you were here last week just put up
your hands
okay so there are some new people who
taking the risk that's awesome
so Peter has offered for me to do
quite a lot of these so I'm hoping that
we can play around with something that
we can build on over time but it you
know stuff that would that would also
hang by itself you know so this
combination of doing one offs and also
perhaps trying to build over time and
the one offs actually people could could
watch the recording so as I was telling
Peter earlier you know he has so many
great guests on this series and so I'm
always asking myself the question like
you know I don't want to just contribute
a lame version of Daniels Martin burger
or lame version of Zach's dying you know
what these people are doing the top work
and what they do so that means I have to
come up with something that is
orthogonal to this main conversation and
that's the part that makes Peter a
little nervous and so what I thought I
would do is share with you stuff at the
leading edge of my own thinking so it's
it's half formed and it's offered for
you as new minds you know I've been
tracking the types of minds young people
have have changed over time I'll be
writing an article how the Anthropocene
is changing our minds literally the
architecture of our minds and what I'm
noticing in my own courses that I give
is some of this very new work lands
intuitively for people and so then maybe
it can be a tool or skill that you can
play with going forward in the general
category of sense making sense
around these things so if you were here
last week
you got a flavor of what I call a modern
minimalist approach to meditation or
some kind of a pasta this is a very big
design imperative in my work so you may
have read some of my articles on
releasing systemic complexity and so we
have this for a long time we've had this
mind has grown you know taken our
theories or issues and they make
theories and they're meta theories and
systems of theories in meta you know we
have this way our mind has been working
for a long time and now we have hyper
objects and recently you will see a turn
there's a turn to using our minds in a
different way because there's it's
impossible to act on a hyper object you
know it's in we've gotten ourselves so
if we continue to use our minds in this
what's called synthetic complexity
synthetic means ads and ads and ads and
ads hierarchical complexity that we get
increasingly complex thoughts with
decreasing returns okay
so my question is how you know not only
I didn't approach it just like how can
we use my our minds differently but can
I can we look for cracks in that wall
and we see them now I mean I've been
writing about this for a long time but
one of the things when you probably all
are no Jordan halls deep code right or
the way he writes about situational
assessment it's a way to kind of like
cut through all this epistemic fat of
what's going on he would call it get rid
of the noise and get on signal right so
this is one of the new minds this is
like the characteristic of this new mind
how can i how can I
it's a minimalist approach but it's
very tricky because we don't want to
reduce the complexity of the situation
we want to preserve the holistic kind of
integration the holistic complexity but
we want a minute we want to control our
the potential of our minds to synthesize
into hyper objects that we can't work
with so this is what I call a modern
minimalist approach and I thought we
would spend this session maybe a couple
of sessions of trying to use our minds
in this way now you see this in ordinary
social life too I mean there's a reason
why people love Twitter it's a it's an
opportunity to bottom-line what you want
to say and for people who are used to
developing ideas through hierarchical
complexity they don't get it you know
there's too much there's too much
information on Twitter and there's no
there's no one kind of collating it into
like well then what is it you know so
you see these these new minds even in
these kind of popular social things
where people even people who aren't like
necessarily geeky abstract thinkers that
feeling of get to the heart of something
in a hundred and sixty two characters or
whatever it is this is this is actually
in our in our culture now and I just
want to say them and then we'll we'll
Platt we're gonna practice we're gonna
play with this but it requires quite a
lot of a little bit of framing I just
want to say also if you saw the recent
rebel wisdom video
and they have I'm not going to remember
his name they have Zach Stein and then
they have this Canadian man who was a
artist and he works with death
Stephen Jenkinson yeah now if you watch
the way he speaks it obviously comes
from like this way of an indigenous
thinker thanks you know these these
these short powerful sentences so I want
to say that there's something about this
modern minimalist approach and deep cold
with Jordan Hall that's actually kind of
a modern reflection of something that
indigenous people did do I see them both
somehow dancing in the same space so the
way he speaks is very simple but
powerful right so I see these two
actually just look for the first time
yesterday when I heard him speak and I
was thinking about doing this with you
guys I realized there's a like two sides
of the clamshell there's something going
on between it's a new mind but it's also
got some of the characteristics of these
powerful ways that indigenous people
speak and I remember that happening to
me the first time I met Oren Lyons a
conference in Yale and Andrew Cuomo was
there and the Kennedys were there and
all these people were speaking one after
another about environmentalists of iron
mentalism in human rights this was years
ago they were good you know there were
really good speeches then Oren Lyons
came up and he just
just cut through so much what I would
call epistemic fat you know he said
you're talking as if if you live
upstream from the toxic dump then you're
okay and then he'd say there's no
upstream honey we just let that sit for
a while
right so I think that this is a skill
set that's very powerful that can really
change the world it could change
political discourse
it could change yeah and I think it's
it's counter valence by let me say like
there's a Daniel Chaumont and Berger
approach which is not this Daniel smart
book is a very integrative highly
complex systems thinker I think there's
a there's a beauty in a need for that
but I think this I just want to you know
account juxtapose that to what I'm
talking about
and someone in between is Charles
Eisenstein you know he both says things
that kind of cut to the chase but then
he's kind of in in a situation where he
feels to justify because he's saying
such controversial things he feels to
the need to justify it by exciting
science and a lot of factoids around it
right so once you start to look at the
kind of dynamics the cognitive dynamics
of our collective you can see you can
see these moving in in the inner space
now what's interesting I won't talk
forever we are gonna play but I just
want to get you very interested in this
this topic there's this book by David
Chandler I have my thing on mirror so
you're not gonna be able to see it very
well but it's called Anto politics in
the anthropic see
this is the first published book let's
see when it was published he's getting
he's he's out in 2018 he's out light
lighting the same thing he says that the
Anthropocene is changing our mind and
it's pushing it to three different ways
and he calls it mapping sensing and
hacking now I think the word sensing is
problematic so I'm gonna call it mapping
tracking and hacking okay so just just
use those three for how you remember
this because you'll see why the word
sensing is I think problematic so we
have these great archetypes in this
space so I'm just going to use the
archetypes instead of getting conceptual
here in this in this taxonomy Daniel
Sherman burgers a mapper you map all the
relationships in the cat you know the
potential catastrophic let's say
Cascades and the trophic effects and all
this he's a he's a brilliant mapper
those of you who like to use mind map or
I think Rome does this this is the
impulse to map everything in all the
relationships okay so this is the
Anthropocene is pushing us to that one
this is one response that the
Anthropocene is pushing us to it's
different then having a complete theory
of everything because a complete theory
of everything just says this and then it
makes it more complex and finally you
have this meta theory on top of
everything that stands in for everything
else mapping is just you kind of have to
travel you have to be a cognitive
traveller to deal with mapping does that
make sense do we need a question or
clarification so mapping still has a lot
of complexity but it doesn't just you
know put like the meta theory that
stands in for everything yeah you
actually have to have a mind that and
you see
Daniel doing this I mean it's beautiful
right he starts here and then it can go
here and then you see well he could go
here but he's gonna go here the mind is
the mind has to journey in with
conceptual territory in real time so
this is a new mind and as I said I was
very happy to see it published if I
could write I could I would have really
written it myself
so that's mapping the prot so each one
of these has benefits and problems and
I'm just going to contextualize what
we're gonna do within this this this
taxonomy so what we're doing is not
mapping the problem of mapping is
there's if what he calls infinite causal
depth there's no end to what you have to
include
and so this kind of exhausts itself
eventually now does that make sense to
everyone
infinite causal depth and you you know I
have this this is very strong in my
personality cuz when I hear Daniel it's
so beautiful and then I just fall into
despair frankly that's like it's you
know and that's not true for everyone
because you might have a mind that has
the energy to continue that you know
these are these are different minds but
my mind is I'm a lazy Taoist like things
cut to the chase and this is more like
just the chase so he calls the infinite
causal depth now the second thing that's
happening in our society is what I call
tracking he calls it sensing but what he
means by tracking is oh so one of the
things that's that is driving these
three responses is that we are dealing
with complexity that you can no longer
characterize as if then if this then
that so mapping doesn't say if this than
that
you can enter the causal chain anywhere
and and there's all kinds of things that
can happen so this is the breakdown of
the if-then structure of mind prior to
three thousand years ago we we were
unable to make if-then propositions then
in axial age this new mind came we could
make if-then propositions if-then
propositions build the upward path to
complexity now we can no longer the
questions we we ask are no longer can be
put in if-then propositions so if you
can't make it if they're in proposition
you can't have a hypothesis you can't
have science this is not a postmodern ku
it's the nature of the evolution of the
RK
you're thought okay is that settling
okay all right so one one of the
responses is mapping and one of is is
called tracking and this is actually the
mainstream response and what it is is
that we are building AI systems that you
know surveil and track everything but
the theory is not that they're trying to
find if then if someone sneezes in
Afghanistan
Putin launches a nuclear missile right
now they're not trying to understand
these complex causal change there
they're working with computational
statistics probabilities and correlation
so what they're seeing for example is AI
could see something like when pink comes
in vogue in the fashion industry
the Taliban tend to become more violent
now if you had insight into why that is
the case it might be because a certain
chemical that makes the pink goes on
certain ships the shipping lanes are
owned by the Taliban the Taliban gets a
heads-up they know that you know there
could be like all these reasons why but
they're just using AI to find patterns
that may or may not have causal links to
control and predict and to stabilize the
world as we know it these people want
the world they have a certain kind of
control version of a homeostatic world
and he calls it sensing but you can see
why I call it tracking so the book goes
on and on it really talks about the
sophisticated knot theory but this
sophisticated yeah like theory or that
thought that backs this whole movement
so there's a very big movement
you
you feel this in you know the kovin
response let's correlate surveil
movements and correlate there's all this
this correlation correlate with
pre-existing conditions correlate with
this quarter with that it's just this
it's not a measurement really it's a
correlation that's so complex
only a I can handle it should I look at
the chat maybe not okay so that one
we're not doing but we have to honor
that these two are in the space the
third one is called hacking and hacking
is what we're going to do it
it's relate it refers to what I call
source code modern minimalist approach
Jordan green halls deep code it and this
is something that you see emerging today
and they're pretty much experimental
right so no ones that do it that's doing
deep code is pretending they have a
theory that's more like a story but then
there's key characteristics they're
highlighting the deep code is there a
code underneath it
and so we are going to play around with
building some deep code today awesome
that was supposed to be half at a time
but we so do we have any questions and
before we do the exercises
you
okay we're gonna start with something
hopefully blow your mind and the whole
weekend but that's the price someone
said that perhaps explain shortly deep
code okay
so Jordan Hall uses the term deep code
and what it is is I'm going to you know
try to language it for him if you see if
you watch his deep code videos he has
like 22 I think deep code videos on
YouTube that has a rapid succession and
what he's trying to do is name the
significant so sovereignty came out of
his deep code analysis he would say what
we need is sovereignty and sovereignty
he has to do with sensing so he's
building up protocols for what he calls
sovereignty and he's saying this is deep
cold for being a human being right it's
not a theory and it's not just a story
he's trying to tap into some intuitive
knowing that this is this is kind of
what being a human is
we're gonna play with one if we don't
get it to today we'll play with one if
you if you read if you know if you want
you can listen to my podcast son emerge
anchor emerge with Daniel Thorson and we
talked about source code analysis of
trust power and collective action we're
gonna actually do that here together so
it may or may not be useful to to watch
that but the notion of sovereignty as
deep code like what are we doing or when
he when he when he he's really good at
looking at complex situation he's and
then he says signal-to-noise people so
just by that little code like their
signal and noise going it's a it's a
very effective way to cut out a lot of
complexity without reducing it you don't
lose the complexity but you you you have
a new perspective on it if he says in in
all this confusion all this this fake
news and propaganda information there is
signal and there's noise people there's
there's a there's that's a deep code
underneath the information ecology
what's that helpful a little been
helpful yeah yeah it's different than
then like trying to analyze everything
that's going on in information ecology
he's just using a it's almost like a
pointing out instruction you know you'll
you will see that deep code and source
code they have to do with sensing your
your body and your intuition is always a
part of it
I call it source code because deep code
you know it sounds very paranoia
conspiratorial but okay so we're gonna
do with this one's a fun one because we
want to build up like our ability to to
to play with with source codes our
source code so what we're going to do is
we're going to take on a simple
exercise first we're going to find the
the source code of the existence of the
universe so we start with something very
simple yeah so the idea is I don't want
to I don't want to download this so to
be good participants you just have to be
willing to say what comes up even if
it's you know you really at this point
you have no idea where I'm going with
this so we can build on it together so
what do I mean by the source code we're
going to parse the source code of the
universe well I obviously I don't mean a
unified field theory because that's more
of this big synthetic thing and I don't
mean mind mapping I'm trying to get at
what is the most minimalist set of
requirements I need
that are necessary and sufficient
to generate everything the universe as
we know it
what is the minimal set of requirements
I call them protocols that can generate
everything
that we experienced and know everything
we know and experience about the
universe
so it sounds like a big problem
and it's actually a very easy problem
once you get the hang of this so you
might say well you have to you have to
justify whether why there's something
and not nothing right I mean that's one
thing you could say it's very
fundamental we have to justify that
there is self-reflective consciousness
even if I don't believe any of you exist
I know that I have self reflective
consciousness so these are the these are
some of the basic things that are
protocols have to code for has anyone
has anyone ever thought of this in this
way and come up with something I was
this different from science where you
have second law of thermodynamics or
evolutionary theory of fittest or
adaptation it's essentially what leads
to the whole system emerging anyways
right because it's it's simpler and
deeper than that in other words I'm
going to what we're going to come up
with you'll see that for example one of
the things we're going to come up with
is the notion of asymmetry and this of
course is a fundamental notion in
thermodynamics right so you know it's
it's it's deeper then it's deeper than
those those things so I'm just gonna
give it to you but but I think huh oh
yeah please good
didn't know if you were asking it's
reminding of something like forest stuff
something around interaction ah okay
that's this one yeah so we'll put
interaction down go ahead Oh try to pull
them for stuff so there it's not knowing
some sort of relation now yeah we're
gonna put that with interaction okay and
there's a notion of symmetry a symmetry
continuity and discontinuity yeah so
that's in the right direction you get
this sense of what kind of mind is
asking from this this a new mind right
so what's coming alive for me juanita
when you were talking is what wanted to
be said was trusting without a guarantee
you know I'm going to that that I'm
writing it down because there is
something that is implicated in our
protocols it's very similar to that so
this is really cool that's a really cool
intuition so I have something it might
not be useful but I had a vision at a
certain point of what was underneath
everything and it was a relationship of
shapes and forms and things was
patterned and related perfectly yeah so
that's very platonic right shapes and
forms so where we need are fundamental
it's not a theory okay it doesn't say
anything about causal it's a set of
protocols that are necessary but
sufficient
and what you're saying is those
protocols have to account for the fact
that there are shapes and forms and
essences and all these things different
ways of cosmology or metaphysics we have
to we have to have the conditions need
to provide for that to happen it's
coming to mind for me is positive and
negative charges and there being a
fundamental thing that allow all further
interaction yeah and that will come with
the notion asymmetry is the word that
categorizes all of that so the word
asymmetry is deeper protocol but that's
the simplest way I can account for for
all of that word that came up for me
seems to vague for what we're talking
about but consciousness yes so we we
need we need obviously our protocols to
set the conditions that conscious beings
are are happening at least one conscious
reflective being you know I can doubt I
can be Descartes and down the rest of
you who are just pixels on my screen and
I'm caught in some kind of simulation
but yes get gen say more about that
hmm so differentiation is where I don't
know if I can explain it I can feel it
yes no it's actually things for some
reason are different and we find those
we can pull stuff apart and say this is
like that and that's a bit different and
I haven't got words for it no but that
differentiation is is is one we only
need three actually protocols
differentiation is is one of them
there's something like just thinking
there is something about like leap a
leaping or maybe creativity imagination
but something not so mundane but
something that has like absolute not
nothing ahead of it and leaping into an
owner yeah wise we're stuck in what this
kind of what is sort of thing and how do
we yeah yeah okay I'm going to tie that
into trusting without guaranteeing
because the leap factors in both
directions in the past in the forward
yeah so this is this is very good work
this is like into intuition it's
actually we're doing metaphysics that's
why
forest works come in you guys are all
doing metaphysics it's easier than you
thought its metaphysics without the
epistemic fat so there's there something
about about just movement in general
like things don't stay the same
there's okay
so that's our first proposition who said
that
Donna okay yeah so I've done this many
times and you always have to start
somewhere it could be a placeholder but
there has to be movement or process or
change
so that's the first condition it's like
a process or a movement or the capacity
to move or to change or whatever and
it's more like a you know we have to
have a place holder you could say it's
the void that has within it the
potential for these the potentials of
the void so they're not actually
happening so you could talk about
potential anything whatever you imagine
we have to start with that the movement
the move to change the process
yeah so this is something with it's
axiomatic we have to it doesn't part of
it comes from our language and part of
it is because we have to get started so
that's axiomatic to this now there's two
others if we had movement
and something was just moving
would we necessarily have many different
things that can relate to each other
if it was just a wave the second one be
differentiation and then yeah relative
relative it has to be a self
differentiating
process
and that's where the asymmetry comes in
you guys are like metaphysics people
yes so that's that's the obvious next
step if the wave didn't self
differentiate
it's not it's not adequate you need self
differentiation and then what's the
third one
is it just complexification no a little
- that's a little too ahead of yourself
it's it's we've already said it if I
have something here's the wave and now
it's done self differentiating what else
do I need
for consciousness interaction yeah
interaction the self differentiated
parts need to interact in order to
produce everything else we have so
that's the interaction relationality or
else we would never have we would never
know ourselves right the wave even
though it's self differentiated would
never know itself you have to have
interaction so interaction or what I
call participation so do you understand
now what deep code is this is like the
fundamental protocols that we need to
generate everything we have
now it's fractal you'll see these same
three everywhere you look because it's a
deep code
you
now one of the things that's very
interesting and these came up with the
leap and the trusting without a
guarantee
is there something
you
you
I'm gonna try it Peter I'm going in
you
you
you
you have to enable participants screen
sharing because they're not them on this
one I'm not the okay
there you go thank you very much okay
welcome to the corona a century where we
need to do these things like this so if
you have something like process and then
the process self differentiates
and we already know like that's that's
not adequate you could imagine many
worlds that exist where there's process
fields that fail to self differentiate
and they could be out there it could be
what for example dark energy is
you could have process fields where the
energy is self differentiating but
doesn't have participation so it
wouldn't build a whole world right maybe
that's what string theory is you go on
and on and on but it doesn't mean you
necessarily have to have all this
complexity there may be quote-unquote
worlds where you don't have adequate
complexity to build the world we have
right does that make sense yeah now so
then these guys whoops
these guys participate
this is where some are called
complexification and that's and they
actually self-organized new forms right
so they can self-organize new forms you
can do all kinds of things with this but
what's interesting is this there's a
there's there's a there's two different
worlds that we can build from this and
there's no reason to choose one over the
other but there's a chance that so if
you if you think of buddhist yogacara
spirituality this very close to their
cosmology and this lower this level here
is called the storehouse consciousness
you
they argue storehouse
consciousness they argue when you go
into deep dreamless sleep you always
deep dip into here this is where karmic
imprints happening where collective
karma happens and stuff like that and
it's why you can be reborn because
they're seeds of your previous life gets
stored in here and then you're reborn
with some information from a previous
life
now the Chi UGA's the dali lama's school
they say you don't need this it's a very
very advanced theory and this is true
for post metaphysical process philosophy
also they say that once oops this is not
really easy to do draw ja ja ja ja text
subject I don't know draw that so once
this gets complexified okay now this is
whatever and you have these forms
somebody talked about shapes right and
you have these forms in the world it is
possible that the this the origin is
gone and the way you think about this is
an amoeba is the first amoeba around na
well is you know is the first amoeba
still with us
and you know me buzz they divide into
two and so the original one is no longer
there in a certain way and it's also
there in a certain way and so is this is
this make sense so it could be true that
as the process filled self
differentiates and participate there is
no nothing left behind that all the
potential in the origin is in
those parts the way the original amoeba
is in all the successive amoebas so it
didn't disappear but it's an interesting
question because it problematizes the
search for the origin of the universe it
actually may not be there
and then this gives a sense of what
Peter said you have to trust without a
guarantee because you'll never bump into
where you came from and what Kim said
and you're leaping forward with nothing
behind you truly and this is the
cosmology of the zouk gen scholastics so
processed based philosophy based upon
the transiency of origin and the
enduring potentials that get passed into
the future and complexify so that's the
metaphysics of Sojin process philosophy
cosmology
can you feel how open it is
and and we use this also to get a
feeling of what source code analysis is
it's it's a kind of metaphysical deep
patterning starting from first
principles and we used
you
yes so there is a sense that if the
thing is no longer there the causes
still can be found why had called these
traces traces he calls them they subsist
they subsist as enduring potentials so
whoever said that that's true on this
now now we take our minimal thing and we
can complexify all these we can
complexify from there we can make new
steps toward reimagining whole new
Sciences and stuff the wiggle room now
we carved off all the epistemic fat so
we have a lot of wiggle room to
reimagine and then and then reimagine
what might be the case
yeah holy cow it landed yeah just
working psychos psychoactive
you know when I first started teaching
my consciousness studies course I got
fired by the chairman of the board this
transpersonal psychologist from Italy
because he said your teaching you know
post PhD work and I'm like this stuff
can land with just about anyone right
because it's in a it's it taps into a
deeper knowing now not all of us can
take this then and
build from it a new I understand enough
time or relations like Whitehead did but
the fundamental fro you know the
fundamental metaphysics is something
that lands with people it's part of
and I don't think this is true until
recently this is this is a new this is a
new kind of architecture of mind and and
it's really interesting if some of you
want to play around with it there's a
lot of questions about what is this
because it's not it's certainly
abstraction but it's not the same kind
of conceptual abstraction because you
notice we're using our body right all
the things you guys said you kind of
like intuitive so it's it's kind of it's
some kind of I've been calling them
cognitive widgets it's some way of
creating so and it turns out there's all
a lot of them come in threes and that is
it's a widget so if you have a widget is
designed to do something right so it's
like an app instead of a program so
here's the this here's the universe
widget you need movement process of
differentiation and participation and
then you print you you take that up and
you get a universe so I've been creating
these cognitive widgets for things like
power and Trust and sovereignty but the
interesting thing is to go meta on it
and wonder what what is this process
like it requires an abstraction it
requires a very
the thought process itself is something
it's it's not on Keegan's map I'll tell
you that so that is also fascinating to
me hmm
Bonita something's coming up so one part
of this project this Toa is like I have
a great desire for it to be accessible
and like I'm a trainer at Dale Carnegie
Training the whole kind of how to win
friends and influence people it's been
around for hundreds of years that
company not hundreds 100 years I should
say founded by Dale Carnegie and when I
first took that training there's like a
sense of cheesiness like oh my god is
cheesy and the book is cheesy but really
resonates with people like it kind of
transforms them and he he would the
Stoics he read all these kind of wisdom
traditions and he distilled and very
simple self-help like you know wording
and some of this stuff while I'm
tracking it just a term epistemic fad
feels like epistemic fad and I think you
know what I'm going with this
so yeah it's curiousity I knew thoughts
on that yeah I mean I think first I want
to I want to acknowledge how much work
it is to get these things down to the
little they're at but I'm always talking
to people like yourself inviting people
to either for example do the meta like
what is happening or perhaps to
standardize you know there's a lot of my
chrome learning tools that can happen
but it's like not my work to do because
it's very you know I especially this
stuff I'm giving you it's it's stuff I'm
actively playing around with myself I
can't really experience it from the
outside I don't have a perspective on it
so much but what I like about sharing it
at this forum is because you know
hopefully people
can create opportunities for for people
to pursue some of these questions yeah
yeah that resonates but I think also you
know what's what's up a stomach fat
today is you know
that might change what would we call it
step yeah I have to probably describing
it for what is a cognitive I'm gonna
call it cognitive widget and that's a
really cool kind of modern term you know
but then to explain what it is
and why is it called the cognitive
widget it's gets you start to build up
more complexity yes could you talk more
about the you came to a realization that
this this thing can land on people but
it's a more recent thing so like before
that it wasn't I'm just curious what was
that realization for you I I felt like
it was something there's something there
yeah so since 2008 I've been writing
about
you know I'm a gebser scholar so we know
from gaps are the the it's not a
developmental consciousness doesn't
develop that it actually leaps into new
forms of consciousness and so that gives
you reason to believe that there's
another company kind of architecture of
mind coming online do you do are you
familiar with integral theory yet so
from the gut serves view everything in
integral theory along that ladder is in
the mental structure of consciousness
okay because it's linear develop man it
builds on itself all it's called
pyramidal it's meta synthetic so girls
and more complexity so guests are said
no there's something else happening
right so everything in the developmental
series all the keygen all those models
are development within the mental
structure of consciousness and then he
said something else is happening and one
of the characteristics it would have is
it wouldn't build up complexity
hierarchically it would do something
else
so four years since 2012 14 years maybe
2006 I've been looking for examples of
that and I would go to integral 3
conferences and kind of give previews
and get a little traction but both
basically people hooked up me like I was
a freak for many years and my friend Tom
Murray you may know him from
he's a developmental psychologist he
writes for integral review I'm gonna
leap forward and then I'll give you the
middle he came to teach one of my
courses in consciousness studies and he
he he taught developmental psychology
and after he interacted with my students
he said he said wow I couldn't have
talked this level of complexity at the
integral theory conference four years
ago so there's something about there's
something about and I think Chandler's
right it's the Anthropocene it's the
fact that these other ways of solving
problems we know are obsolete we know I
mean you guys are young you could go on
trying to like solve every factor in the
climate thing your whole life and you
won't it's like you know you're not
gonna get to something that way and so
our mind even if we don't want to is
always looking and always in the 60s we
took drugs for reality testing same
thing like we didn't we knew that
reality was it wasn't like they said you
know and and there's always the energy
for the mind to to self transform itself
and some of those are dead ends you know
I mean there may be dead ends also
there's a lot of psychotic tendencies in
the new and some of these new Minds
because the pattern recognition but what
I know for sure is that and I used to do
workshops where I would have do
exercises and there'd be different
generations ITC
and you would set out having people
solve some dilemma like we just solved a
dilemma and the not always by age but in
general by age young people had these
other ways of solving the dilemma and
say so over time just kind of taking
taking chances that these things can
land at some point my students always
complained that someone said it hit them
like somatically and then they go home
and their husbands say oh what did you
learn this weekend and they can't
language it because you have to be able
to make an object out of your experience
so I'm not saying like all of a sudden
people come experts in this but trying
to amplify this kind of new new knowing
did that answer your question it
certainly is not being taught it's it's
just being happened and the quite this
is like the question is if now that it's
happening can we as educators scaffold
that to a larger community by naming it
so this is kind of me naming it and then
having it I think it's important like if
you are thinking like this and you feel
like you're weird or something it's it's
nice to have the confirmation that this
is this is a new potential
you
you
I had a question something that you just
said really hit hit with me like if
somebody comes to the class and they go
home and try and tell their spouse what
they learned and they can't language it
because they can feel it I had that
sensation as we were going through that
exercise there was something I felt but
I didn't know I didn't know what the
word was
- and so the only word that came into my
mind was consciousness but there was
something else I was feeling and I
didn't know what word to put to it and
so I don't know exactly what my question
is but like in my head the story that
was going on is I'm feeling anxiety I'm
not equipped to be here I shouldn't be
like you know I could see that story
coming in and wanting to leave yeah I
don't belong here I don't know what that
you know I don't fully know I don't know
how to participate and so that's the
area that I tend to be interested in is
like how do you get somebody who you
know I'm pretty pretty aware so I can I
can see okay my anxieties wanting me to
run and I don't but for the people who
aren't aware of that and like getting
them into the conversation yeah yeah so
I'm glad you said then in
and I don't think I have to convince you
that something's landing but you know
part of all of this is is
transformational education and the
problem is so if this is truly the mind
we have then it's these types of
exercises we should do with children
very early on this is what we are this
is a potential educators need to bring
forth not downloading information now
one of the things that happen some of
the anxiety comes from the fact that
you're relating to the exercise like you
should know the answer I mean this is
this is so deep in our or that there is
an answer or or or that the felt sense
is not good enough like if you had just
drawn that out and couldn't say like
you'd be it would be an evocative object
like what if I erase this and it starts
to make meaning for you that wouldn't
that wouldn't fly it would be like
that's silly right so we want to
transform education because for me it's
it's it's been a scaffold this this new
mind and it's you know it's tenacious
it's coming online even though you guys
most of you probably went a horrible
school where you just were downloading
information it's tenacious it's being
born anyways but what's the potential if
we can get in there now you can do
versions of this with little kids you
say I it's kind of cruel but leimia you
bring them in and they weigh themselves
on the bathroom scale right kids like to
do that right and then they get a
measure how much they weigh and then you
say how much does the scale weigh
and then they laugh something very
sophisticated is going on in the
architecture of their mind when you ask
them that can you see I can you know if
I tried to language it it being
hopelessly complex and kids play these
games all the time because Dan Brown
showing that kids have and this woman
Alison Gopnik she's saying that the
child is a scientist with a
metacognitive mind they just don't have
the same tools and so we too heavily
steer them down the pathway that the
boomers have have you know we think we
think they have to go through everything
we did in order to get the kind of
complexity to do without we just did and
I'm saying this mind is tenacious it's
happening by itself and as educators we
need to be able to identify and scaffold
it and yeah so and maybe you know Peter
that's some of the things in your Dale
Carnegie like how much is a scale way
there's ways to evoke when you ask a kid
that you can see their like their eyes
you know there's something going on in
their mind different kind of pathways so
Benita were passed to our mark is there
anything you'd like to close off with uh
no I think we should respect people's
time and I think yeah I mean it was
fantastic fantastic and we can do more
of this with some more relevant things
like power and trust in the government
stuff like that yeah so Benita is going
to be here this time each week
that's Friday to ten and Eastern Time
they're not going to put it on the the
reoccurring wisdom Jim portion on the
website so you can kind of check that
out I'll make announcements in a moment
Benita again thanks so much I'll try not
to laugh next time
I say your name is very hard not to okay
um so upcoming events we have a Socratic
speed-dating we're Raven Connolly that's
tonight at 7:00 p.m. Eastern Time and
then after that at 8:30 p.m. Eastern
time you have a Friday nights with Pat
on trauma drama with that's what Patrick
Ryan you can RC p f-- to both of those
on the website they're gonna be both
delicious I think so yeah the the stove
was based off the gift economy there's
something bubbling up in you and you're
inspired to provide a gift to the store
whatever it may be just go to the
website the store at ICA / gift for more
information I'll write it down
that being said thanks again Bonita and
thanks everyone for coming today thank
you so much have a great weekend