for me money is probably the single most
important thing in off price run defense
it drives almost everything that we do
right we need money for other things
that we need to survive every day food
closes does the government need to spend
on infrastructure in place public sector
workers business if you needed to invest
in research and development in the
future to trade with other businesses
its sector right so it's Bruce Lee it
pretty much dries everything that we do
in our society so I'll explain what the
money again behind the money system and
all is blamed how that is you to enslave
us and come with other fundamental flaws
it must it is ever increasing about
percent that it transfers real wealth
inevitably from the ball to the rig and
and that it is constantly unsustainable
again upon anyone Haven so let me start
with often how money work there are
several kinds of money converting that's
perfectly and it's one of the coins and
loaded on in circulation all familiar
with certain devices commercial thank
you to play by the high street mate they
created out of thin air I explained how
in just a minute or the third point is
called central bank money we never see
that since bank money is held in the
Bank of England and it's used second
account between the base the end of the
trading day right so first of all
government money's very easy to explain
it comes into this private process known
as fee Niraj I'm up to 18 horses floor
never excusing after the late sporty for
any bank had the ability to making own
coins and notes right he had several
currency in circulation at the same time
because that was unstable unreliable and
bank kept glancing in 1844 up here
government decided the Bank of England
will be the sole
issuing authority of the nation's
currency for that fire forward all money
has been issued by the Bank of England
by the Royal Mint and so the Royal Mint
produces notes from us and then sells
those to the high speed banks as a must
make to circulate around xiety
equals on average maps
your pen to print a banknote and so for
a 20 pound note that the government
makes felon 19 pound and life is
everything dropping about two million
pounds in fluctuate falls about two
three years out every year is robbing
the general is why we printed sell the
debates the money goes into the Treasury
and that money is spent combination it
produces a little bit the amount of fact
the reference allocation and the moment
they're between 55 and 60 billion pounds
of cash money circulates around the
economy sounds like quite a lot of that
is less than about two and a half
percent of all the total that money
circulates around the economy the other
ninety seven a half percent money is
created by commercial bank I'm sorry oh
one other thing
it is important to realize that we
certainly problem of money with the
special coin money this is net freder
joh debt and there is no interest or
hand good money is made it's bought and
sold one point and then it circulates
around and that bit of you don't have
interest on it and if not it's not owned
by anyone to pay for it so mostly by
running however it's completely
different a commercial banking line
gives you the bank gives you the ability
to create money out of thin air
in response to alone somebody goes into
the bank you can either break you're
accustomed you come to me I want of our
100 thousand pounds by out I say sure no
problem
tap tap tap tap tap as if by magic one
hundred thousand pounds appear to your
bank account brand-new shiny money never
existed before
right not most people seem to think and
quite reasonably cuz this is how we also
know it's a sensible way to think about
money most of things that other savers
have their money transferred to the
mortgage holds account yeah they do take
a FEMA map interface may Allah grant
this respect Lexus not how it works with
commercial make money the money
as if by magic I'll show you a little
bit as works here so if want to
understand with verb with commercial
bank money that money and debt are the
same thing so money equals living steps
I'll come to savings in a minute
actually what savings are savings
reduces the amount of money playing
around the economy of everybody called
it saving them going to a massive
recession right here who goes there so
but I'll get all young people actually
if you don't mind I'll get to the
savings thing in a bit so Mike thank you
right so solar goes into the bank
members 100,000 pounds of money I'll
represent a hundred thousand pounds of
that block right there they give you our
2012 go digital make cash you now owe
the bank that hundred thousand pounds
right so money equals bet they give you
the money and create alongside it 8-0
step this set now becomes leader on
asset of the bank take account that
among the act they are owed it right now
whenever you borrow money there's
interest to be paid on that money right
so there's one hundred thousand pounds
of origin plus the interest which is
going to be due on it somebody else
comes along both hundred thousand pounds
I'll just keep it all out hundred
thousand just on taken through visiting
and a new debt is great for another
hundred thousand pounds with the
interest which is due on that and so on
and so on and so on I can you see what's
happening here
every time I bring people set a new debt
is created the deck is actually larger
than the original low because it
interests you on it as well right and so
let's say that everybody decides they
want to pay off their debt okay all
these customers want to pay off their
debt now there is a total of 300
thousand pounds in money given by the
bank but how much is owed maybe four
hundred thousand so that means one of
these people can't pay off their debt
right there is not enough money that's
four hundred thousand pounds
um but there's only three hundred
thousand pounds in circulation to pay
that debt and this is one of the main
problems of our money system because 98%
of our currency very nearly is this
stock is this commercial bank money
which is based on debt and debt carries
with it a burden of interest
never enough money in the money supply
to pay off the debt we do owe this bulk
bankruptcies are inevitable it's like a
game of musical chairs right you got one
two three chairs you've got one two
three four people it's like musical
chairs you can never and this is
impossible to rectify this can never be
fixed and this problem gets worse and
worse and worse as you learn a debt get
ever larger than the elaborate has this
problem gets worse the interest payment
the interest you get larger and larger
and larger the only way to cover the
interest is to make even more money and
then of course you make even more debt
the problem gets worse and worse and
worse right now advertising not right
now has 2010 at the latest 8 - 5 global
debt global debts is 180 trillion
dollars that's the global debt it's
global money supply it's about 70
trillion dollars that means around the
world right now as we see it today right
now there is over a hundred and ten
trillion dollars of unpayable debt it is
impossible it is impossible all that
debt excuse me be paid off so I've got a
couple of other stats here for you back
in 1945 the ratio of government money
cash and coin to commercial bank money
was one to five those five times as much
commercial bank money and government
money in 1982 that ratio had gone up to
112
excuse me in 2010 that ratio is 1 to 37
so you know we really know that the
commercial bank money was funny maybe
there's a fictitious money had got out
of control it is now almost 98 percent
of our total earning it
right now various consequences to this
part of money system one I just
mentioned unpayable debt it impossible
to ever get on top of that and the only
way to keep up the interest payments Oh
in fact sorry I've got another little
snack yeah I'll do it at the graph it's
going to be easy to understand by Chris
Brown right so this is in the US money
supply versus total debt I'm going to do
two target of you to set the doctors so
money supply is three four and a half
and four and a half five and a half I
got seven and a half ten and a half
that's the money supply line right there
this is the debt owed in the US economy
six and a half nine 1/2 11 of our 1905
and 27:40 that might apply and debt have
diverged over the last 50 years as
you've seen from getting worse and worse
work is inevitable or I could get much
it must do that commercial bank money in
circulation also students number don't
even understand in 1817 half a billion
pounds was a commercial bank money in
circulation 1939 3.2 1970 25 and then
but it really starts going on in year
2000 up to eight hundred and fifty seven
billion two thousand five one point two
trillion and 2010 two point two times so
the money to borrow is expanding
expression it's still talked a lot with
the debt burden that breaks the head
however fast the money supply growth the
debt burden she got a runt head even
faster
the second consequence efficient
inflation it gives it possible in a new
money increased by only two ways that
money have to go somewhere right
thirty-two ways to spend that money
either produce more goods per family
economy to reflect that a threat or the
price would be indigo this must go up
and that's what inflation we've been
talking inflation is because of rising
prices no rising functioning impact on
inflation and on a course on inflation
the real cause of inflation is a
constantly expanding money supply that
money Forex money to go somewhere this
is why the housing market keeps going up
fuck market keeps going up will that pay
of that money and Kiwi money that where
it ended up in the props market in the
top what what the problem if they were
problems and places it punishes savings
if you've got money in the background of
trading it as inflation goes up your
savings in real clouds go down and it
also means that as prices are constantly
going up people have to work harder just
to maintain or change their music talk
more about that later on the third
problem is that it transfers real well
from the poor to rich hoping is really
think about it who has the ability to
lend money people have lots of money
quickly from Junipero money
Sheila so coming up wobbly right poor
people now the internet alone rich
people and then again between it and
walk it ever wider and wider and wider
and inequality itself when everything
absolute what are your absolute vision
providers concerts the sense of being on
people carry very all sorts of both
physical health and social consequences
in 1960 another factory in 1960 the top
20% of people in the world on average
had 30 time for wealth of the bottom 20%
of the world in 1998 tending toward my
god okay if they decide to make big
enough but I can only move it Spunkmeyer
the man in the USBC there who can the
top 150 42% of wealth the bottom 80%
between impose 7% of the day although
that's a must go ricochets get me his
world now how to practice well as of
course extent of the people and as well
now that exams Andrews just became
obviously and in 1959 2007 the average
wheels earned income to the top one
percent increased fourfold West got a
sense face of st. eating we're down for
me the biggest consequence is that the
bank actually get to return in where the
back passage I keep on you get smart
society right because commercial banks
because you know ten percent of our
money to play and they decide who they
lend it to and all not turns a little
bit the banks are actually deciding the
direction of the tide you taking away of
hiding where money's being invested on
right and so where did all that new coin
will act wanted easing and bailout money
go
did it go to lending to me start up to
try out to me they're just building you
awesome to school in the energy and
transport infrastructure building social
housing alleviating poverty on the
street we did it buggery it went to
inflation the housing market speculation
will stop the foreign exchange market
and buying more government bonds I this
is where it actually went for us
okay our government take a hole in a
free money back so that they could buy
off government bonds and increasing
stranglehold on oh it's coming
anything on the ceiling I agree any day
and if you look at the stock market
you've been reaching records right some
four trillion dollars every day is
traded on the foreign exchange loss does
anyone know what glodean team imperiaz
angle do to do and one thing about 170
trillion dollars global GDP each year so
in about three weeks the foreign
exchange markets are trading the entire
global community absolutely insane where
our financial system is gone and not
forgetting of course color that money
had prepaid metal bonus this is a very
cook the technical intern area the fifth
and most dire consequence of all is the
fact that it creates the temptation both
on a corporate level and on a government
level and on an individual level if you
have the ability to make money as much
money as you want and lend it to
government in exchange the government
bond you now have a situation where the
population of the country is working to
pay tax on to the government that the
government can cover its interest
payment on the bond on the loans that
have taken out in a commercial bank it's
AG again but it's true particularly to
help you get home
life isn't about income tax go financing
interest payments hold on the run 90
percent value
not being spent for bottling schools
enrolled in La Mirada but it's being
spent on credit information of debt I
couldn't believe it here it is finished
to remember of course the debt can never
ever ever be repaid so we are doomed to
remain in Bali forever and so we kick
this fucking system and come up and
replace it with something a bit more
sensible on an individual level is on
this to remember these bank rows are
fictitious they've made up they lay up
between following like psychic ability
to God isn't it it's not real and yet
you have to repay that loan by going
every day for a real job doing real work
like on real time you will realize of
which you only have one and that's it
right and they're spilling it on right
and yet also don't forget the bank is
taking no risk here when they may be
that you are self-identify or how they
didn't take any risk it's not their
money pages created at dinner and lend
it to you if you default on that loan at
any time how come you're not invited
if you pay twenty years ago one drop and
then you thought they take the whole
house from you what we are paintball
porch and all of it so they take as many
as a payment plus two deposits across
these needs and values 1/2 over 20 years
baseball you end up with nothing
daylight robbery plain and simple
they were the case in 1962 an American
drone daily was take was a huge they
tried to pull clothes on his August he
took them to court and he argued exactly
that the mortgage was not uneven
contacted the bank you've not only
managed money as Hauptmann in the first
place and the court agreed with him and
you've allowed to keep in town the judge
very nicely in his note afterward said
that sorry because they're very nice
little dope afterwards that he agreed
that the money did not exist property
the bank created by cookies measuring
and added Road collector again only God
have a lot going to get home your own
name versus Knott County Minnesota 1960
reveal the very next day blow the way
the state Supreme Court came in and
squash nepotism no hearing arguments no
way to prove or date none of that
thought but of course that's the end of
the monetary system right there in that
grunting Ramona business of course it
had to be swamped so the question now
becomes why why is it like if this
shooting is so dysfunctional and so
forth and so obviously exploited to the
rhythm why did they do this why is it
allowed to come into an existence sizes
how many do any of you remember
tomorrow's world the diva shows a lot of
love back in the nineteen sixties
tomorrow's world is predicted by the
year 2000 productivity and automation
would have increased to the point where
the average family will be able to cause
itself on the way with just one worker
working only ten hours a week and
precise the biggest problem if you want
to do it all of our legislation what the
fuck after that right and from so yeah
the increase in production and equation
productivity heard happen by indeed
occurred but he's not benefited from all
of that I've gone up the pyramid to the
very very top it's a deliberate scan all
all of all of them is increasing
productivity and increasing prosperity
has actually done nothing other than
increased paint a suit here's another
stat for you for an 89th 1965
fang-tastic a pretty steady at about
for the last 18 days in 1991 advocacy
want to be taken as a procurement and
defense of national banging GDP in 2008
up 550 the fact now this is how about in
various ways one is privatization as we
privatized railway Airport nor to work
etcetera etcetera this financial
institutions operations are buying those
things up these now become added
remember is an infrastructure pay for
and built by competitors of this country
right which is now being given over to
corporations around for their own profit
these things should be like a belong to
us they belong to the nation they will
now pay in rent instead of owning them
and then being used planning for our
benefit we're now paying rent on them
so these corporation shareholders you
receive a dividend check if you know a
certain way that they've done is is by
purchasing government bonds I mentioned
it earlier on but by buying more and
more and more gun won't get is assets
like they buy and sell debt the most
control right these are assets the bank
so the more money they can lend the
better it looks on their balance sheet
so they've been vigorously lending money
to government and buying government
bonds in exchange and in the third way
it's really the average house all those
company now evening that was not
excluding mortgages the average
household in this country is indebted
machine of over 9000 pounds
other states not including water so the
proliferation of cheap credit on credit
cards and car loans and financing and so
on all of that you happen to make well
all of that also money created a spin it
in response to me pullo doesn't really
exist but it now count as
the bank I'm here today with the
zeitgeist movement which is initially
social even benefit they advocate a
system of resort fake army role money's
not meaning sorted because every member
of society has unfettered access to all
of the things that they need and
everyone contribute and they are able to
around they wish to you know what I mean
and the other one right first we like
the ideal is for the government to bring
a whole bunch of hundred billion pound
now go around the bank and say here you
go
we've paid off all of our back all our
loans now buckle right now on we're
going to issue our own money that's what
I would like to see personally Henry
Ford put this very well it's a quote
from Henry Ford gogo the guy that found
the Ford Motor Company it is just as
well but people do not understand the
truth how am i hard to keep money work
but if they did I believe there would be
a revolution before the war we're
absolutely life people truly understand