I'm so confused you two really cool
right so YouTube won't let me go live
because I don't have subscribers on the
iPad but it will totally let me believe
on here I'm just gonna switch over to
here because who needs that portable
light beam
alright we'll sit over here where I
meditate every morning um what am I here
did you say I talked about when the
World Cafe no that was going to be the
one that I'm deeply happy so yesterday
yep first day when I went for a walk in
the evening time became very clear that
it's just as important for me to give
the there's two things that I'm it's
like the world cooperative it's gonna
save humanity and there's also the
process I'm going through to become the
person who can actually do that and
they're both equally important if
anything's more important the journey is
more important and yet I'm all trying to
share the logical cooperative side and
like I'm like but this isn't necessarily
gonna work for everyone
there's no way I've tapped into this
magic and that it doesn't work for
everyone there's no way I'm the only one
with an inner guiding voice it unfolds
magic in front of me this is how the
universe works we just have to tap into
it and so I am learning how to tap into
it both through guidance from other
people in little bits from other things
but also just experiencing it because
this I the secret the secret secret like
the book and the movie about positively
thinking and inventing or your reality
with your thoughts there is some truth
there and when I came into contact with
that I was able to so for kids friend of
all thank you new eyes oh my goodness
stop
basic noise annoys me but I can find the
beauty in every day like it is both a
ridiculous my world is weird and
different and it's amazing because it's
my world and let's not have the camera
like cut off my chin there two minutes
in we're getting we're getting somewhere
I'm if this does work and I'm able to be
on here I will keep going live because
one periscope is a little I like
periscope for what it is but it's
confusing for my brain when people are
constantly talking about something to
say and clearly I'm doing great today
that I have I don't need to prove to
people I'm happy and that's part of what
my issue is I'm like but how do I
explain to them how it's awesome like I
I'm constantly listen I'm in pain and
exhausted my body breaks down I can't
handle basic like light and sound
and yet I am profoundly happy and the
reason is because that is my journey
that is what I am here to experience
like I'm in this thing with my sister
which is its own video which I probably
shouldn't have on YouTube and but if I
feel the need I will do it because I'm
not filtering myself in that way in any
way for anyone else because I'm here to
do big big things and using my energy to
filter my personality just to mask to do
any of that stuff is taking away from my
journey and my journey happens to be to
create a world that works for every
single human being on this planet
getting to experience that getting to be
the person whose mind comes up with that
is in and of itself the greatest reward
that nobody in the external world could
give me no one could pay me to not do
this someone could come and offer me ten
million dollars for the idea to make it
but have it be made in a way that wasn't
transparent and democratic we didn't own
it together and I would in no way take
that to probably wreck my life but
when you figure out who you are and why
you're here like when you figure out who
you are you will not settle for being
having anyone in your life that will not
accept you for that even as scary and
that's part of the reason why we don't
do it because we like all we're gonna
lose friends and family
I just lost my sister over this in a
deep way and although I'm not a hundred
percent okay with that I choose this I
choose me and my journey and my health
and my learning over being something
that someone else demands that I be I
choose this
I choose exactly how I currently am and
I also understand you when I went on
this walk that I'm like why can't you
just say that did I like this awesome
I'm like Oh cuz you've been no way
shared it with her and that's a big
piece of it is simultaneously having
health challenges is shitty and horrible
and being poor is shitty and horrible
and it's also a profound deep learning
in how society works and how we fix it
for everyone and how like my health
challenges have been challenges and
therefore have taught me everything I
need to know I don't need to go on a
jet-setting Europe trip to learn about
compassion and that people are different
because I can I can I have it in my body
I get that like I have conditions and
other people have conditions that we
have to be so freakin strong just to
survive another day and yet we're never
look like that to the world we have to
be about four times as strong to look
how to look weak like it's like yeah but
I get what this is that this is that
that this is and the more I'm able to
figure out how to explain it in a way
that works for other people and it's
about letting go of it working for other
people and explaining it just how I want
to explain it
and that's what periscope has been for
me is figuring that piece out and
YouTube has not been that piece because
I don't want to put unfiltered videos on
YouTube but that's just my eco and the
more I'm willing to push through my ego
and look wrong and get it wrong in the
right direction
the faster this thing happens both my
inner journey to get there which is like
I can feel it this thing is so close to
happening and is happening but it's
close to having the other people come on
board to do to have fun because that was
the other thing I got on it so my next
step on my GPS to her is my last one was
to give up hope I give up a lot for two
weeks
I meditate for an hour today I'm
continuing the hour of meditation a day
I'm more in control of that's like I be
in control of smoking pot more like can
I'm more conscious with it and that's
what that that's its own journey in and
of itself like everything's a soul
journey that's amalgamated together and
a lot of it the world is luck is really
judgmental about and it's hard not to
also be judgemental yourself when the
whole world is judgmental but I'm
releasing that judgement like oh yeah I
don't really give a buck that's cool I'm
what I care deeply about making a world
that works for every human being I do
not in any way care what you all think
of it like it's like I care what you
think about the idea if you can help
improve it if you want to come on board
and make it great we're gonna create a
world that's collaboration but if you
just don't think it's possible or you
don't want it to exist don't care where
I'll show you you won't be who we first
show because you don't you're not ready
yet but like the rest of us are gonna
create a world starting people the
biggest payment is that you get to be
part of that in fact you're going to pay
to be part of that that you get to have
hope in a in a bigger future in a nicer
future and abundant future you got to
create a world that works for you and in
so doing and get a creative world that
works for everybody I'm going to create
a world that works for me and in so
doing I'm creating a world that works
for all of you all of you that are
watching the zero hello how I got scared
when people came on for the one time I
think what came on my live YouTube video
uh-huh and I'm getting there like right
I have to be Who I am which means I have
to find like my Oprah self and I don't
think Oprah could find her Oprah self
being Oprah like it's like she didn't
know who she was gonna be she kind of
just all on the staff so like yeah the
daytime talk show knowing that that's
kind of who I have to be stops me from
that progression and at the same time is
like right you're not there yet that's
cool
she's the next step you don't have to
like be in front of 50 million people
you have to like be okay with one person
signing on and I don't know why YouTube
feel safe in periscope for that reason
but thing is so on the verge and I'm
figuring out what the steps the steps
that's what we want to talk about the
GPS steps so the preview at the one
previous to that was to let go of my
sister and in order to be at anyway
capable of saving any resemblance of our
sisterhood of our relationship I have to
be willing to let her go 100% and on
hopper in my life
at all and I did that one kicking and
screaming for sure but could see the
beauty in it like okay I get why I need
to do that I get it and I never would
have thought that was a thing that I
would need to need want to have to do I
don't want to do it but it's like me too
and have to do it I get it and I'm
willing to do that previous to that was
a bunch of other things I'm sure so it
was like give up your sister stop
smoking pot for two weeks meditate for
an hour I did that and got the next step
and now my next step is like yeah you're
going to go for a walk in nature every
day and listened what the universe has
to tell it to talk to you about and it's
a lot a there's a person I per say we're
just talking about how that makes these
made me nervous in the past and now I'm
good I'm good with it I'm also talking
about how to create happiness in my life
anyway so my next step is that because
it's it's happened the most profound
happiness is following your own journey
it will look like a crazy crapload of
weirdness at the outside world and
that's okay my her journey is like I go
let's even to headphones I either don't
have headphones in and so I sing under
my breath to myself and make up songs as
I go and I Melissa save the world and
like talking to myself maybe angry at my
guides and arguing with them because
that's who I am
I'd like to argue at I argue with my
guides all the time until I will let
argue like I cannot tell you for a year
my guides are like to stop smoking pot
another day stop smoking pot and bandits
and it was like you mean like during the
day right I was like I'll give you two
weeks so we're like yes I'll take it so
I did two weeks and I got that learning
from it and then going for descend now
it's like right go for a walk every day
this is your connection to nature and
and soul and higher power and everything
be here every day and so that is what I
am doing in the next the next ideas come
which are so close to figuring out what
the first project is and iterating it
it's World Cafe made online and how much
amazingness comes from that I can see
that I'm not yet there to communicate it
clearly but I can communicate this
journey so that I can showcase my
batshit crazy journey so that that you
all can find your own and that is also
what I'm doing and one of the steps is
also turns help the world gives multiple
steps at a time because like because
I've taken on going for a walk every day
I took on not smoking pot and it needed
to have weight to like literally the
14th day to be like and now you get a
person and now you get new insights and
now you know why you did that because it
doesn't tell me before hands and the
more I walk on this journey and get the
UM the rewards from it the more I'm
willing to walk on this journey like I'm
like okay what's the next thing you got
in store what's the next thing you got
in store including the shitty stuff it's
like I would not have chosen that not
for all I would not have chosen email my
sister sent me there is no way in fact I
did the exact opposite I was like be
kind to me I'm going through some
here's what I'm going through and her
response was the most horrific email one
human being is sent to another one that
is and it wasn't even anger it was like
written out of love that was like
horrific a plane you in no way
understand my life and what I'm going
through
I cannot have you in mind and I guess
I'm getting into the sister thing and
then what it was um Oh experiencing and
I probably would have to pick a time and
keep coming on and so that people know
that I'm going live and doing that and
that was just to happen a year ago like
just listen to the universe and follow
it and this magic is gonna happen so I
need other people that want to do that
magic with me because otherwise I'm
gonna feel stifled in it so for our
Board of Directors I need to communicate
that idea that we need to have fun and
it has to be easy and fun to do for
everyone not just for me but what's
gonna be easy and fun for me is that we
get to follow our GPS who'd you get to
be like and then I went on a date
because the universe told me to and
somehow that does it that made this
feature and the app makes sense like
it's like weird things that have nothing
to do with what you're supposed to be
doing
make it happen life is not as difficult
as we make it even the difficult parts
cuz I can tell you my life on surface is
difficult and it's still freaky and
amazing because I've had to learn how to
find the beauty in the mundane I've had
to figure out how to learn the lesson on
repeat for like a very simple thing
otherwise it just keeps reacting you
know Colleen to confirm my appointment
on Friday or just have a new appointment
people talk on here I guess not I guess
it's just like comments after writing
song years go that's why I do like
periscope because other people can join
on and have a conversation we're gonna
create the social media platform that
does that on a deep meaningful way it's
what I was already planning on doing
Meets World Cafe meets its its
crystallizing and coming together and is
in no way crystallized yet but realizing
in what I need from this project what I
need is to have fun with it and to for
it to be easy because my life likes easy
and we can create a better world
together from an easy fun place in fact
it's kind of the only way to do it
because if we have to get together and
slog through all of
yes we'll still have to do it has it has
to be fun we have to want to do that you
have liked this process this up-and-down
process of figuring out who I am and
what I need to be in the world is
extremely simple and easy and I would
not have signed up for defining how hard
it was gonna be all at the same time
like it's like if I had known beforehand
that I would have to give up my sister
there's no way I would have signed on
for this and yet I did and it was
like okay well how about you try Venice
and how about you do this and how about
usually that and it's like this is the
next step and I got the message a year
ago when it was I wasn't ready for it
because it was like you need to give up
your sister like in no way am I doing
that yes she's stressful but she's my
sister and I love her and I need her and
then it became horrific Lea clear that
like oh but she doesn't she does not
support you and she does not see your
world and you guys are so in alignment
right now that she is stopping you from
progressing and you have to be willing
to give up her pedestal that she's on in
order to be able to save it at all and
I'm still working through the anger to
get back to love so that I can we can be
absent with but I don't want to get how
my neurosystem get into anger and almost
hatred about somebody that I do deeply
love but it has to process that and go
through that that bit like our emotions
like she's like well you're just angry
and sad all the time but like I am in no
way angry and sad all the time but I do
experience anger and sadness because
there are emotions that are here to
teach me and I'm not cutting them off
this idea that we have to be positive
and grateful all of the time breaks
positivity and gratitude because if I
have to be grateful I'm not really being
grateful if I have to be happy I'm not
actually happy if I can be angry and sad
and then get back to happy and gratitude
that is much more fun much more fun to
be like okay like if I can process the
anger I swear my guides all the time you
want me to do what kind of oh
no that's not happening
 you you deeply and then
they're like oh just come back ready
then how about are you ready to give up
call and meditate now no why would you
suggest such horrific things okay I'll
go now okay I'm ready
exactly what I needed and the more that
I do with it what is given to you and
follow it and get the magic the more
willing I am like it's like walk on walk
on some nails be like I guess so I've no
idea what's coming but it gives us to be
getting some tetanus or something that
it's not that is not what they're saying
and now I get like the thing some of
them are amazing
some of them are just like I don't even
know the goal posts over the last year
have been like some of them are things
that are stressful that I void like the
plague like my car breaking down and
then a community member yelling at me
and now my sister yelling at me I'm like
okay I mean no way choose those things
and they're the universe giving me these
things to learn and now with hindsight I
see why all of them are exactly perfect
and what they were supposed to be and
again I'm pickin still that's it that
bad one should be like you're not
allowed to yell at me you're not in my
cart I'm not gonna try to get my car to
break tyonne but when those things
happen I'm more able to be like okay
maybe I don't need to sleep for two
weeks with my car breaks down because
somebody's gonna come along and help me
that it's going to progress in the right
way and I'll figure it out and if it's a
bad time in my life and it's super
stressful and I'm in bed a lot and I my
body's rebelling that is not permanent
either it's not permanent in that it can
get better and it's not permanent and
that it can get worse it's just it is
what it is and if I'm willing to learn
the lesson the universe gives me kinder
ones like it's like if I don't listen
it's like well then yes you're gonna
need to like get slapped in the face a
little bit because you're not paying
attention you're not paying attention to
the subtleness I mean the biggest one
the biggest is that like I think why I
started listening to my guides and even
that like it happened 15 years ago and I
only started in the last few years was I
got brain tumors and in 20 in 2005 I had
brain tumors and just in case that
wasn't clear that it was like you're not
doing what you're supposed to be doing I
got a brain tumor my hearing nerve it
was like you're not listening it was
like okay cool now I'm really not
listening because I'm deaf in one year
and I did get so much learning and
understanding out of the brain tumors
thing that going through that process
and having community connection and
happy and I become
deaf in one year and figuring out life
from that from that stance and then I
still was absolutely not listening so it
needed to give it gave me a second brain
tumor that was like right at my crown
chakra it was like you're not listening
to your higher power was that not was
that not clear
you're here for a greater purpose and I
still wasn't listening because I was
like well what do I do with that though
what do I do like I don't I I'm here for
a greater purpose great one what is it -
how do I actually move forward with that
when you've given me deafness and brain
tumors and now my brains changed and now
if I couldn't do it from my intelligent
I can go to university get a degree
plays how am I supposed to do it from
this place and it was like yes because
just listen listen to your higher power
and will we hide you and I'm like I need
to step by step process of the entire
way with everything it's like we're not
giving you that that is not happening
and then um then what happens let's
follow this whole thing this is fun um
then the next step that's coming up is
going to going to groundswell and being
like okay well I mean I couldn't go back
to work because of their weird policies
and the Phoenix pay system and
everything else I was like I don't want
to be on disability I don't want to live
my life in poverty and I don't want to I
can't do what I was doing and I can't
learn something new so like what that
like I'm not allowed to do what I was
doing I can't learn something new what
do I do it's like sit around be
depressed a lot so I went into
groundswell which was like a business
school for hippies and that was amazing
and in no way to give me a project
except that like it was like you're not
able to be an entrepreneur you're not
able to take risk you're not able to do
this you're not able to focus you're not
able it's like you're a failure at that
yet it showcased to me people who were
genderqueer who I met for the first time
I'd never really met genderqueer people
before and figure out that oh I am I
have been living my life as a woman when
that is in no way in alignment with me
there's pieces that I like in pieces I
don't like and I get to choose I get to
pick who I am and/or figure out who I am
and so going on that journey and
realizing that I'm queer and that I
although female I'm not a woman but I
still go by seeing her because my brain
doesn't like romantical issues with a
baton but I try to call my friends that
because it's it is what they want to go
by survival I will call them that but
myself like no my brain is part of a
game she her um and going through that
process and be like okay well that's
that's an interesting development that I
have no way thought was gonna happen and
and uh manoa you even really doing
anything about besides just going
internally and figuring it out cause I
also have things that stop me from you
know look we're all from dating so it's
like I'm glad I figured this out and I
was like 36 and have a child and
condition and health conditions or I
can't do anything about it and then
going through depression of like why am
I here like I have this urge to help
save the world and it's not happening
and letting go
surrendering to like yeah well what can
you do from this moment what can you do
from where you're at and encountering
Kyle sees and his humor and his ability
to like you're his apple tree analogy
which I came into contact with a lot
more than two years ago and did a series
of YouTube videos a hundred different
YouTube videos on the hundred different
apples I created in less than two weeks
and I got my iPad out of it
that it isn't about perfecting it and
then putting it out in the world it's
putting it out in the world and it will
get perfect by putting it out in the
world it will it will I'm going to fail
in the right direction on repeat till I
get there and that's that interpersonal
journey to do that well the idea is
crystallizing and the idea is there I
mean I've got how we saved the world I'd
have to be able to communicate it which
is not my strong point and I'm figuring
that out and that's crystallizing it and
it's like okay what I can do is do a
blog post a week I'm doing that I've
been doing that consistently for like
last three three months and a few I have
a lot of blog posts up and finding the
people to that it's going to be fun with
and now I'd this week I got that message
this has to be fun it has to be I'm not
doing it if it's not fun it has to be
fun to save the world and people are
looking for hope and they are so ready
for something that gives them that hope
of a better world is possible I know
what better world is possible and if
people are willing to ask questions I
can explain it to them but in one big
nutshell it doesn't quite work but
that's what the website and blog posts
before and there's gonna be other people
come on board and make that fun and easy
cuz right now that pieces is like ok
I'll give myself a little not fun and
easy you can write the blog post and
even that is fun and easy because it's
like you only have to do it once in some
weeks I'm like whatever this is these
crap let's put that out there and other
weeks and like I love this and the ones
I love it none of them go viral none of
them do anything and that's ok too it'll
happen in its right time and having
faith in that of like I get it universe
this is unfolding in exactly the way
it's going to if I made it successful
two years ago it wouldn't be what it is
now
the world wouldn't necessarily have been
ready for a wrong person want to come on
board and destroyed it like this is
going to unfold and exactly the way it's
gonna be and I'm gonna showcase my
journey for that because that is also a
piece of it that it's like right I'm
figuring out this GPS step or are we on
this GPS thing you know he's gonna
listen to you but I'm doing it for
myself um you did you guys well gender
queer stuff health challenges and then I
the big the big ones that I was like
okay once I was aware this is your guide
this is what you need to do I got the
clear message I was supposed to do
ayahuasca and within a little bit of
time about I don't that must have been
cuz I knew who I know who does it and he
heard about it and had that guy way
before I shouldn't know it was a guy and
then it was the next step and I was like
hey the ayahuasca is waiting and I was
scared cuz it involves vomiting and I
had vomiting and I was the person I
could do it with I was like yeah I don't
know they're younger than me and they're
like a friend's ex and they're like I
don't I don't I don't know like it's not
but then I was like I got the clear
message no this is your this is where
this is the this is who you're supposed
to do it with and I went to the weekends
and they were freaking amazing
the community was they were it was just
I could not have experienced a better
experience and yet it was in no way what
I was supposed to experience like I
thought I was gonna go and get a Vision
Quest be like and this is how this
unfolds be like thank you awesome thank
you for allowing me to save the world
and instead I puked my guts out and it
was like you're willing to die for this
are you willing to die for this like are
you willing to be here in this moment
and choose time and time again like to
take more to take more and I chose to
take more even though his comedy and and
I got I was like yeah this is me dying
for this and then because my car broke
down right before that I and my car
break down is its own journey long
journey in and of itself but because my
car broke down I needed a ride there and
the person I got a ride there with
talked about how she had gotten a yoni
massage and how it had changed her voice
like literally the sound of her voice
had changed and I was like I need help
with my throat chakra I need to
communicate this idea I need help so yes
I'm gonna go for that so I so that was
the next message it was like I found it
from the old one and it was the next one
it was like okay you are supposed to go
for your knee massage I was like alright
cool awesome so I found I found someone
to do that and I went for it and it was
in no way a profound experience it was
like this didn't change my voice that
was not and he was expensive and quasi
illegal because it's like sex work which
whatever I don't agree with that should
be illegal so ethically I was fine with
it but I'm like okay getting dressed in
the room after I was like what's how the
next step not be illegal and or cost a
lot of money because there were both
like not they were in the gray zone for
sure at least and the universe this was
a year ago was like um you mean stop
smoking pot and meditate those things
are free and really helpful and I was
like okay ah really have to sit here and
listen to my thoughts what kind of
monsters are you and so I did that no I
didn't I did not do that in any way
shape or form I can did everything about
that it was like stop smoking pot during
the day now
I can do 20 minutes of meditation while
I lay down and fall asleep I can do that
too and it was like that's not exactly
but sure sure you can continue doing
that and bliss learning to listen to the
guide in like the little moments it's
like okay we'll just just go live just
post this thing just do that and I had
to it was like I had to simultaneously
be okay with this thing never going
viral and never getting anywhere and I
might be the next Oprah both
simultaneously at the same time it's
like okay this could go and I'm in no
way comfortable with that and so I have
to get comfortable with that and you
can't have the ego piece involved of
needing that to happen so it's it's like
that is basically my lifestyle like it's
like okay I figure on those two things
and then I was in community which I'm
about to begin again and was having an
amazing experience and one of my
neighbors like yelled like
just things that when adults shouldn't
say to another or not when they're
supposed to be involved too bit and it's
like like you don't have a disability
and you're not welcome here you're not
and I was like okay that's an
interesting experience both of like I
needed that this is not acceptable hot
action in community and I'm gonna hold
this boundary and I'm gonna hold this
person accountable who has done these
things in the past and not been held
accountable and I didn't know that that
wasn't their full-time I'm like okay
it's not just me that I feel bad I'm
like wait I don't feel better this is
not acceptable behavior in a community
and but I got so much learning out of it
she's approached me since then and like
she's gotten so much learning out of it
it's like even though horrific conflict
stuff brings learning and understanding
and beauty and love and it was like if I
would not have chosen that give me a
multiple choice of experiences to
experience and I like could a neighbor
trigger all of my insecurities please
that would be great just check that one
up but it did it happened and I learned
a lot from it and then more recently the
same thing happened with my sister where
I was like I had this box which is its
own thing that she needed me to go into
and I already gone into Anna Nardini
like it was I was like now like I'm just
not doing that I'm tired and she was
just like freaked out on me and the next
day I was she's like I'm sorry ten
minutes and better guys so hard videos
like but in no way are you actually
sorry about that that it's not what
you're sorry about
you who are you don't understand my
condition in any way nor have you tried
you make me wrong for having had brain
tumors you made it all about you for the
last 15 years I've been and that's not
even my email one so you almost like my
life is difficult right now it's snow
there's a lot of energy I can't drive so
I have to take the bus that takes energy
and our guinea pig died and I have to
change the KH and that hasn't happened
yet and she doesn't understand what it's
like to have a condition that you don't
have energy on and the more you push the
worse it gets because she's just like
uber type-a personality pushed through
everything and then the world is amazing
I'm like jet said all around the world
first class go to Bali to deal with
morning as opposed to like some of us
don't have that opportunity some of us
need to deal with our in the
and so it's like just pay for someone
else to do it right that's not a
possibility for other people anyway does
explain like I need you to be kind to me
I cannot have I cannot deal with you be
mean so you need to figure your or
you cannot ask me for favors if you're
not willing to take a no because I'm
someone who has to sometimes give a no
and her response was like horrific like
you you are doing this to yourself
you're the one who's like yes you might
end up in a wheelchair and it's all your
fault
like you're it's your because of the
language you use she's used to shoplift
in your twenties because you're just
like basically like I'm faking it which
is basically what the other person in
community said I'm like you're not in my
body like how are you not there when I
had surgery were you not like how do you
not know like I don't and partners that
I haven't let her experience it with me
because she's not safe to experience it
with she just judgmental highly highly
judgmental so it's like if you make me
wrong for brain tumors you're definitely
gonna make me wrong for chronic fatigue
fibromyalgia that basically doctors
don't believe in so yeah I think I'm
like of course you think those things
but I could see in her and I won't show
this part cuz it's um but like I can see
in why she feels the way she does and
how it's a perfect reflection of her
life but me pointing that back to her
would be only horrifically painful for
her and I'm not willing to do that I'm a
little wanting to do that but not willin
to quit and so it's like I have to get
back in love with that and it's been
more triggering because she just had
just adopted a baby and now that baby
was supposed to be born at the end of
the month that I had it I thought I had
another month to heal before that and
now I'm like nope he's born and you're
not in his life for his first month and
you might never be and that's what it is
she cannot understand you're you where
you are your family is not supportive of
you and until you get to a place for
that safe you can't have them like you
need to have minimal minimal contact
with one sibling who I love but is not
supportive and the other one who I also
love but is really really not supportive
you just clearly outline for me why
you're not supportive and why you think
I'm like I like you by that I'm not
raising my kid right that I'm not doing
everything wrong in my life and it's
like I get why you feel that way based
on your worldview and so it's like the
pro so sitting in bed cry me like I'm
not giving her up he's my most important
person it was like yep this is and then
she basically was like you need to not
talk about capitalism and how I make my
money than other people and I was like
oh you want me to choose between you and
my project that was a no-brainer I
choose my project I choose creating a
better world
even if I'm even if my only worry on
this planet is for actually my sister I
would still choose the project because
it's better for her she doesn't realize
that in any way shape or form or believe
in it but like capitalism is destroying
all of us and yes you're benefiting from
it because you're able to be a CEO of a
company and get millions of dollars and
I'm like this a little bit I'm fixing
the world for me and breaking it for you
but not really like I'm like it fixes it
for everyone it's broken right now you
just don't realize because you're
benefiting from it it's like that you
get to have someone come in and clean
your house and cook for you and do
things that like you don't need that you
just want that and someone like me who
actually could use that in a real way
doesn't get it because I don't have the
money and I don't so it's like this
broken system when it comes to
disability and finance of like the more
you need it the less you have access to
it and from that space I'm able to
figure out how to create that for
everyone and I'm going to create that
for everyone but a big piece of that was
cutting her out with the with the UM not
having that constant you're doing it
wrong you're doing it wrong in my ear
and so I'm like okay right now
eventually because I can handle
doing it wrong from the world I can't
handle you're doing it wrong for my
family right now but I will be able to
handle that because I'm like you know
I'm not I'm not expressing it the right
way
I'm not showcasing that this is amazing
any it's amazing to be in pain and
exhaustion why can't you see that I'm
like I get why you can't see that but
like your whole world is ablest how do i
showcase that like your journey is your
journey including if it's it's painful
and exhausting that your journey is
exactly what you're supposed to be on
and dictating what other people's
journeys are supposed to be is what
breaks us and so that is what I'm
figuring out how how to share with
everybody else and when I got this week
I was a big long it's been 36 minutes
nothing that can figure that out in a
blog post anymore actually actually
write it this week I get to move
tomorrow into community the same
community the exact same apartment that
I was in where I triggered the person
downstairs by walking ugly
and but we're back on good terms we'll
see we'll see how that goes I'm open for
the universe giving me any and all
learning and I'm like I'm on it along
the path guys I'm on it
thanks guys I literally willing to take
anything if I'm willing to cut my sister
out I'm willing to do absolutely
anything if I'm willing to die for this
which I realized puking's not dying but
in that moment it was I was like if
you're willing cuz I was like I would
die I would trade in my life so how'd
this happen overnight and yet that's not
how life works like I have to be here in
order to make that happen and I'm like
but I would like I would for my child
for to create a better world for her a
world where she gets to be in happiness
and abundance means I have to create it
for everyone to create it for me I have
to create it for everyone and then I get
to create it for everyone
valuing of itself is the most amazing
part of it and so that is what I am
Jimmy and so I'm gonna figure out a time
to be on here more often I don't know
why it's letting me live stream because
normally it's like you don't have enough
people you're not popular enough to line
a stream but maybe it's just the the
laptop let's see the iPad does in well I
don't know but we are going to know and
if I never get more subscribers on here
that's cool I just won't figure but if
you're watching this he'd like he's like
it's
I share with your friend great a world
of abundance and peace for everyone you
get to follow my journey along doing
that because it's fun and it's not gonna
look like anything anyone else is doing
because I my goal is not to have a
mansion my goal is not to have a yacht
my goal is to make a world that works
for everyone and that means dealing with
my own inner that keeps me from
doing that and that is that is a payment
a incentive in and of itself like once
you figure out this path once you're
like oh this is my this is my path it
doesn't have to look good to anyone else
you I don't I don't have to explain it
like you tap into this magical happiness
it doesn't necessarily that way but like
I get when it's just like you're getting
angry or more entitled I'm like I'm
entitled okay cool cool I'm the entitled
one ask anyone in our family I'm not the
entitled one in the world based on our
current society yes I get it I get why
you think that because you don't
understand my disability in any way and
I get there like abundant amount of
$2,000 month for my from the government
that you're not even paid into because
you don't even live in the same country
whatever rocketed we're not gonna have
her my sister's dirty laundry oh I'll
air mine which it went in a bowl sir I
will because and that was a piece of
giving her off it's like oh I've been
filtering myself has heaven forbid I
offend her heaven forbid I do she does
feel like I'm trying to hurt her I'm in
no way trying to hurt her except maybe a
little bit now I think I'm like not
which is why I'm processing that cuz
that's not who I want to be in the world
I like I feel broken because I'm like I
can love everyone I'm here to like have
compassion and love for absolutely every
human being except somehow right now for
the one that's one of the ones that's
the most important to me cuz I'm like
your type A personality you
need to think positively my way or the
highway is just not working for me and
I'm like and I can't have compassion for
her lack of compassion yet but I will
get there I will evolve to that point
and it will in no way look like that to
heard of the world and I'm like yeah and
I have to be okay with that
but I'm not there yet so I can't have
her back in my life yeah if and when I
get there she might not be a real
willing to accept me in her life because
I wasn't there when the baby was born I
wasn't there it's like you were here
me like these are the thoughts in my
head not necessarily the truth in her in
her life so it's like Jillian is all
about and I'm doing those steps to do
that I am I have an appointment tomorrow
with them a psychologist to work through
the family dynamics my piece of it and
his leg was also it was like the three
go for a walk daily deal with the sister
ships you don't need to wake up angry
every day and this is like it's costing
you not her and nor you know I don't
wanted to cost either of us I want us
both to grow as humans and eventually
get back into friend like relationship
but only one that works for me because
our entire relationship for the last 39
years has not been working for me his
I've had to cater to her I'm the second
born I'm like I've literally catered to
her my whole life
and now my body's like that's not a
possibility
you cannot do that you're poor you
cannot pretend to be rich when you're
around her you don't have the energy you
cannot meet her you don't know how the
spoons for it and I'm like okay I was
willing to but I can't now and she won't
meet me so I'm like I guess we're not
meeting because I can't and you won't
and I a little bit won't
so like because I can't like it's like
okay I got it I can see that and I'm
like if I could choose I would I would
be willing it would break me I would
break myself to be in relationship
Claire and I have been breaking myself
in relationship with her and I'm in no
way doing that any longer because I'm
here for a bigger purpose and so
following this whole palette it was once
the three things those are the three
things happen to be uh the curable app
which I'm also going to be showcasing on
here because when I looked it up no one
had been on here showing that so I'm
going to share I've given myself
permission to stop you didn't pain
chronic pain so I am going to I download
the curable app and I'm gonna try it the
issue with anytime you have a chronic
illness and you've tried so many things
is trying the next thing it's difficult
because you're like you could not work
it might not work it's mine actually
comment I can't actually see those
comments so I will comment after that is
a comment it has two of your name Leslie
and thanks for coming in and commenting
if those are comments come after this is
a weird because it YouTube won't let you
go live until you have a certain number
subscribers but right now it's kind of
working actually they're gonna get
smaller I don't know no I did not they
just need to go away you go over to the
side why do you want my glasses on my
glasses I would be blind to felt them
and then I wouldn't be able to read the
comments this is the glare bothering you
I totally can't watch other people and
do other things when I think is robbing
me but I only have the audio and
lighting that I currently have and being
poor I can't buy other ones I tried
tried the cheap ones they don't work
they don't also don't work I will want
to why would I spend No then I have to
readjust the camera angle and such why
why why are we dictating what I do with
my body I'm creating a world that works
for everyone with democracy but like my
life and my stance note it it's not a
democracy I just met before
oh yeah no no point does anyone need to
see my outfit my outfit is comfortable
it is in no way an outfit that is like
poor fashion in any way shape or form
because that is my priority to be
comfortable my clothing it's basically
this shirt it's a t-shirt and I'm
wearing tights that is why I live in all
of the time is some clothes the cloth is
either like itchy or actually causes
physical pain so I pick what is
comfortable I'm gonna get off right away
spit on for 40 43 minutes and I'm liking
that youtube let me go live and I will
he live more often because that's what
the universe is tell they need to do but
that he scares me still says I say no to
those things a lot of times it's like go
live on periscope hope you like ok now I
can do because it's only ever 2 or 3
people I don't know why YouTube because
YouTube's less people but potentially
could be more so it scares me
and I don't care that I'm not there yet
and I look out there
this thing is unfolding in its own
unique time and I'm unfolding my own
unique time and you want to participate
in that journey and create a better
world together then come watch and I'm
gonna go
thanks just chiming in keep y'all coming
in I can't think of the work that goes
with that take