this is decoding superhuman with your
host boomer Anderson
why hello superhumans it's Boomer
Anderson here your host of this podcast
as always I'm appreciative that you
joined I really love the fact that you
guys listen to this podcast and I hope
to bring a tremendous amount of value to
you now with this podcast we generally
like to go all the way out to the edges
back to the mainstream bring on experts
to give you bite-sized pieces of
actionable information for you to use in
your everyday life but before we begin
today I must admit this is a bit of a
confession rather than really bringing
on someone to talk about bite-sized
pieces of actual information brought on
an expert to talk about a completely new
framework for thinking and interacting
with the world the topic today is
sovereignty and I encourage you to
listen to the full podcast to get really
all the details of what exactly that
means but my guest today is Jordan
Greenhalgh Jordan is a CEO of neuro
hacker collective but he's also in his
17th year of building disruptive
technology companies
Jordan graduated from Texas A&M as well
as Harvard Law before beginning as one
of the first employees at mp3.com in
2000 George really kick-started or
really led the online digital video
revolution as the founder and CEO of
DivX after navigating to financial
crises as well as an IPO Jordan left
DivX to return his attention to the big
picture he spent a number of years
sometime at think tanks and Institute's
most notably the Aspen Institute as well
as the Santa Fe Institute where he
served on the board of trustees for five
years Jordan joined neuro hacker
collective and the co-founders Daniel
schmuck Tim burger as well as James
schmock Tim burger after being or
spending I should say a week on an early
neuro hacker collective stack he was
convinced about the power
potential of this new technology and
join Daniel and James to bring it out to
the world as I mentioned earlier the
topic today is sovereignty and Jordan
really takes us through both why
sovereignty is needed to save the world
from a potential apocalyptic event but
also the three key elements of
sovereignty how one could really begin
to get into a state of sovereignty and
exactly what that means and feels like
and then finally we close out with just
sort of me picking Jordans brain about
the key obstacles to sovereignty talk
about how government may get in the way
and that really brings up items like
blockchain this conversation was both
intellectually challenging as well as
fun for me you'll see at times that I'm
both processing and trying to ask
questions at the same time in fact I
took so many notes that I'll try and
condense them all into the show notes
which can be found at decoding
superhuman calm backslash Jordan that's
Jo R da and again I really enjoyed this
conversation and I hope you do as well
have a great one super humans our
sponsor today is neuro hacker collective
not surprising considering the CEOs on
the show I enjoy their products so much
that I use them five out of seven days
whether it's qualia or qualia mind which
is a new formula that you should all try
I do find them to be completely
revolutionary in the supplement world
and I do think it really kind of
upgrades me as a person to hopefully
reach for this whole concept of
sovereignty now if you want to try
either qualia or qualia mind go over to
neuro hacker.com right now plug in the
discount code boomer and you'll get 10%
off your first order or 15% off any
subscription order this is something
I've been taking for the past ten months
and I've noticed a significant upgrade
in my overall well-being a reduction in
anxiety and just an ability to think
clearer throughout the day does that
sound like value to you well I put a
little skin in the game and I invested
in their company's recent we fund around
so that's how much I believe in the
product I put some my own money at stake
so again go over check it out neuro
hacker comm and put in the
boomer for 10% off your first order or
15% off your subscription Jordan welcome
the shelf thank you I'm glad to be here
so this is a conversation I've looked
forward to for a very long time actually
because I've had the chance to speak
with a couple people that you're close
with being Dan stickler and James from
Ogden burger about this very topic and
the topic today we're gonna get into is
sovereignty but before that I have to
ask you because I saw this video and you
said that you're excited that Donald
Trump got elected do you mind if I ask
why all right so the me preface because
by invoking sovereignty we first have to
make a little bit of room which is in
order to discuss sovereignty to do it
right and well we actually have to
already begin the process of entering
into it if that makes any sense okay
it's not the kind of thing that you can
stand outside of to look at you have to
actually enter into it one piece of
which is becoming is understanding it
and the reason why I mentioned that is
that this question of Donald Trump has a
particular characteristic of shaking
people out of their sovereignty and if
if by virtue of entering into a
conversation about Donald Trump you get
shaken out of your sovereignty then well
for one thing you won't be able to
actually participate in the conversation
FairPoint great so now we've got like
three or four layers of recursion going
so think about that as a primary point
that if you want to be able to
meaningfully actually consider anything
and in particular meaningfully consider
precisely those things that are the most
challenging to you and which will often
show up while they're not exclusively
show up as controversial in the social
milieu then you must be first and
foremost very clear on how your
sovereignty relates to the world that
you're interacting with and so just keep
that in mind up here as we go into this
conversation so that you're noticing as
I say things how does that actually
affect your ability to continue to be
fully
listening to and responding to the
conversation and to what degree do you
check out to what degree do you enter
into a kind of a coarse grained
emotional response or to what degree do
you begin to enter into a kind of a
simplistic schemata of thinking which
you might call judgment or prejudging
the first thing that I do and the reason
why I can actually say that I was and am
excited by the election of Donald Trump
is contextualized alright so I'm not
saying that from the point of view of
being a political partisan on the ground
in 2016
I'm contextualizing it at least two
layers and probably three or four layers
larger and so if anybody has spent any
time looking at or listening to the
kinds of things that I gauge in I take
as a primary object civilization design
so the evolution of civilization and
then the degree to which we can actually
engage in a conscious relationship with
how civilization unfolds all right
already at that point I've already lost
most people but that's important which
is to recognize that we are we're
embedded in a civilization we're
embedded in a huge amount of stuff that
we more or less just receive that we
have very little consciousness of it's
actually been say developed how it came
to be how it relates to us and how it
forms our ability to perceive and act in
the world and so that's a primary
consideration particularly these days
but one that I urge people to take is to
recognize that we're fish and there's
water and that water is mostly of human
creation and therefore it's kind of like
we're playing a game and we can
recognize that as kids the consequence
we can notice how the game works and
then we can choose to begin considering
different games we might want to play
all the way down to the basic level
there are certain things that are rock
hard solid like the laws of physics that
we're probably not going to be able to
play around with but a couple of levels
higher than that and it becomes pretty
plastic okay so watching and monitoring
and observing the shape and flow of the
evolution of our civilization I then
notice the event of the 2016 election as
one being particularly enter
meaning that it actually represents a
well actually specifically what's called
a phase transition mm-hmm there's
something going on there that is
profound and important because it's
happening at such a deep level almost
completely invisible to almost everyone
who is watching it at the wrong level
and and I think that if anybody is sort
of if you go back and rewind your mind
to the point at which the election
happens so if you can maybe in the
moment where that that sort of
interesting moment where the news mass
media had to begin the process of
shifting their narrative from inevitable
Clinton win to runoff oftentimes
unfortunate Trump win mm-hmm something
happened at a at an individual and
collective level which I'm going to call
entering into a liminal space people
were disoriented most people not
everyone but most people even the people
who are Trump supporters were
disoriented they were disoriented into
euphoric direction but nonetheless
something happened that was confusing
the model the framework the collective
intelligence was surprised and it was
surprised in such a deep way that it
didn't know how to resolve it surprise
now we can run this actually at this
point this this way of framing it is
useful because we can actually run a
line which is to say that this this
experience it happens at an individual
level as human beings we on occasion run
into circumstances like this we find
ourselves in situations where our
ability to make sense of our environment
and feel confidently that we can
actually make good choices in our
environment gets blown up and we're just
were confused and oftentimes very
quickly then have some emotion response
to our confusion now usually usually
Fiera they're not always but that sort
of thing happens at a collective level
as well right so awesome
many many people at that particular
moment entered into a state of
individual liminality liminal space and
in a collective liminality they couldn't
even look around to find other people to
give them orientation on what was a good
framework I can look at that moment from
two perspectives from one perspective
anything that does that anything that
generates that sense of individual
collective liminality is extremely
powerful important because it is in
liminality where we have the necessity
and the possibility of the most
if we get upgrades in our technologies
of sovereignty our capacities for
sovereignty it also is by the way that
most places where we can have the most
damage we could actually make the
biggest mistakes you know everything has
moved now from solid into fluid and
depending on how things play out it
might solidify into something that was
actually not a very good way of doing
right so it's it's a moment of distinct
important and in this case it wasn't
just a called a stochastic or a random
or a just kind of event but actually it
was it was itself a part of something
which requires it makes needful the
possibility of an increase in
sovereignty meaning we're in the middle
of a phase shift we're in the middle of
a great transition the world that
developed through the 20th century and
frankly the world that developed through
most of civilization and I can kind of
do this in stacks like there's 80 years
since World War two but also the 500
years since the Enlightenment
and also the 2,000 years since the
beginning of Western civilization and
also the 15,000 years since the
beginning of agricultural civilizations
like all of those are actually cleaving
and the transition is of that order of
magnitude if not possibly larger so I'm
witnessing at this moment a thing that
is simultaneously generating at mass
scale on a global basis an opening into
liminality that is incredibly needful
because it is happening as a consequence
of a set of changes that are going on of
such magnitude and across so many levels
that our ability to respond to it is
impossible in the prior framework all
the forms of making sense of our world
all the frameworks of how we make
actually take actions over all the
technologies of civilization and society
are inadequate to the moment that we
find ourselves in and so hopefully
there's a phrase from philosophy that I
like hopefully this event will awaken us
from our dogmatic slumbers and in in
being awakened from our dogmatic
slumbers we will find a way to enter
into a new way of being in the world
relating to each other and coming into
response to the world that is actually
at
which the moment we find ourselves in
okay so Jordan if I if I understand this
correctly we're in this moment and we
haven't resolidify debt right so we've
gone from solid to to liquid I guess
first question is have we re solidified
and then secondly I think one of the
other things that I've I've heard you
say before is that we're in this
transition that could potentially kill
us all what events what technologies do
you think could lead to that and how do
we avoid it okay well okay you actually
asked two questions both of which were
profound I'll try to take them in order
if I if I lose the thread just remember
the second question and we can come back
to it okay all right so the first
question what's interesting and again I
I find it delightful though I understand
that it's very painful is that many
people endeavor to solidify and to
solidify too quickly so I'll give you an
example a very concrete example there
was an effort after like within the
first month after the election to make
sense of the event and to make sense of
the event in the most banal way possible
meaning to change as little as possible
the way that you previously made sense
of the world and still try to make sense
of the event I think of any number of
things
a Russian hacking I think is the most
enduring one and which what's
interesting is that each of these
forming structures you can think of
almost like crystals in magma
so there's solidification but they're
initially almost like snowflakes funny I
didn't yeah they're actually like
snowflakes that in the physics that
they're as they're growing they're
building resilience but in the beginning
they're actually still very fragile
mm-hm the tectonic shifts of the nature
what we're going into continues to break
them so while there has been a decided
effort to close ones eyes and not
actually think about what's going on to
stay deeply embedded in a increasingly
dysfunctional delusional framework of
sense making the reality of the
circumstances have continued you just
break that up so I find that many people
even those people who move steadfastly
endeavor to bury their heads in the sand
are just finding that they're being
dragged kicking and screaming into
having to recognize that okay
just gonna have to figure out
something's going on that is deeper than
just the stories that I could make up
and I think that like the entire arc of
the past two years has been a great
example of that every time a prefab
mechanism for endeavoring to heal the
break has come up it has lasted only I
don't know days weeks maybe months
before it's been turned under it's a
nice process where you know at some
point somebody just has to recognize
that that's an unpleasant place to be
and step back and say okay oh I
don't want to play in that washing
machine anymore
what the hell's going on and I think
more and more and more people have made
that have made that recognition at a
basal level and at a physical level
really and then have made the choice to
step back and wonder what the hell is
going on and so of course what happens
is that as fewer people participate in
the mass delusion the capacity of the
mass delusion to just keep pulling
people under weakens so we're actually
beginning to accelerate towards having
our together which is good news in
spite of the fact that it's very
unpleasant right this is not going to be
a pleasant thing this is going to be a
deeply deeply distressful thing as all
moments of liminality are okay did that
feel like that was a good response to
your first question it did moving on to
the second one where we have all of
these people that are accelerating
towards having their together so to
speak and there's a lot of there's
potential transition and there's
something greater but there's a lot of
things that could screw it up and could
kill us all what do you see is some of
those potential obstacles whether it be
technology politicians people etc so at
this point we've been doing this long
enough that I hopefully what I'm about
to request has some heads to it or some
it feels solid in order to respond well
to the question that you asked I'm gonna
have to actually construct something
which is not simple and so the request
is to actually listen and I don't mean
that mean Lee what I mean is actually
it's not easy to listen to something
which is not simple but to be curious
about what I'm trying to construct and
may be allowed to build out before
thinking that it it makes sense because
it won't make sense for a while I don't
think okay so because the there's a
bunch of different pieces that it all
kind of fit together so let's start it
just technology and I think it's not
fully obvious but
pretty clear that somewhere in the
middle of the 1950's as a result of the
invention of the atomic bomb the human
species entered into a historically
novel moment so prior to somewhere in
the middle of the 1950's try as we might
we couldn't really get up that badly
World War two was bad but it barely made
a dent in the population of humans on
the planet even really significant
natural events like the black death
which were really really bad still
barely made a dent on the population of
humans in the planet but we couldn't do
anything suddenly in the middle of the
1950's we found ourselves in a
circumstance that we could do we had the
possibility for the very first time in
the history of the universe
I've actually pushing ourselves to
extinction or at least to an edge it was
morally equivalent and functional
equivalent to extinction literally no
species has ever had that circumstance I
mean some many species have entered into
circumstances where their relationship
with their niche was one where certain
behaviors like they could grazed
themselves to extinction or they could
to certify to a point where their niche
was Milner supporting themselves that's
true we're talking about a situation
where a single affirmative choice in the
part of two specific individuals could
have killed everyone and that's novel
all right now what's important after
that point is to recognize that why that
happened was that we had reached a level
of ability a level of our own power in
relationship to the world that itself
was unprecedented we had built a
capacity to deliver energy to deliver
power into the world that was new and we
had done that because our own ability to
invent ways to deliver power had
continued to accelerate we should say
science and technology so we've gone
from swords to arrows to guns to bomb
well bombs actually predated guns but to
bigger bombs to bigger bombs there
suddenly bombs that were insane and
penetrating the deepest recesses the
laws of physics to be able to get there
well okay that hasn't stopped right the
the the process of our ability to know
the world and change the world because
of by virtue or use of our will has
continued and it in fact has continued
to accelerate so in just to make it
simple in 1945 we entered into a new era
where we had a capacity to destroy
everything but at a tiny tiny fraction
in this case the inverse of the problem
in that case only two people had the
possibility of doing that meaningfully
the President of the United States that
and the premier the Soviet Union but
because Science and Technology have
continued to advance we've kind of
continued to fill the gaps so now we
have entered we have the democratization
of the technologies of extinction is
maybe a way of thinking about it and it
doesn't seem like we've reached out but
just just take nuclear proliferation as
a simple example I went from two to
seven and we're now kind of entering
into a moment where the people who are
the biggest experts of nuclear
proliferation of said look our ability
to keep this thing contained is
decelerating like the likelihood that at
some point we're going to enter into
nuclear power in the hands of something
which is at a level lower than a great
state is pretty likely and we're gonna
find somebody somewhere who's maybe say
a multinational corporation has
developed nuclear power maybe in the
next 10-15 years and it doesn't be a car
it could be a terrorist organization to
give you a rogue state it doesn't matter
the point is we've entered into a new
phase and that new phase it's not just a
linear thing it's just it's one thing to
get two to seven people to kind of in
balance but thirty people is a totally
different game and the game theory
starts to unravel pretty quickly nuclear
power is only one variable you know with
things like CRISPR the ability to engage
in the construction of genetic and
bioengineering is very rapidly and much
less controllably going to be entering
into the social environment
single-digit millions of people are
going to have a level of power that in
the seventy was only within the
constraints of you know two or three
maybe seven national governments cyber
warfare is also a same order in an odd
way because we are actually binding the
fabric of our lived world to a
computational substrate cyber technology
cyber warfare capacity is beginning to
enter into an existential capability in
1995 if you shut down every computer in
the world who cares doesn't matter that
much life continues in 2025 it does not
okay we could do other ones I can just
keep keep making them up let's try
another one
drones particularly swarms of autonomous
drones are also beginning to enter into
a moment right at the edge of
existential it's not quite there but
it's at the edge and the reason this
list zoom in on that because I think
it's a good way for people to grasp we
have to understand things in the context
of how the dynamics reinforce themselves
because it's escape velocity it's when
things get out of hand that we're gonna
to travel so I don't know if there's a
really really really good video that was
put out on swarms of killer drones I
didn't at the top of mind it can't name
it right now but maybe afterwards I
could find it and send it to you can I
can link to it in the show notes but the
the basic premise is it shows a world
that is extremely feasible like it
exists tomorrow where autonomous little
drones I just looked a little a
quadcopter drone is we have have enough
AI capability and enough signal
awareness capability to engage in
targeted assassination by the way this
could actually happen right now and I'm
surprised I'm sure it actually does
exist so I could create a drone and I
could have that drone have the ability
to just attach to a cell cellular circle
and I could code it to be aware of the
signal that your cell phone sends out to
your cell tower to tell your cell tower
that your your cell phone and I could
put a small amount of explosive on it
wired to a little little device and fly
it and you know within if you're within
a 30-mile radius of where it's flying it
can find you zoom in on you and blow you
up it's not super sophisticated you know
if you happen to be inside it probably
can't get through the window but the
point is that we're not far away from
that but the bigger point is that
there's a co-evolutionary dynamic that
if anybody figures that out then lots of
other people simultaneously are aware of
the possibility and have an intrinsic
game theoretic motivation to actually
get better that's the problem right the
problem is it's called rivalries game
dynamics if you and I are in competition
on an exponential feel alright so if you
and I are in competition and you're
ahead of me on that competition on an
exponential curve your advantage is so
significant that I have to engage in all
kinds of effort to catch up and get
ahead of you otherwise I'm an extreme
risk well I do right I do engage in all
kinds of efforts to catch up with you
which means that I'm going to do things
like not be careful I mean I'm gonna
I'm gonna be willing to do things that
if I had been extremely careful I
wouldn't have made the choose choice to
do well now if I get ahead of you in
that in that race and I've pushed the
curve now further out I've invented some
new thing that was not in the world but
by virtue of inventing it you know it's
hard to invent things it's easy to copy
things I've now moved the threshold of
possibility forward a little bit but now
everybody's in competition with me can
copy that and that's the new fundamental
that's the new baseline so now in order
to be able to be in competition we're
all seeking new innovations this is
almost like the dangerous version of
Shumpert risk creative destruction
creative destruction capitalism in
relationship with technology has the
enormous benefit that the threshold of
innovation is actually where all the
interesting stuff happens once I've
innovated something for a little limited
period of time I have a competitive
advantage but everybody in the world now
has is the ability to see that I've
invented it copying is easier than
inventing so they can catch up with me
they're motivated to do so because if
they don't they've got competitive
disadvantage and so the entire economy
now moves to this new threshold so
that's awesome from the point of view of
certain kinds of things from the point
of view of weapons of mass destruction
is really nasty so that's the idea right
it's the the combination of the
intrinsic dynamics of innovation is hard
to do copying is easy to do and a rival
risk game theory we're always in
competition on the field of innovation
and the field of innovation is
exponential power we've been doing that
if you actually run the history line
back the reason why nuclear weapons were
developed was because we were concerned
that the Nazis were ahead of us on
nuclear weapons so we were willing
to engage in the massive investment of
the Manhattan Project and move the state
of innovation forward which we did
enormous Lee and in about two years the
Soviet Union figured out how to copy it
all right wow that's that's that's the
moral of the story run that same story
against every other possible field of
destruction and across the nuanced
levels of creativity that human beings
happen to have and you find yourself as
a circumstance where the democratization
of weapons of mass extinction is where
we're at kind of now like right now and
accelerating over the next two or three
decades we're just going to continue to
run into circumstances where we've moved
from a point where two people have to
choose not to turn a key at the same
time to a point where every single human
being has to affirmatively know how not
to make bad
decisions lest we in fact kill ourselves
so that's that's the shape of the
problem to me this is brilliant Thank
You Jordan so we all need to develop
ways to learn how to not kill ourselves
right and I guess this is the
appropriate transition into the concept
of sovereignty yeah and really just sort
of because some of the audience may have
heard you speak but also others speak on
this concept of sovereignty but maybe
some have not do you mind just going
into first what is sovereignty real
quick and just sort of the three
components of that sovereignty at the
basic level sovereignty is your capacity
to respond to the world and when I say
respond I'm distinguishing that from
react and a good metaphor for this is
the notion of balance if you imagine
let's just say a fighter like a boxer in
the beginning let's imagine that our
boxer is poised meaning that he's
standing well balanced that his ability
to shift what he's doing is actually
very high you know and he can read and
respond and when he responds the action
that he takes keeps him in a position of
being able to respond so right is my
movement increases my ability to make
better choices in the next moment
that's what response means every choice
you make has the characteristic of
increasing your ability to make good
choices in the next moment when you
react it has the opposite characteristic
it moves you out of balance so you make
a choice that choice changes your
relationship to the world such that your
ability to make your next choice is
actually lower and so I'm a boxer I make
a really strong like I swing hard well
I've made a significant commitment
meaning I've moved out of balance
literally physically you know I'm out of
balance I'm over hope my wait is over as
uncertain spot if it turns out that that
choice didn't work out I'm now actually
quite significantly less capable of
responding to what my opponent does for
quite for a significant period of time
and so what I have to do at that point
is get myself back into balance so if
you notice the way boxers move is they
they make small imbalance movements
really significantly reading and
responding and staying in a state of
high response and
and only when they're willing to make a
gamble do they make a movement that
takes them out of balance and very
quickly try to move back into balance
right that's a really good metaphor if
you don't like combat if that makes you
feel sad first notice that that that
very fact is a response to the world we
can do it with surfing surfing does the
same thing okay
you've got to flow in a movement of
objective reality which is complex and
difficult and over which you have very
little control no control really except
your ability to actually shift and move
your balance so that you're constantly
in this really amazing relationship with
reality where your choices continue to
upgrade your capacity to make choices
and that by the way that that is the
distinction between a and novice and an
expert surfer and if you watch the way
an expert surfer move they have this
amazing ability to almost fly across the
way that every move they make actually
increases the potential of the next move
and every once in a while they'll
explode into a flurry of something that
then decreases their potential but then
of course they immediately have to come
back in so then sovereignty is you're
better to respond to the world it turns
out that there are three basic
components of what that means and I
should mention by the way that I don't
mean control the world I mean respond to
be in relationship with in a way that is
fundamentally collaborative and to allow
the generative of the creative aspect of
being relationship with reality to
emerge so the first aspect is perception
the second aspect is what I call sense
making and meaning making and I say it's
a hand off it's it's converting
perception into sense which is to say
raw input into something you can
actually make sense of and all renting
that sense around like notions of what
the hell's going on and then converting
that sense into Meeny which is to say
into meaningful ways that one can
actually respond to what's happening a
hand on the hand off into action and
then finally this actual action the
choosing how to act and then the
execution of that action in the world as
elegantly and skillfully as as you can
there's a feedback loop right now you
have entered into you've entered back
into reality reality will do what it
does with whatever the hell you did and
then you will be able to perceive that
right so it's a
it's a constant flow and by the way I
should mention it's a complex flow
meaning there's actually stuff coming
back the other direction that your
disposition on how it is that you you
are acting has consequences for your
perception right if I'm in a fight if
I'm if I'm in a combat stance I'm tuning
myself to proceed I will perceive
threats more often if I happen to have
been startled and somebody comes up to
me I'm much more likely to perceive that
as a potential threat than a potential
opportunity then if I am in a state of
complete calm they could both go both
directions and is extremely complex but
nonetheless that's a simple framework to
kind of begin the process of grasping it
do you mind if we do a little bit of
deeper dive on some of these because I
think just looking at all three of these
we can spend hours on this right if
somebody wanted to really get a grasp of
the model of sovereignty and sort of
start to think how they could apply this
to themselves starting with perception I
mean obviously you can do the observing
of what you're observing but what what
are some of the ways that somebody could
start to like just start with perception
and really understand sovereignty the
sovereignty model a little bit more I
imagine you might have noticed that on
occasion I've actually closed my eyes
mm-hmm and that's an example of that
peace perception is actually much bigger
than I think we oftentimes give it
credit for our bodies and our minds and
the combinations have a huge amount of
ways of sensing the world I'm gonna I'm
gonna use a very rough term I'm gonna
call it feelings but by feelings I mean
for example the feeling that guides you
when you're trying to get a lens into
focus or the feeling that guides you
when you're driving a motorcycle to stay
in balance feeling that guides you when
you are shooting a basketball such that
you actually hit the basketball right
there's a pre-reception
you know how you know when your body is
in balance there's the underlying sense
of all the ways that your physiological
systems are responding to the
possibility space of what's going on
right so hey do I feel a certain like
tension okay what does that mean the the
point being that you've got these
evolved sensors let's just call them
sensors and there's lots of them like
thousands and tens of thousands and they
entered
complex relationships with each other so
there's billions of potentials that are
all dedicated to perceiving reality and
converting that into sense and it is no
small feat to endeavor to be able to
actually perceive all of them and allow
them to enter into a very clear sensing
I mean me a simple way of doing that
especially my dad my dad was a fighter
pilot so he taught me that this is one
of the things fighter pilots do is you
can do this with just vision and there's
there's a way of sort of allowing
yourself to be envision where your
ability to perceive your visual field
goes way up hunters like if you're
hunting in the forest this happens
you're not allowing yourself to think
you know what's happening you're
allowing yourself to be very very like
nuanced and sensitive to subtlety in
just your visual field and of course you
can then do that even more broadly you
can be sensitive to subtlety in you know
the normal perceptual field we were
talking like just hearing insight that's
how you do something like hunting like
if you want to know if you want to find
prey out in the in the forest you have
to become very very sensitive to that
kind of thing but then the interior if
the interior signals are even more
subtle now particularly these days
because we live in such a noisy world
and we do such a terrible job of
training people to not pay attention to
their interior landscape that things
that our normal human stuff we've been
very very separated from honestly I mean
this is actually on but it's honestly
the case for most people the biggest
bang for the buck in terms of building
sovereignty is actually at the
perceptual level is actually engaging in
practices where they relearn
skillfulness in sensitively noticing the
subtle signals that come from all the
various modes of sensing that they
actually come into possession and then
they relearn a way of being in
relationship with those subtle signals
that allows that signal to come through
clearly I'll give you an example of
where that fails the notion of
triggering if I perceive something and
some part of the way that I interpret
that perception generates a aversion
emotional
response don't allow this to continue to
come towards you which is a very basic
fundamental and gross and I mean gross
and sense of like coarse-grained emotion
response the state that is generated by
that emotional response has a
characteristic of reducing our capacity
to perceive sensitively it actually
literally at a neurological level
changes the brain and moves blood flow
from say for example the neocortex into
the amygdala as an example and what that
does is it shifts the nature of our
capacity to perceive to perceive subtly
to perceive sensitively and to perceive
caught broadly and it's actually kind of
a simple you know to use a simple
metaphor let's imagine that you were
dealing with a radio antenna and I've
got the radio antenna tuned to 99.7 and
I can hear the music and if I move the
dial one single notch 99.9 hardly enough
they're odd members but whatever the
amount of signal I get drops
tremendously that's actually a really
interesting characteristic of the nature
signal in general it's just real and so
to be in resonance with yourself in this
case as an antenna to be in resonance
with the signal is vastly changing your
capacity to actually perceive it's not a
small thing as a gigantic thing and very
small changes and what I would call your
internal coherence can know enormous li
shift that signal processing capability
all right so to recapitulate you've got
a reinvention or a rediscovering of what
are in fact natural ambient capacities
to just even notice that these things
are happening and then you've got a
developing skillfulness to allow those
things that you've now noticed and
discovered to become clear what do they
mean then you've got a developing
capacity to allow these things to become
coherent to allow the relationship
between among all the distinct signals
to enter into a single signal that is
actually a really high-quality
representation of them all that make
sense that makes sense
so I guess narrowing that point of view
would be like for instance when you're
seeing red so to speak I know that's a
phrase that people use aa trigger
so when you see you get triggered you
get really annoyed and you only have
this narrow focus that would be an
example of just driving you out of this
coherent state is that correct that is
correct I should mention by the way it's
astounding how often that happens and
under what circumstances so for example
being confused and then getting annoyed
is seeing Rhett okay so a
misunderstanding of something could just
narrow your focus so to speak well it's
it's actually not quite that a
misunderstanding of something which
enters into a state of curiosity expand
your focus a misunderstanding something
enters into a state of annoyance or a
state of well either avoidance or
conflict narrows your focus so avoidance
in conflict being the to narrowing
components right yeah going back to
something you said earlier about
perception and the way people perceive
the world is being sort of one of these
core tasks or core ways that people can
start to engage in sovereignty I would
have thought it would have been the
sense vs. meaning the stuff the second
component of the sovereignty you know
model if you will just because some
people struggle to make sense of a
particular concept or a particular event
in a certain way and therefore would
training that area get you into a state
of sovereignty faster or I might
completely misguided there we should be
in a place that actually honestly sort
of slugging through it because that's
what this is about the short answer is
sometimes right and point in fact this
is all going to be absolutely particular
yeah individual there is no general
answer when I start on perception the
reason I started on perception is that
that is the beginning of all and because
of the specifics of what most people
have experienced developmentally most
people have very narrow bands in
perception and in fact that's also very
difficult it's not as obvious to Bill
but what you're saying is also quite
correct I actually would a different
essay called on thinking and simulated
thinking simulated thinking is also
extremely common
it's a comprehensive trap that removes
you almost entirely from sovereignty if
you enter through that door
if you enter through the door okay well
let's work on sense making and meaning
making there is you know a whole lot of
work and path to be engaged in there
in fact so let's just take it at a
higher level this is a whole thing it's
a comprehensive it all the pieces fit
together so no matter what door you
enter into you will quickly find that
the only way to move forward is going to
be found in some other portion of
sovereignty if it turns out that you
have chosen to enter into the door of
sense making and you're working at the
level of say bad cognitive models you
might very quickly find yourself in a
circumstance that in order to do better
you have to move into a liminal space
and when you're in a liminal space the
way that your emotional systems are
responding to it is now a very confusing
environment shuts down your capacity to
actually engage in any form of thinking
so now we're actually kind of moving
into the more of the perception
sense-making
modes like right at the border how does
your system recension in limb analogy is
a there's a significant open thing cuz
you're now separated from sense making
your sense became frameworks have been
dropped and so now you're right now in
that fluid space between perception and
sense making and that by the way is not
at all in common and somebody actually
says the way that I am trying to make
sense of my environment isn't working so
they're willing to move into beginner's
mind
well that's very uncomfortable it often
will expose a lot of stuff that was
developmentally how do I say this right
we arrived we arrived at our sovereignty
as a result of our development in the
world and effective everybody's develop
in the world is to a greater or lesser
degree traumatic our particular form of
sovereignty is a scaffolding built
around that developmental landscape
whatever sense making framework you have
right now it is got a whole bunch of
holes in it around traumas that were
part of your growing up and when you
drop that sense making framework a lot
of those traumas are now raw they're no
longer buffeted and protected by
cognitive and emotional strategies that
you can use to avoid feeling bad things
and so it's gonna often happens you're
gonna run into those bad things and
you're going to feel them and so now you
just dropped yourself right smack back
down to the beginning
which is to learn how to actually feel
bad things at a bit is a level without
dropping out of sovereignty all together
this is kind of the iteration and so
then you'll maybe you'll get good at it
maybe you'll learn how to resolve a
trauma or just learn how to how to build
more skillfulness in not avoiding trauma
when it shows itself you don't get
triggered by events you may not have
learned how to become responsive to but
at least you've learned how to not
become reactive to them and then from
that basis you may begin to be begin
building up a new scaffoldings of sense
making
for example I'm gonna I'm gonna use a
term artfulness and so in agency
artfulness is what we're seeking and the
reason why I'm using that term is
because I think it's many people can
connect that with sensitive and subtle
perception and to have an artful
response to let's say just pass ketball
right you know the difference between a
novice and remediating occur basketball
player and a professional basketball
player is an exquisite elegance and the
flowing of their perception particular
things like proprioception into action
my elegance in motion is first and
foremost tied to a very fluid connection
between subtle senses and all the way
through to action and so it's a really
nice if you just want to watch under if
you've ever seen like the way that a
dancer like a ballet dancer might
practice just moving their hand that's
an interesting thing right because on
the one hand it's a feedback loop
between perception all the different
components are not jerking it you're not
there's a perception aspect and an
agency aspect and so in order to
actually build artfulness to go from
skillfulness to artfulness
means first and foremost to go all the
way back down into perception and build
sensitivity and and add sensitivity it's
such an unconscious level that you can
actually just flow it through it flows
smoothly you don't have to be conscious
of it you can actually now have it just
be a foundational element like think
about like the way that you learned to
walk compare a toddler to say a
six-year-old to a dancer this is move up
that developmental stack in each case
there's a process of an inadequate level
of sovereignty right so at the edge the
threshold engaging awkwardly with a very
complex thing building a sensitivity at
the perceptual level slowing it all the
way through to the point where the
action level it has become artfulness
meaning that it is now smoothly and
easily done and yet very effectively I
think what happens when you're a toddler
what does it make it more so than we
were all other than were familiar with
when you're just learning how to ride a
bike or just learning how to drive a car
that is all you can do your sovereignty
is as a capacity is maxed out by the
complexity of the thing you're trying to
do as you become more skillful in doing
it as you become like this the notion of
like in them driving a car feeling the
road beneath you and feeling how the
tires are glued to the road and feeling
and knowing from a sense making a
meeting making perspective how subtle
adjustments and where your your hands
are on the steering wheel will shift
that into into equilibrium you've now
become artful you're good at driving a
car and that Luton house becomes smooth
you can run very very significant hard
complex human actions through something
which can handle them easily almost
effortlessly and therefore you can do
other stuff right you've freed up a huge
amount of capacity within that zone and
then okay now notice what happens that's
your ordinary sovereignty in response to
your environment oh it's snowed in
and there's ice in the road and things
have become unglued BAM
he's now dropped out of sovereignties
some kind of alert has happened your
capacity to handle that artfully I'm
assuming that you're not from Sweden so
you're not actually expert of that
problem yours you're from Southern
California
so you're deeply out of that's not yours
you're your scheme you've now dropped
out of that your sovereignty has has
shrunk enormous Lee in response to the
complexity in mind you're dealing with
and so now it is all you can handle and
hopefully you've not entered into panic
you haven't actually entered into
reaction at least you've stayed in a
responsive environment and you're trying
to recall okay how do I respond to this
and all of your resources are dedicated
to handling that moment so it's actually
kind of a nice like a series of things
you've got developmental and as a
toddler or a person who's learning how
to drive entering into a relationship
where your holistic sovereignty in this
particular domain is adequate to the
problem so it takes all that you can
handle and then learning more and more
sensitivity and nuanced and skillfulness
to artfulness and at that point now have
a capacity where it becomes smooth and
then
becomes effortless and that just becomes
a component of your larger scheme of
sovereignty now becomes a piece of your
capacity to respond to your environment
and all that complexity now actually
becomes available to you to respond to I
mean now I'm obviously have thrown an
unbelievably significant amount of stuff
at people who are listening to this but
let's try to plug this back into the
previous question driving a car is a
serious deal like if you actually just
look at it from the outside the notion
that we have you know my friend Jim
refers to humans as chimpanzees with
clothes we've got billions of ship in
seas with clothes hurtling about
willy-nilly with 4000 pounds of Steel at
well in California 70 to 80 miles an
hour and yet very rarely does this
actually lead to any meaningful harm
it's actually rather astounding you know
if you were to take a 16th century
adventure and drop them smack dab in the
middle of driving around on any normal
highway they would be out of their mind
in fear for some significant period of
time but it probably affects you would
just sort of drop out of fear altogether
just become at peace nothing because
it's just too crazy and yet we've
figured out how to pull it off so that's
actually quite hopeful that our ability
to achieve individual and collective
sovereignty over very complex things is
real we can pull it off we can do things
in a way that we actually have achieved
a level of artfulness in relationship to
them that we can render them not
unreasonably hazardous well now we just
have to get really really really good at
it and and by the way comprehensively
and so if you take now a look at this
metaphor of cars I'm not just dealing
with the problem of hurtling balls of
steel I'm also dealing with catalytic
reactors that convert fossil fuels into
other kinds of molecules and in the 50s
and 60s they were producing let well
 that was a bad choice our
sovereignty in this case our sensitivity
understand the complexity of chemistry
and human biology was inadequate to the
reality of our capacity to actually
shift and change on reality and we can
created a substantial amount of harm but
we were able to figure it out and
responded to it before killing everybody
and so ok we move forward of course
we're continuing to engage in that kind
of a process around things like carbon
dioxide and our collective sovereignty
is not
adequate to the sense-making portion of
that task meaning we don't actually
really as a Colette as a group of people
have enough sense of what's going on
there to actually make effective choices
and our agency is also not accurate we
don't really understand how to do that
job well but it's not it doesn't feel
like it's so far beyond our capacity
that it's hopeless I feel like we've
actually made great strides and it's
interesting to think about that
particular problem you know Alan musk as
a particular individual trickled look at
it and said you know I think I've got a
way to solve this problem I'm just gonna
cut through the Gordian knot I'm just
gonna go ahead and move us all the way
to electric cars and I know how to pull
that off without having a whole lot of
cord nature it's actually kind of
interesting how that happens we can
actually do a whole whole little story
on the relationship between collective
and individual capacity in the broader
scheme of things which is nice like that
kind of thing can happen and that's very
helpful it grabs hold chunks of problems
and moves them in a different sense
making or collective sovereignty domain
but again if we zoom back the
problematic exponential innovation
exponential technology growth in the sub
domain of rival risk game theory and the
fact that innovation is hard to do but
easy to copy means that if our pace of
collective individual collective
sovereignty doesn't keep up with our
pace of our capacity to generate impact
on the world
then we're when we will in fact if for
sure kill ourselves it's actually uh
it's guaranteed there's there's actually
no way that can't be disastrous and it's
not like I don't I don't want that to
sound pre-emptive or visceral it's
literally just math it's like you know
if tomorrow I have the ability to
generate two levels of harm and I have
the ability to manage that at the level
of two and the next I could do four
levels of harm but I can manage it at
the level of three and then the next day
it's eight levels harm I can mention
level of four all right so I've got an
exponential growth of harm and a linear
growth of management and let's say the
world can survive a level of say 10,000
harm I can actually go for a while and
not notice you know the world is like
okay you're doing 500 harm but who cares
10,500 doesn't you know I can kind of
cash it out but at an exponential rate
when I'm somewhere in the range of you
know a thousand harm I'm only a few
seconds away from killing and just to
bring everything
that's the keeper that's the insight is
that it's an acceleration issue it's not
a velocity issue is an acceleration
issue and think they're accelerating
your ability to respond to what the
consequences of your actions are is much
less than you think you're projecting
forward and saying okay I'm going out a
hundred miles an hour so that thing
that's ahead of me is gonna come at me
at a certain rate but you're wrong
because you're actually going to be
going 110 miles an hour on 120 miles an
hour 130 miles an hour and so things are
coming fast this happens by the way for
people who jump out of airplanes there's
a car thing called I think it's called
ground rush where our minds are
perceiving our are heading towards the
earth and we're perceiving it as if it's
happening at a constant velocity and so
we get extremely surprised by how
quickly happens as you get close
now you can train you can become you can
become skillful in relationship to
acceleration but it's not obvious it's
not trivial and our human evolved
systems are not designed to deal with
that you know we didn't involve in an
environment things were happening that
rapidly for most of our evolutionary
timeframe things took thousands of years
to change meaningfully I'm it's only
been recently we're seeing the
Industrial Revolution or maybe the
second agricultural revolution where
things had changed rapidly enough that
we're even conscious the fact that those
changes were meaningful but now we're
returning to a time frame where they're
in fact changing so rapidly the decades
are see changes alright so then that's
what I said this is it's just
mathematics that we need to actually
come to the point where the technologies
of sovereignty become the primary object
of our innovation frontier so the first
and foremost before we increase any
other capacity we have already increased
our capacity for individual and
collective sovereignty so that we're
always certain that our capacity to be
responsive to our compart our abilities
is always equal to our abilities did
that make sense it does but it evokes a
lot of questions because if I look at
and maybe I'm seeing the wrong side of
the story here but if I look at the
world right now and I see that we're
developing all these technologies AI
CRISPR I guess nuclear energy to a
certain extent and
sovereignty I guess the the focus on
sovereignty as a development and one of
those technology seems to be behind
those technologies so I guess question
that I have is how do we catch up and
that part b of that question is really
we've talked a lot about individual
sovereignty how do we go to collective
sovereignty all right so let's put a
note right here because what's about to
happen is gonna be really good i want to
get to the good stuff first but i want
to lay a little bit of groundwork
alright so let's start with a very
interesting problematic and that is
unfortunately the strategies associated
with rival risk game theory conflict
competition that is in the shape of
conflict as for a long time understood
that sense making itself is the kind of
thing that often you want to be able to
break but in the after the Cold War
started you know after we realized we
couldn't just beat the other guy up with
bigger bombs we entered into a hyper
acceleration of what I call the war on
sense-making this is actually
excruciatingly ly problematic because if
we've identified building capacity in
the technologies of sovereignty is the
most needful thing being an environment
with winning the war on sense-making
is in fact one of the primary areas of
rival risk competition is particularly
bad does that make sense why that's the
case no do you mind just unpacking that
a little bit so sure so it's very
difficult let's just use this as an
example I said what we're endeavoring to
do you and I we are endeavoring to
engage in the formation of a coherence
between us we are collaborating which is
to say that we're endeavoring to
construct a collaborative sovereignty
and to jump to the end the only way we
figured this out as we build
collaborative sovereignty no particular
individuals opportunity anywhere near
enough if I thought you were lying to me
if I thought you were trying to
manipulate me or take advantage of me or
even if I just entered into a situation
where I couldn't trust you enough to
tell you the full and honest truth that
is catastrophic for collaborative
sovereignty it's not a little bit bad
it's actually catastrophic or you can't
even begin to enter into collaboration
when you're in a frame when you're
nervous when you're in a space of
potential
defection okay well that pretty much
exploited describes our entire global
environment I I can't trust anything
that is currently conveyed through any
kind of signaling mechanism if it's if
it's not human to human right in this
conversation with you I can enter into a
space of potential collaboration and I
happen to have made a commitment to
being willing to take the risk of doing
so so I will always enter and tell you
volunteer making myself fully vulnerable
to you defecting to me and then if you
know if it turns out you do I just sort
of shut down and stop engaging with you
and kind of cleave you from the graph
like you're now hostile no more
engagement it's actually literally
called double tit-for-tat in game theory
but the technology's just broadcast
don't work that way so I can't trust any
signal that comes from broadcast
full-stop doesn't matter I don't care if
I think they're well-intentioned or not
the underlying incentive structures and
organizational dynamics that control the
broadcast signals guarantee that they
are so deeply embedded in the war on
sense-making that they cannot be trusted
which means that they cannot be used for
collaboration which means that any
signal that comes from them or drives
them is effectively a virus that breaks
down our capacity to enter into
individual and collaborative sovereignty
it's actually a big deal what I just
said just declared it was the media
basically yeah no question it is a
comprehensive existential conflict that
must be won and here's the thing you
know the phrase like it's a phrase like
if you go to war with monsters be
wearing less you become a monster
yourself those lines this is a place
where we have to have enough individual
sovereignty that we can actually go
enter into this war without becoming
monsters ourselves and we have to
actually have enough capacity to
recognize what it is to create a
boundary without entering into struggle
I don't know if you've ever practice
Aikido but Aikido is a good example of
what that feels like
not Aikido but I'd done my Thai that's
very different different actually yeah
you can actually if you if you if you
sort of imagine well what I would
suggest is just doing a little bit of
Aikido and then comparing the two and
that actually gives you a whole lot of
the sense the odd Lina the Jedi in the
early Star Wars movies actually had a
sense of this and to be able to to
connect with what it is to be
extremely capable of actually engaging
in combat without actually but at the
level of your heart or soul being in a
fight is the thing okay so that's that's
a bit of far-field but it's interesting
but here's the thing this is actually
circling back to an earlier question
earlier point as far far too many people
allow themselves to just enter back into
infection when the liminal event opened
I don't care what mechanism you that you
use to enter into sense-making and I'll
use an example I don't care if you read
the New York Times or watch Fox News
these are both straight-up viruses
everything that comes out of them is
reducing your sovereignty the tone the
facial expressions the body language the
frame the expectations the assumptions
the invitations to entering into
relationship everything that comes out
of these is a virus is destructive of
your sovereignty now if you recognize
that you can enter into relationship
with them in a fashion that is affective
meaning you can observe them you can
know that you're not entering into
collaboration with them you're watching
something that is an evidence of
hostility and learning how to respond to
it skillfully you can do that and that's
actually by the way very important I
have a nuts set of sensors that I have
out in the world that I observe and
spend time on to be perceptive of what's
happening in the world but yeah I'm not
letting it in to my psyche I have
boundaries on what is true and what's
not true that's unfortunate because
that's really hard and of course that
means the field almost everybody is
exposed to a field that is pulling us
out of sovereignty and putting us into
conflict that even further pushes of
sovereignty and it's and it's not simple
it's really sophisticated because
remember it's the war on sense-making
that's been going on since at least the
1940s which means that our understanding
of propaganda and our understanding of
human psychology and our understanding
of messaging and our understanding of
mind control and I mean that in the
strong and weak sense is amazing and we
don't actually have any idea how
sophisticated it is I'm actually in the
process of writing a blog post call I'm
currently calling that the Ballad of
James Jesus
angleton you knew who he was if you
don't mind enlightening me he was the he
was the first head of
counterintelligence at the CIA hmm think
about that counter-intel the first head
of
her Intel at the CIA he went completely
insane like schizophrenic all the way
down absolutely completely insane
because that's what happens when that's
your relationship to your environment
obviously the KGB was trying to
infiltrate the CIA well how do you know
how do you know when the individuals
you're interacting with are themselves
hyper sophisticated agents who are
actually privy to things that you're not
privy to and are trying to disrupt your
own understanding of reality we're all
James Jesus Angleton now and if you're
if you are in that field you're in
trouble okay so that's a that's the
stuff the context all right that's the
context of this problem so we got a
double whammy on the one hand we're
rapidly approaching a level of challenge
that we you know that is way beyond
anything we've ever considered possible
much let's dealt with on the other hand
we have to innovate a level of
sovereignty that is adequate to it which
is something that we've never even begun
to contemplate much less developed and
finally on the omnipresent and always
ironic third hand we're doing so in the
context of a war on our capacity to do
that that is profound and accelerating
so that's that's that's that's actually
the situation so what did I say there
was good news well it turns out there's
actually really good news it's
interesting actually the problem is
exponential as it turns out the essence
of exponential is collaboration okay
that's not obvious unfortunately be nice
if it was obvious they see if I can find
a way to make that a little bit more
clear going back to the innovation on
top or copying on top of innovation
leading to further innovation is that it
yeah let me do it this way actually this
is actually puppet Buddha way of doing
it in in World War two the Manhattan
Project and Bletchley Park and I'm just
gonna use those as metaphors I know
there's a lot of nuance here but let's
just assume that they're more or less
the way that they're articulated so the
Turing story and the and the Oppenheimer
story these were recognitions of the
necessity of creating environments that
were conducive to innovation so that the
level of innovation was adequate to
achieve the objective something happened
there which was in a recognition on the
part of conflict of the necessity of
innovation and of the discovery that the
environment that is necessary to achieve
innovation is of a certain
Manhattan Project was a collab
raishin Leslie Park was actually
collaboration as well I mean Turing was
the singular genius unit made it happen
was the collaboration the space of
collaboration is the fertile feel from
which Springs all creativity and thus
all innovation it has always been that
case but because we're now entering into
a situation where the raw level of
creativity the raw level of innovation
is the thing right the thing that
matters it's becoming more more clear so
if you look for example just like the
arc of the culture of technology
companies going back to say Ford the
Ford Corporation and all the way up to
say Google so for General Motors IBM
hewlett-packard Apple is just skipped to
Google and there's a whole bunch of
other ones in there Microsoft Google is
just just like that which you'll notice
is that in order to achieve a higher
level of innovative capacity which is to
say in order to get more of that thing
which is in fact the competitive
advantage each one of these
organizations had to innovate a higher
level of collaboration they had to
redesign the underlying nature what
their core culture was in a direction of
more capacity to collaborate
collaboration the space of collaboration
is the fertile field from which
creativity and thus innovation Springs
and because in just straightforward
technical innovation or technical
capitalism the ability to be more
creative the ability to be more
innovative was the currency of
competitive advantage that has shown us
the arc well what that means is if we
can just find ways to continue to
improve our ability to discern these
spaces of collaboration right how we
create environments where human beings
are increasingly capable of coming into
collaboration with each other which then
means to discern the spaces and the ways
in which we can become more coherent
with each other then and only then we
can achieve higher levels of creativity
and sheave higher levels of innovation
well we're almost there
you may notice if we kind of listen or
rethink about this entire story
discernment and coherence and in
are the characteristics of sovereignty
which is to say that precisely to the
degree to which that we've become
skillful in developing individual
sovereignty and creating spaces where we
can enter into relationships of
increasing the sovereignty that is the
most that that that kind of thing and
I'm just going to call that right now a
creative coherence that kind of thing
this this there's gathering together of
individuals we're achieving high levels
of personal sovereignty and learning how
to enter into relationships of
increasing collaborative sovereignty
creative coherence is perfectly aligned
with the essence of creativity and
innovation so if what you're doing is
you're racing in a conflict of how to go
about engaging in innovation the place
to be you know to be further along that
curve is to be in a space of coherent
creativity and that is the point at
which there's a shift from the rival
risk game theoretic dynamics to anti
rival risk game theoretic dynamics in a
rival risk game theoretic dynamic you
and I are some at some point in
competition struggling over some thing
that one of us can have the other one
can't and therefore we enter into a
psychology in a relationship that's
associated with competition at some at
some minimum point in anti rave
rivalries game theoretic dynamics we're
in a situation where my ability to
benefit increases every single time your
ability to benefit increases which means
that the best possible choice I can make
for myself is perfectly in aligned with
the best possible choice you can make
for yourself and it produces and this
thing this this anti rivals relationship
which is to say again I'm just saying
this in many different ways
collaborative spaces creative coherence
is the most capable of creativity and
the most capable of innovation so
there's a perfect linkage if we actually
begin the process of coming into and
putting sovereignty individual and
collective at the forefront that place
that that place where we've actually
achieved that becomes the locus of the
highest level of potential innovation
because it's the locus of highest level
of potential innovation it becomes a
generative attractor because aunt iris
is is uh Metcalfe's law parks lots I
mean the more people who participate the
more value that generates on an
exponential level and sort of shifts
we've now shifted from the rival risks
on the game theoretic curve which is
ruinous to the ante rival risks on the
game theoretic of which is well it's
perpetual okay there's there's nothing
that that should continue to proceed
until there's unless there's something
about reality itself that causes it to
just sort of elegantly slow down alright
that was a gigantic payload and there's
some pretty poorly rock concepts that I
threw down so I imagined that I didn't
actually deliver much but hopefully it
was at least a gesture in the right
direction I think it was very helpful
now one question that came out of that
is that you said things like the
Manhattan Project in the past were a
recognition on the part of conflict or
the conflicting side that they needed to
innovate right yep how do you see
sovereignty expanding if the government
in this well these are in conflict in
the past has been government how do you
see sovereignty expanding if governments
are not aligned or if governments aren't
cooperating in general with this concept
of individual sovereignty we are going
to have to reinvent governance which
almost certainly will imply routing
around government and I it's funny like
yeah I said that was a very much
straight face and it's because it's
oddly enough in the scope of things
actually not that much of a big deal
we're already in the process of doing it
I mean just think about like just being
a cryptocurrency one minute before
cryptocurrency happened it was
absolutely impossible for anybody to
create a currency that wasn't a state
actor like literally the nanosecond
before the Satoshi Y paper was published
it was categorically impossible and you
know we now sit in the era where it's
obviously trivial there's like I don't
know tens of thousands of them right now
so that's it's happening and it turned
out it's actually in the space of
creative genius and it's just another
way of putting it and particularly
collaborative creative genius which is
to say people being able to enter into
collaboration with each other the power
of that is so enormous that these
problems end up being prosaic so
government as big as it is
and it's powerful listen don't get me
wrong is actually miniscule in
comparison to the potential of what
happens if we become artful in these
technologies of sovereignty in these
creative coherences and it's actually
something interesting going on right now
in the world of watching broadly
speaking it's actually the whole point
is that it's it's it's not that so I
might become very interested in a
project called holo chain in fact I got
to tell you right now that even though I
don't know for sure all of my intuitions
are telling me that that's a super big
deal so much so that I'm pointing a lot
of attention at it and the reason why
I'm positioning it is interesting is
that it's part of an arc so if you look
at at the arc it's basically been
Bitcoin aetherium
and then question marks meaning that
everything else that's happened in
blockchain has been a kind of an
exposition of those two primary moves
and what's interesting about those two
primary moves is they're both moves in
the direction of more capacity to engage
in collaboration and hollow chain is
really quite vastly more of that sort
there's a phrase that the I like which
is called culture eats strategy for
lunch what the hollow chain people seem
to have done really well is they got
culture right I don't know if you've
spent any time in the crypto universe
but one of the biggest challenges
particularly the Bitcoin subset of the
crypto universe has been let's call it
I'm gonna call it culture meaning that
all too often they've come into
situations where conflict resolution
looks an awful lot like 12 year old kids
on a playground and that's not a
particularly effective way to resolve
conflict it's definitely not a
particularly attractive way to engage in
collaboration because it generates hurt
feelings it generates people who feel
like the other people are not to be
trusted sort of begins to fragment and
so the collective intelligence breaks up
it breaks up physically meaning people
have now sorted into different groups
that are now in competition with each
other engaging in all kinds of weird
stupid but also even the
individuals in subgroups are now left to
serve and sense of like wait a minute
maybe this is not a safe place to be and
I need to be less trusting other people
around me so you've got like a
decreasing capacity hollow chain
actually seems to have spent a lot of
work on just building sovereignty as
individuals and a group first and
foremost they've actually been working
on this thing for 10 years well well in
advance it actually Bitcoin existing
they actually working a different
project called the meta currency
and the group that worked on it actually
has consciousness of questions like
individual sovereignty and questions
like how do we enter into spaces of
collaboration that actually got really
good at that and on the basis of that
they've actually constructed something
which when you double-click on it and
take a look at the code and the
architecture and the design and the
strategy is really really good like a
lot better than anything else that I've
seen so that's an example it's an
example of two things it's an example of
fact that we are ambiently discovering
that the niche of selective advantage in
the contemporary environment happens to
be in the place of increasing individual
and collaborative sovereignty if I'm
right how the chain is going to
out-compete eath the theorem which by
the way means that I'm moving a lot of
my crypto investments into all those
tests okay so that the niche of
collective competitive advantages in the
space of individual and collaborative
sovereignty and that the generativity of
that fact is enormous but it's it's what
ends up happening as a consequence of
getting there is really significant I
call a chain may be a potential not
right now an actual but a potential of
say a thousand times more creative or
capacity to deliver real innovation into
the world then aetherium has been and
I'd say right now we can say that the
theorem is about a hundred times more
creative than Bitcoin if you look at all
the kind of things that were developed
in that space so that's like that's
interesting I would say right now I'm
making a bold claim but I could be very
well wrong and I haven't done enough
work to be able to feel super-confident
but my spidey sense is is is telling me
that and it's a really good example of
the nature of what we're talking about
Jordan I want to transition a little bit
because one of the the project that
you're involved in and how I came to
know you neuro hacker collective in
terms of attacking this whole question
of sovereignty and how to develop
sovereignty both on the individual and
on a collective level how do you guys do
that in terms of the products do you
that you produce do you mind just going
a little bit on well you have quality
and quality of mind out right now yep
how those help individuals develop
sovereignty
okay so first and this is actually I
think important this is mostly a
question for Daniel neuro hackers is
vastly more centred on his area of
expertise than mine I am a collaborator
he is the
core collaborator he's the Turing in
this story and I'm the guy who kind of
bias Springs during his lunch it's a
pretty fair comparison so this lets me
look at from the point of view first why
why this particular thing and approach
and then how and I can I can I can
simulate the how pretty well so for
purposes of like pretend look looking
like I know what I'm talking about it
I'll do an okay job but its core to
recognize that I'm mostly simulating it
why well we've already identified why
the technologies of sovereignty are the
thing the thing that actually is is the
most needful in the moment why this
particular thing we've got two things
going on one is the problem of what I
call in media stressed we're in the
world we're in a world that is happening
in in in ways and we are in that world
and we have certain capabilities of
being present in the world I can't snap
my fingers and make things happen I have
to actually do stuff in a relationship
to be my personal capabilities are so in
looking at the space of possibility of
what could be done by us for real right
now and then attempting to consider that
in the context of what actually must be
done in what order we ended up
recognizing this particular moment this
particular event was a good use of time
a good place to attend so it shows up
like this on the one hand the physical
body is the primary instrument of
sovereignty let's put it very simply
with very limited exceptions if you're
hungry like really hungry you're can't
you can't be somber and your your body
hunger signals are gonna override your
habits and if you're physically ill we
can't be sovereign alright and this
actually by the way shows up not just in
the sense that if you're physically ill
you can't do stuff but also to affects
your psychology your cognition you know
as we all know if you're depressed if
you're not getting enough sleep like if
your body's stopped everything else is
really really hard and by contrast if
your body and in particular now I'm
thinking if you remember your brain is a
part of your body so that's important if
your body is dialed in then everything
else gets a whole lot easier in fact a
whole bunch of stuff that used to be
problematic drops out that's actually
really interesting we can actually solve
say issues of anxiety not behaviorally
but biochemical and I don't mean xanax I
mean actually solve the issue
we could get the how in a second that
distinction between xanax and for-real
is important okay so it's a super high
lever here's another piece we could have
the swim against or with capitalism yes
it's there it's got all kinds of
problematics it's got all kinds of
awesome advantages what about some
advantages is that the ability to
deliver products into the hands of
billions of people exists now of course
if that product happens to be a can of
coke that's really bad but there are
ways if you could develop a product
which is broadly and well designed to
increase sovereignty then you're now
increasing sovereignty on mass using
swimming with using the advantages of
the amazing enormous credible machine
that capitalism is constructed right now
we are able to deliver qualia to people
in New Zealand in Abu Dhabi and and all
over the world except for China right
now and I should say that that we are
quite decidedly not Apple we are not a
sophisticated well-oiled corporate
machine because we are eating our own
dog food which means we're experimenting
and how to engage in collaborative
sovereignty first and foremost it would
have been short-sighted lis easier to do
this like a venture funded company but
we've been very careful to maintain the
centering on collaborative coherence
which means that we're not as effective
in the short term but hopefully on the
basis of actually being able to go
exponentially and there's there's
evidence that's beginning to happen
which is nice now here's good and then
go to one more level are so the body is
a lever in sovereignty well the next one
happens to be that we have entered into
an ace which is we've entered into a
place of opportunity and Daniel and a
handful of other people in particular
where we have enough understanding of
the the psychological cognitive
neurological biochemical stack that we
can actually engage in effective action
elegant artful action in that space you
know that wasn't true ten years ago it
is true now it's actually quite
decidedly truth that's down here by the
way we can do this not just in this
psycho effective area we can do it in
all kinds of places and we're like I
think I mentioned before you started
recording that we've got like a hundred
different products they've been
identified and about
that are well characterized and only a
handful are in the psycho effective
space like say sleep others are in
places like cellular regeneration
longevity immune response to a gene ante
a anti aging broadly like I actually am
by forgetting anti aging and feeling
youthful there's one that makes you
actually live longer and there's another
one that makes your current being in the
world younger more youthful and that's
because of the fact that the the fact
that we are on the threshold of a new
way of engaging in how we go about doing
scientific discovery and how we go about
generating scientific hypotheses that is
broadly synthetic rather than broadly
analytic and there's I mean that's a
gigantic digression that is probably not
worth doing but the point is that that
opportunity exists right so we have a
really interesting fine point then we're
in a situation where we have the
possibility by virtue of executing on a
strategy of deploying new capacities and
a new potential specifically for
upgrading psychological and cognitive
capacities and then using that as a
leverage point to go into the broader
pieces of this biological body piece of
stack and potentially I'll mess all
right so if I was in the business of
trying to figure out how to actually go
about constructing sovereignty that's
one of the things that I would do first
because now it happens is every single
human being who enters into right
relationship with qualia is meaningfully
increasing their personal sovereignty at
the lowest level of the stack and at the
highest level of the stack meaning that
their body is becoming more available to
be responsive and they're actually
increasing the capacity of their
conscious awareness to make use of that
simultaneously and therefore becoming
capable of becoming part of the
conversation so going back to the
beginning for example if you find
yourself really struggling with how to
live in a post Trump world qualia is
actually a pretty good answer
because it'll actually help your body
deal with stress and the negative
consequences of living in an environment
that is hostile and confusing not
perfectly but it'll help actually it can
help quite a bit actually depending on
what dysfunctions you have is it's
really good at addressing dysfunctions
and will increase your your
psychological cognitive capacity
again the process of actually
interacting with the liminal questions
so that's it like it's like a little
it's a little tiny instrument that is a
bit out of catalytic and hopefully
hopefully a lot autocatalytic we should
just say that the people who begin to
enter into this relationship what we're
calling the field of empowered
responsibility
meaning they enter into a conscious
relationship that there's like a like a
a mirror the the looking-glass Alice's
Alice's looking-glass you could be on
one side of the looking-glass
where you are reactive you are not
conscious of your capacity to enter into
personal responsibility for your
response in responding to the world and
then there's the other side of the
looking glass where you were entering
into the field of empowered
responsibility it does not mean that you
are in fact actually sovereign it means
that you have chosen to begin taking
that path and that choice is the first
choice like if you haven't made the
choice it's very difficult to go any
further but once you've made the choice
then two good things happen one is you
become more available to yourself and
two is you become more capable of
entering into collaboration I can
collaborate with you and or anybody else
who's chosen to enter into that space
because I can say something that maybe
doesn't sound right but instead of going
from confusion into avoidance you may be
now learned that going from confusion to
curiosity is a more powerful response
and that's kind of it once we can do
that now we're beginning to
collaboratively build it has to be
collaborative unfortunate this is not an
L on Musca movement well not
unfortunately it simply is not an L on
musk movement it just it's not
unfortunate at all if it works it's
wonderful but we can begin the process
of figuring out how we go about
collaboratively constructing these
spaces of creative coherence and that's
it like that's that's ends up being the
whole game so this is not a trivial
effort right we are not in this for the
purposes of making dough by selling
brain pills as some of the people who we
work with have pointed out is like okay
be careful that's not the thing this is
actually all part of a reasonably well
considered seamless web fully connected
with the most challenging problems
well a of the moment and be as
I can tell I have ever been faced and I
can personally attest to just quality as
effectiveness I've taken it for about
ten months now and just like you said
being able to engage in that
conversation and really reduce those
anxieties so that you can be more
open-minded and admit when you don't
understand something and see curiosity
has been frankly life-changing for me so
thank you very much for that one I guess
a couple more questions because I know
we're running late on time Jordan and
Jordan is just looking at your
background and you start at Texas A&M
Harvard Law DivX and you've developed
this thought process around complex
systems complex science complex system
science so to speak how did you get
started like what what books came to
mind what books came to you where it was
it interactions with people like Daniel
what what really got you started down
this path okay so we have to start the
begin at the very beginning which is on
the one hand I was lucky enough to be
born into an environment that was pretty
darn conducive to the kind of being I
happen to be and the kind of being I
happen to be doesn't work in the world
in which we happen to live for whatever
reason none of the ordinary mechanisms
of achieving a sense of fitting in or
achieving a sense of success worked at a
basic level so fill in the blank you
know in school
the notion that you know the teacher
approves of you or that you got an a
actually made me angry not satisfied in
business being offered a lucrative job
or some sort of upwardly mobile position
made me feel depressed not successful in
relationship with other people like
interacting with them as a child and as
an adolescent an inability to actually
feel met or heard and an inability to
actually perceive why it was that other
people thought third thought that
certain things were attractive or
interesting all right so this was an
interesting dynamic on the one hand the
things that would Brett Weinstein
actually very specifically calls this
the hill climbing
so there was a path of climbing a hill
that existed that if you could climb the
hill was a really good choice if it
didn't work that just wasn't wasn't my
thing
I wasn't that kind of a creature and yet
on the other hand I was just lucky
enough convenient environment where the
kind of being that I am was supported
enough that I didn't get broken on the
rocks most of the people and I've
encountered many of that this sort of
the latter support did not have that
luck and so they ended up more or less
broken on the rocks which is super sad
and one of the other things that we got
buried that got us very motivated around
qualia was actually different to heal as
many of those people as we possibly can
both out of a sense of compassion and
love and also I'll do sentences just
practicality which is we actually need
those kinds of people think again back
to Turin as an example token on the
rocks right actually died as a
consequence of not being adapted to the
world in which he found himself okay so
in that context and that characteristic
one of the interesting things that I
noticed and this is actually literally
me retro actively looking back on my own
development and saying what the hell's
going on there is that certain things in
my experience showed up with a kind of
luminous intensity and mysteriously
meaning they weren't ordinary other
people didn't say hey this is cool
I would like come across something it
would just be a human that's attractive
like like a five year old a six or seven
year old an eight year old and I would
get reasonably obsessed about them and
since I spent a substantial amount of my
time Solo would effectively indulge in
them and so this would be for example
computers I was very deeply involved in
computers about as early as you could
have been deeply involved in computers
historically like born in 1971 and you
know playing with computers more less as
soon as personal computers became
available at all and then a lot I could
actually my wife asked me a question
like if you've been born now what would
you do and the short answer is well that
kid would have never gotten off the
internet which is not healthy but that's
probably what would have happened the
only reason I got off the internet back
when I had a modem was because my
parents needed to use the phone if you
would call how those work I mean all the
other stuff that interesting enough we
can actually broadly call nerd nerd
culture for example things like science
fiction and comic books were
role-playing games and science itself
mathematic
these were all and here's the thing I
had this really interesting recognition
that each one of these is kind of like a
bat signal or a lighthouse of beacon by
a kind of mind or a kind of spirit that
was endeavoring to signal out the space
of creative coherence in spite of being
in a world that was hostile to that is
endeavoring to speak in collaboration
with anyone who was willing to actually
listen and some of these cases they're
actually cryptographic a lot of the
cases actually meaning many many
geniuses in the past figured out how to
say something that was attractive in the
prosaic language of the world in which
they lived but actually carried a more
fundamental payloads that those who were
able to hear it in fact I'd say that was
somebody figured that out a long time
ago and it's my comment and for whatever
reason I found that I was attracted to
those kinds of things and repulsed by
things that felt bad like you know
watching TV shows or movies or reading
books that had a certain I know you say
exploitative nature to them that they
would they used your own humaneness to
take advantage of you a good marketing
it is it basically and so that just ends
up becoming it builds on itself you know
if you when you're like ten four
different find yourself reading
Nietzsche and trying to actually do the
thing that Nietzsche says which is not
become a follower and it's his his his
hope the whole point of Nietzsche's is
to actually listen and then stop
following that's a good okay what does
that mean when you're ten years old and
then you know turn the corner and say
reading Asimov and saying okay now I can
imagine these vast possibilities what's
available in universe and then going and
say playing a role-playing game where
you begin to recognize that identity the
identity that you're handed as a human
being in the world is no more real than
the identity that you just adopted in
your role-playing game you know I I am
as much Jordan Hall as I am Hagar the
dwarf and it's just okay well how much
time do I spend there and how do other
people relate to me it's it's a
exactly the same but it's if there's a
lot of similarity and it creates a
consciousness space it creates the
fluidity of being able to not be
addicted to a particular paradigm to a
particular identity or being addicted to
not being addicted to them right to be
sort of quitting about but actually a
fluidity in liminal space that allows
you to be receptive to the possibilities
in a kind of openness and then when it
up happening was I guess for my in my
particular case two characteristics one
was for a variety of reasons not the
least of which is that my dad was a
military man
I built the substantial skillfulness in
strategy how I showed up as being able
to be in relationship with my dad was to
be really good at strategy like strategy
games for example and the second was it
turns out that nerd culture was on the
ascendance so having a deep familiarity
with and artfulness and say computers
was really useful in 1994 so I could buy
those two combined a high capacity and
strategy with the high awareness and
broad spectrum skillfulness in all the
various aspects of nerd culture to begin
getting into being a technology
entrepreneur but never ever from the
point of view of being a business man I
have no interest whatsoever in that
entire category the whole point has
always been the thing that I'm talking
about right now which I've always been
connected to as far as I can tell which
is actually a childhood level is
literally just being able to enter into
a space of collaboration otherwise
entities playing with good friends so so
then what ended up happening and I don't
know if you paid attention to the bio
but I was quite successful I actually
achieved a certain meaningful level of
success I took a company that I had
specifically founded public on the
Nasdaq and then it would ended up
happening was that I was handed the
wonderful opportunity of feeling all the
various traumas that I had not resolved
sort of collapse on top of me all at
once Jordan this has been an absolutely
phenomenal conversation one of the
things I just want to close with is just
first off I would thank you again for
all the work you've done around qualia
and thank you for this awesome
conversation just a couple of books that
you'd recommend in terms of people
reading on I guess let's do complex
system science in order to get started
where would you where would you start
I would read a book called a thousand
years of nonlinear history and warned
the age of intelligent machines both by
Manuel de Landa top tool you use to get
yourself into a state of peak
performance actually I may not know the
answer to this question the top tool is
breathing so are we talking
diaphragmatic breathing or something
else no no a whole like 19 different
breathing techniques depending on the
situation so breathing as an entire
portfolio like becoming mindful of
breathing turned out to be huge I mean
what kid should be taught that and
almost is it from birth
the second was all the simple different
variations on meditation and mindfulness
and then the third actually was qualia
Jordan thank you again this has been
awesome my mind is mind is blown in so
many good ways so I'm gonna take this
all away and I've got a lot to digest
here but thank you again for being on
the show and I would love to have you
back on some time soon I appreciate it
yeah it sounds like we were actually
just getting ready to have more
conversation so this is exactly we could
go down a lot of other places but thanks
again right on thanks bye-bye all right
superhumans what did you think of that
episode is it something you enjoyed is
it something you like to have a
follow-up episode I know I have a lot of
questions that come out of that episode
and I could have conversations with
Jordan for hours but really I want to
hear your feedback so if you can send an
email to podcast at decoding superhuman
calm I read them all it would be greatly
beneficial for me to really just hear
what you have to say what can be better
how could we grow this thing speaking of
growing if you wouldn't mind going over
to iTunes SoundCloud whatever podcast
listening device or application you use
and giving decoding superhuman a 5 star
rating it really helps getting the word
out and I appreciate it very much
again I look forward to hearing from you
so just send an email to podcast at
decoding superhuman calm and have a
great day superhumans