oh the electro and living very creating
around right they also does wine nice
people
yeah
court so she is a very unique
intelligent and crazy person so I'm very
centralized ever here
Institute for rapping here kind words
and all of you through our journey errs
on a pinnacle adventure an adventure
consciousness
[Music]
[Music]
okay so my presentation is motion of
awakening perception in the traditions
and special event revision there's this
notion of direct purchase drive
perception that I can see the world as
it is and this is of course been
debunked by many years such as
postmodern and I'm going to try to
convince you that there is a modern
sense of direct perception as direct
participation one of the questions that
will be asked as we go along is what do
you participate in it we participate
with emotional material with mental
ideas with memories with fantasies with
our computers or I'll be participating
the sensations in our body that deep
sense of presence in a sense of spatial
mess of this room and sounds on the
outside so in the consciousness studies
course the Masters course and
consciousness studies a great deal of
the work we do is to train people to be
able to notice in their direct
experience what is what are they
participating with because let's online
contracts and what's off live in
consciousness will create the kind of
experience you're having okay so this is
just a tiny little preview through what
we do under pressure
okay so you guys have had a long history
of calling perception into question that
we said well we have perception we only
get the appearance of reality so we have
the east this notion of perception and
appearance as illusion in the West we
have sciences that has shown that
perception is also not deceptive so this
is the refraction of work the
postmodernist remind us that perception
is vulnerable to the perspectives that
you take as multiple different
perspectives and of course we have these
cool videos would enough spread your
attention disorder cannot actually
member know that you've seen or actually
seeing the gorilla in the middle of the
basketball game because you've been
primed to watch only white whiteness
right so we we kind of long as you're
calling perception into question but
there's a paradox here because every
time you notice that but there's a dis
privacy between the perception and
reality the fundamental when we know
that the pentacon has some level our use
of our perceptions
so we because our senses ultimately
verify these guys
errors and we are silent thing is
affirming our trust in them even as we
call them into question listen so we
look at this example I'm not sure if it
works on the big screen but certainly
the smaller venue you can get the
feeling your motion right from your hand
you know it's an illusion and we know
it's a visual illusion so your signs
painlessly poultry senses two things at
the same time that that stationery an
oxidation it's actually moving are the
cicada movements in your eyes that are
making the sexual get respect angle
guesses excusive your motion so the
senses simultaneously tell you that
there's an engine now in the West with a
long tradition after the Enlightenment
period of idealism for philosophers view
these these great views like David Hume
says makes no less sense to leave the
building through the third floor we know
them to walk out to the first floor door
because he says because it's just an
illusion that one is better
yup of course you never walked out of a
third-floor window sir that's a little
kind of interesting so there's authors
basically four different ways the ideas
have explained perception why does
science work and perception is
and the first one is a transcendent army
the transcendent argument says there's a
transcendent consciousness that governs
things - with that in the transcendent
consciousness is also governs the laws
of reality because that can second
consciousness is kind of controlling
both then our perception has some
correspondence and the other argument
that content for example is the
transcendental argument no there's no
transcendent consciousness but they're
suffering about everyone that has these
transcendental faculties like Pure
Reason logic mathematics and science if
you use your mom in this way then it is
you're an accurate map of what reality
is although we can never actually go out
so that's the transcendental argument a
little later on mom I don't have that I
can have the positive so you still you
see most of reality is still we can't
get up because there are fixed causation
causal laws of the universe there's a
whole causal sequence that linearly
makes that what's real through all these
positive laws of take place in our mind
and because the laws are consistent then
there's
correspondence and most of us today
philosophers and neuroscientists have a
naive perception is representational
that there's neural correlates there
somehow causal thing here in the neural
correlates could neural representations
of the world and then we primarily go on
and participate with neural routers and
patients not so much with the world
itself so these are all different
correspondence with all explanations for
why our perception is not exactly
correct but it is the response somehow
the problem with this is it leads to
when I called locked-in syndrome the
sense that we are actually blocked in
our heads and that we either the
technology or God or some kind of third
term to get at the world really creates
a horrible metaphorical kind of
existential situation so but there's
something weird about locking some Joe
so you see this picture you know the
guys left in Randy's is out in the world
but really what is he participated with
he's locked inside his own head yes
someone will come better than his
girlfriend come on business was Mia but
here's the thing most of us can actually
relate to this club most of us say your
dog sees this don't like what's wrong
with us do we not have the mammalian
perceptual system do not have this
capacity so see if I put it up
you notice that sometimes as possibly
you think this but when you go home
you're pretty much sure but this is
what's operating with your dog of course
that's the real so what's going on you
seem to be holding holding these two
things simultaneously so the four years
and all depends what you're
participating with if you're
participating with this yeah give
himself
I've got locked-in syndrome but you can
learn to transition with this then you
will realize that after the broke you
can let the world in this very simple
beautiful way for example perception is
keyed into action if you read the book
the physics of baseball you will find
that I thought this to be made over the
batteries you know a head in a field or
first the fielder must start to run
before you here's the grab it.about he
cannot trace that wall is in its
trajectory you cannot look will go back
up at least
knows where bills and yet he can make
this kept and the reason why is because
all this preset sexual beauty is
completely 100% accurately you might
match the world you cannot say that
perception is a loser or merely
appearance and understand how this is
possible it's just not true
it depends what you're participating
with that of course when athletes reach
this kind of performance what they're
not participating with is emotions and
thoughts and fantasies and fears and
mental concepts and often they're not
even person participating with a sense
of an I'm here nine so what makes
perception possible is not adding
something to expect but it requires
being able to drop much of what limits
our actual live experience it requires
us to be able to learn how to drop that
to stopping the stress so
so there's a group of people if you read
the book crisis Superman they're out of
meditative practices to extremes force
to actually learn how to do this
directly to get back into the world in
my million role through our perceptual
acumen for more potential so in
philosophy this started to be proclaimed
by the American pragmatist and William
James says the intellectual life of man
consists almost wholly in the
substitution of the conceptual order for
the perceptual order and richest
experience removes any house so any
philosopher conferences must be needs to
be able to realize when they're talking
about the real world of perception over
any really joggling run conceptions in
their head they're really just mapping
concepts onto other concepts and the
mind is this instantly created so that
can create a lot of infinite interesting
ideas and theories but is it saying
anything about the world if you can't
trace it directly down into the
experience so a lot of people know this
man is calling young a lot of people
think of him as making that mistake this
think of the whole life of a human being
in there being in there socket or
archetypal experience but laying on
later on life he concluded this the
deeper
society lose their individual uniqueness
as they retreat farther and farther into
the darkness as they approach the
economy's functional systems then you
can increasingly collected until they
are universalized and extinguish in the
bodies materiality hence that bottom
then he traced the site all right with
final would he find the material world
same thing with this man
well Pompey he says truth does not have
it only the end of him or more
accurately there is no man man is in the
world and only has the world as he knows
so Rawls of scientists of consciousness
perception record numbers the body
receives about sixty million bits of
information for its perceptual organs
broadly defines the conscious mind can
manipulate concept from between 60 and
40 to 50
information 99% of what we will talk
about today is this one-tenth of one
millionth of what is actually conscious
when you compete
this is probably the best oversight yeah
so this is how it works
what are we participating with anymore
this is the promise that I have left but
it just shows that the level of mind
space information is deselected right so
for 16 million bits of information goes
through all these neural gates until you
get these chops and most chunks are made
up of a tiny for the perceptual
information of memories and fantasies
and ideas and concepts of a chunk
together as a experience so for example
if this is not a person but life is very
very very little perceptual information
on the screen and just feel what it does
so what are you participate in what cut
is online this is not a person listen
right so basic you have some white and
black perceptual from angle but what
comes online when I put it up it what do
you participate
right now not a lot of perceptual
experience but something is coming
online
what do you process so there's a local
perceptual information here some and the
color with or graininess a little more
sculpting but but what are you
participating with you're not
participating with the perceptual
information so I would Harleen this is
why it matters because this is not a
perception it's a stimulus if you watch
now your life from this orientation you
will realize that you just need like I'm
stimulated by media and technology and
social drama them you're not actors
living all that is in the background
waiting for you to touch base with it
I need for you to be alive information
universe is coming from your left body
and basically what we're just getting
with all the students 99% of your energy
was probably reacting this it's not
perception students okay so how my
favorite
so the background these are slides what
we want but what I do know my research
different experiments that is that at 60
all those 16 million bits what are they
doing well there's a lot of information
coming from the world
and then here's our sensors and what the
background is with the background of it
there's three primary processing modes
what what happens in the body mind right
is that each one of these is our
perceptual organ and in one subsystem
processes all that information and
creates exterior septa 'v space so some
of you may have had experience in deep
meditation or when we fall into sleep
with you almost if you're lucid dreamer
where all the perception goes away all
the thoughts go away your body and
perceptions go away and then you just
get a tremendous expansion into
three-dimensional space right this is
the exterior section the body takes your
hearing which is three-dimensional sight
your circulation the way your body moves
in space and says the fundamental
reality is spaciousness and this is
well-documented and subsystems in the
body my brain and recent neuroscience a
second subsystem takes and all the
serial processing puts it into a
background foundational perception and
interiors and this is my basic body
well-being my limbs connected is my head
where it's supposed to be and so that's
how the guy ourselves as
three-dimensional pieces of the world in
a three-dimensional world and then the
third systems proprioceptive which
allows us to take skillful action in the
world the three of them together create
takes up much of that 16 million bits of
information to enable experience to be
possible yep the interesting thing about
this slide is that anytime you trace a
perception down to its finer and finer
detail
so for example in proprioception
requires me to be balanced and part of
the system of balancing is a little
little grain of calcium that sits on a
saddle in my ear and as I move around
that granule calcium is around so if I
say if they don't talk about that grain
of calcium
it's a grain of calcium that sounds like
world right so when I trace any any
perception whole organ in my body car
chase it down to what's actually
happening I get to a point where I'm
talking about the world what is it about
the calcium I start talking about
chemistry if i trace light going to my
eye event eyes that talking about
quantum effects on the retina right so
in this is what we didn't trust
perception because when we trace it down
you head for a point where conceptually
we don't know if it's the world or with
us and so that intersection I call that
the hi-low select zone it's where the
body in the world are so finely grained
don't find it into each other that if
they're there it's an interface it so
fuzzy you can't tell which is which
this is why we can trust perception how
the lower means it's a philosophical
position that says only the mind is
making a strong conceptual cut between
what's the material and muscle it so you
can you can
practices actually touch base with this
zone so if you did you would have this
kind of experience you would have the
sense of becoming luminous things were
becoming luminous before my eyes they
shone in a riot of colors that
continuously increase in intensity I
look back and says it will all need a
stained glass with sunlight shining
through there the scene became a living
scintillating dance of Lord the darkness
of the trees needles begin shining
verbal moon
this is all the information is coming
through the threshold with this person's
consciousness the sense of me at a fixed
location space and time expanded that
this is the exterior Septon asked
information of a body coming into the
rails into a less consciousness
perception Sena seeing that the play I
became to like the whole circle of
horizon was before my eyes
simultaneously so these are examine
accomplice experience can show into
meditative practices you can learn the
distinguish they act component
experience so you can open space have
more more choice move the distractions
and the stimulus out get deeper and
deeper and touch over the world in you
are rising there's one
[Applause]