I want to talk about earth air fire and
water earth the kind with which you can
build bricks and you can ram down
somebody's throat and choke air with
which you can lift wings and you can
blow away empires fire with which you
can fuel the void at the core and that
you can scar in your born space water
with which you can give life to a
parched flower and then you can wash
away all life on the earth the rising
tides the earth is getting hotter be
afraid to go outside you'll get burnt
the earth is getting weaker the core is
being extracted transformed into riches
the air is getting poisoned clouds of
chemicals transformations
of ancient dead dinosaurs into energy
energy flows who controls the flow
controls the power the power of the
world's big fat gas pipes thin little
crack pipes blow in your mind
say goodbye to tomorrow crack warfare
flood the ghettos c.i.a airplanes
importing tons of cocaine Chinese
chemical warfare fentanyl flood slip it
in the heroin forget you ever was
opioids epidemic obesity too fat to lift
your own weight starvation - we empty
takes nothing for your baby to bid on
trying to replant millions of years of
forestation after we have plundered the
planet of it of its natural resources
plantations countries built on genocide
and cotton slavery broken bats
Changez chains of scars
then tax trickle-down if you're lucky
pecking order big fried chicken by the
barrel Daniel got it animal feed
anti biotic cannibalistic
hate to the trough and back again
brand-new ancients trying to be reborn
into a world which is trying to toss you
off its spinning surface the world
spinning faster and faster and faster
and faster
you
the world 22 via or itself Auto fan kick
fantasies that was the belt you missed
that you were talking as it went off
I've written down a whole bunch of kind
of keywords that came up as you were
talking it's sort of it's it's it's like
a progression through from the elemental
right baby the elements from which the
universe is built earth air fire water
whatever all hydrogen helium or protons
and electrons or whatever it doesn't
matter but the basic building blocks the
substance of the universe being put into
motion this is energy right and an Ender
and that then the story evolves to be
the misdirection of those things right
there the the the lies the corruption
the deception the rapaciousness the
dishonouring the the the spitting on
that which we came from the the complete
inability to just be in it the the
constant drive to change it and to seek
to improve it and mold it in our own
egoic image of grey dirty homogenous
poopy destructive nastiness the the
vulgarity of excess the the pouring
buckets of chicken down your neck that
that flagrant disregard for anything
that has been before or anything else
that is to come it's just me now me now
me now me now it's a it's a really ugly
picture the the the notion of
malnourishment having been a problem for
eons but now our biggest problem is
getting too fat eating too much
and getting too fat this is this is this
is another symptom of the perversion of
of the light of the West but however
however all of that granted and true it
is not the whole truth and I so I want
to spend the rest of my turn just
pushing back on all of that a little bit
and put to you art and self-sacrifice
and courage and humility and the
addition of beauty to the world the
ability to complexify the ability to the
mold the world in beautiful ways that
perhaps she could not think of herself
the ability to gaze upon the beauty of
the world and be fully conscious and
present in that beauty you know the this
is this also resides in all of us and so
I mean I'm guilty of this myself taking
such a dim and dark view of humanity
that there is simply no way out but
there is
this is the this is the eternal
conflicts isn't there between the divine
and the base between the ego and the
transcendental between the satiating of
desire and the wisdom to know that these
satisfactions are fleeting and and and
you know to revel in our physicality and
yet not get stuck in the base desires
that are that reside in our physicality
to to bring together perhaps for the
first time in the universe the conscious
fusion of the physical with the ethereal
you know in in in in in a volitional way
I mean that's not to say that dolphins
and blue whales and whatever hasn't been
doing this for millions of years before
we ever got here I'm not so arrogant as
to absolutely assume that but it seems
like it could be that you know this is
that this is the birth in the evil in
the consciousness in the evolution of
the consciousness of the universe that
this is the birth of self-directed
evolution right that that you know
instead of it being a random process
that unfolds messily over millions of
years that this can be directed and
pointed and and and and accelerated but
the burden of wisdom that that places
upon us is enormous and it's maybe the
fear of that responsibility which is
making us act up as we are right now
the universe becoming more more
conscious of itself and being terrified
of that which is revealed becoming more
more aware of its shadow of the dark
matter at its core and retreating from
its self retreating from the process of
evolution because it realizes that it is
so much more than what it wants thought
that it is huge and infinite and not
just points as planets disk galaxies
just life plants animals humans and now
next era in coming
psycho technological fusion dyson
sphere's sucking up the cause of the son
smart dust transforming galactic
landscapes at the flick of a binary
switch in some super meta mind formed of
biology and silicon the next step of
evolution feels like it's just around
the corner of the labyrinth and we've
been in this alleyway for a long time
and as we turn the corner who knows what
we're going to be confronted with is it
going to be in other corners it going to
be a whole other labyrinth is it going
to be the end will we finally be out
where we will we finally be free and
enter into something else or will we
finally have to confront the mine at all
and only if we can learn to love that -
toril would be able to be free or will
the minor toy devour us and humanity
shall be destroyed in this process so go
backwards before it goes forwards one
step forwards to step back one step
forward to step back on step forward to
step back how many times as great
species evolved and then being destroyed
arrogant we ought to think that there
was not the same that's going to happen
to us
so easy for everybody to die so so easy
so fragile so fragile the whole thing
and yet we strive for some moment of
beauty and aesthetics ISM and art we're
trying to avoid the perverse inversions
whether all belongs to the few relevant
to the all inverted equations turned
upside down
psycho technologies hoarded
priest casts hiding in tempo isn't
castles
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
the earth belongs to all
you
all in one and all for one
the earth belongs tall
you
you
you
you
you
I really like the analogy of the shadow
to the existence of dark matter in the
universe that you know this whole notion
of dark matter at the moment is nothing
more than an intellectual construct to
make equations work right that's that
that's all it is it has no reality
beyond that yet and so yeah the notion
that that's that the invention of this
thing is in fact a reflection of our own
shadows imposed onto the structure of
the universe right this dark mysterious
thing which we don't like to look at it
we can't look at it whatever but but
it's there and it's real and it binds
the stuff we can see together something
like that it's a projection of our
psyches onto the cosmos it's are really
interesting it's a really interesting
idea and then of course layered on top
of that is dark energy which pushes
everything apart writes this dark
sinister force that is everywhere
forcing everything apart it's like they
it's a was it Carly isn't it is it Carly
the destructor yeah that sort of notion
so yeah I think I think I think all
that's really the another thing which
occurred was was the idea that if it is
true that we are just the beginning of
the universe truly waking up to itself
for the first time right - it did - the
unimaginable unlimited potential that it
contains within it if that is true then
then what we experience as consciousness
and you know this rich fantastic world
is but the tiniest tiniest tiniest
sliver our first the first crack which
is opened into a whole new realm right
and it's all we know and so we think
it's the world but but it but it's not
it's it's it's it's it's nothing at all
so if that's supposition if the initial
supposition is true we are just at the
beginning at the very very very
beginning of a journey which
utterly inconceivable to us so that no
wonder that would fill us with fear at
you know at as always pre existential
level right it is it is no wonder that
we are so filled with fear and
trepidation and so the embarking on that
this is Jordan Peters and stuff again
right shouldering that and embarking on
the journey anyway even in the face of
overwhelming fear this is this is the
challenge right some something like that
and yeah I mean historically not many
people have the courage to shoulder
really really really big burdens you
know so yeah and I know the thing which
occurred was was this notion of we're
right on the brink of something I mean
I've just been talking about that with
that we're right on the brink of
something but I also wonder if because
if you look back through history there
are always people writing about this
this is a great opportunity for change
the world is falling apart around our
ears you know blah blah blah blah blah
always always always be in the case
there's been people talking about that
kind of thing and so I just wonder if
this isn't a condition of our psyche to
feel that we are always on the brink of
some grand thing yeah that we're always
on the brink but we never ever
breakthrough and that this is just just
just part of our condition this is what
drives us forward is thinking we're
almost there even though there is no
there is no there right there there is
no there it's it's it's a it's an
attractor it's a direction it's a it's a
it's a journey into literally the
infinite not that as a hyperbolic use
but but but literally the infinite so
they cannot be there cannot be a place
where you are going right the whole the
whole notion of that is is absurd so the
breaking through into this new thing
well that's happening every single
moment of every single day of every
single lifetime is that you are breaking
through into a new thing the problem is
that it more often than not looks much
like the old thing right because our
eyes are not open to the becomingness of
things
we got this static vision of the world
around us of these objects which are
there whether we're there are but the
constant becomingness of things is is
something which is outside of our
experience
radical uncertainty a patient of knowing
is equal to the proportion of no matter
in the university proportions
unknown is equal to the amount of dark
matter in the universe that is how
little we know and we do not dare think
about that because how terrified would
we be
even down to the fundamental oncology's
with which we organize our world all of
that is potentially false may you have
free will
maybe not you don't have free will maybe
not you think you're in a simulation
maybe not
the you know in a simulation maybe not
you think you're in a dream
maybe not you're in somebody else's
dream maybe not
you think that you can predict the
future works for a while and then
completely collapses accident just
around the corner
cosmic calamity no agency find a little
psycho technology which allows you to oh
yeah reshape a little bit a little bit
file a bit water a little bit air and
you think you're onto something magical
what huge processes are we potentially a
part of what my new processes are we
potentially a part of is the universe
just our mind turned inside out
and we the universe turned inside out no
fucking idea and yet we've got to try
and figure out something that some kind
of quest is some kind of desire to
understand inside of our minds this
debuted throughout us trying to make
sense of it all humans could be at peace
if only there wasn't injustice
this is the rat knowing at the root of
life
it's a rat trying to take down a corrupt
tree they're stealing all the light and
all the lands and all the people
instead of having a forest where each
can find their own little corner
participate in the plenty of the fruits
we have one giant motherfucking World
Tree with some big fat baboons in the
top and everybody harvests and takes it
up to them hoping that they will give us
some kind of blessing
and through that be saved
how to trick a towel how to trick a
trowel to dig the garden
break sweat on the harvest and feed
themselves on star crumbs
don't be fools by the stars in the sky
it's all bullshit false idols
Gold illusions
monotheistic mono mythos myth-o-maniac
one God to rule them all
sacrifice the gods within
to the one God without don't believe
your father
you
sacrifice the secret on the altar of the
present
you
Cronos devouring his children
you
Oh believe your
Oh
don't believe your father I mean there
are times of course when you should not
believe your father because your father
is telling you porky pies but to have
that as a tenet to not believe the
father that is that is the road to chaos
right there the then not believing the
father is in a way the denial of the
ontology of the epistemology with which
you'll present it right that is that is
in in a sense the psychological
embodiment of the father are the other
structures that you have and that are
put in place then then and and so yeah
the the ontology zhh may be wrong well
an ontology is an ontology right it is
neither right nor wrong it is useful or
it is not useful it is it is it is you
know it allows one to frame one's life
in ways which make it meaningful or it
does not right it is only to that degree
that an ontology is true or not true it
is only ever a construct and so the
notion of truth in the sense of some
kind of permanent verifiable that I mean
it just doesn't apply in that kind of
domain at all that that notion of being
truth it feels like to me and no fucking
idea that is probably though though that
that's probably the closest thing to a
true ontology there is you know there
are no fucking idea and and but but you
know we laugh but it's but it's but it's
really really really serious and
profound point I think to know that you
have no fucking idea I mean this was a
this is what the Socratic story is all
about right it's that he alone actually
knew that he had no fucking idea lots
and lots of clever Fortson and and
whatever but but but actually no idea
and but this is also dangerous right
because no idea means I well you can't
know anything therefore there's no point
trying to know anything
that's that's equally stupid because
while there is always I mean you never a
hundred hundred hundred percent certain
about anything but there are things you
can be sure enough of right that you can
that you can work as though that was a
certainty even though you have that you
know that that little whatever so yeah
again it's that it's there it's that
balance thing it's that just feeling
your way into what is what is right you
know and and right in right is a
one-time thing here and now right right
does not exist outside of the moment
right right yeah only exists in the
present soon as you write it down it's
not right anymore because it was only
right then doesn't make it right in any
other time or place or situation so yeah
but nevertheless than the notion of
right
feels deeply right that you know when
something is right it just it just so
that's that's that's like a feeling of
alignment right that somehow be universe
is running through you unfettered right
it's laminar flow laminar flow between
between in energy between you and the
universe unperturbed as it passes
through you
and then there's the there's the whole
thing of trying to make sense of the
world are is it not just a self
referential process that all you're
actually doing is making sense of your
own sense making that there is no sense
to be made of the world in any kind of
real way right it's only ever making
sense within the constructs which you
have already established as being
meaningful to yourself whether
consciously or not
so yeah the manic is really good for
this right the freedom of the an art to
not have to make sense and then deciding
the constructs with which you are going
to make sense and truth is a tightrope I
know that I know nothing here's a
gyroscopic principle that allows you to
maintain balance below there is an abyss
of bullshit and the people who are
perpetually trying to push you off a
true ontology can only be based in
biology the biological substructure of
our being from which emerges ontology
what secret powers are hidden inside of
this biology in what ways are we down
regulated
in what ways are states of consciousness
denied from us or forgotten
creating an ontology on
the foundation of a weak biology of weak
bodies and weak minds
we'll be thin in comparison the full
possibilities a thin tightrope but you
have to tiptoe honor you have to
perpetually maintain your balance fear
of being thrown off into the abyss
instead of a tightrope could we not
sleep on a hacks woven out of deep truth
could we not build houses in the sky
instead of being afraid that at any
moment we're going to be pushed off into
the abyss of bullshit
good on the horns of the golden bull
stress anxiety fear soon as that starts
you're going to fall off the tightrope
concentration poise
all the things for which you need to
have free time and a safe space to relax
you can balance yourself
instead we have a world torn to pieces
by Wars visible and invisible Empire vs.
Empire pushing pawns around
trying to tear the minds of their
enemies apart with mimetic warfare
trying to predict that future move is
supercomputers that can manipulate
elections
generate new opinions use humans as the
vessels for their ideas newer mafia the
war of ideas
invisible water you don't have to kill
people anymore you can just kill their
minds replace it with a virus
you
increasingly difficult to distinguish
between truth and lies not between truth
and false are between truth and lies we
are being intentionally lied to to fuck
with our minds
make sense of our sense making make
sense if I loved making make sense of
our war making so you can put a stop to
it
world peace the only goal worth fighting
a war for not a sick piece of stamp
stamp human potential for the Peace of
the fullness human play fighting a war
for pieces that is that one of those
paradoxes isn't actually a paradox or is
it actually a paradox that's it's
because if I'm in fighting a war in the
sense of there is an enemy to be
defeated once you defeat that enemy do
they stop being your enemy know at some
point they will rise again unless you
eradicate them and now you now you've
committed genocide and so yeah then what
what what what moral
you know what moral superiority do you
now have can can war ever lead to peace
or is war and it's like cigarettes right
every cigarette is a chain to the next
cigarette it's the same thing with war
every war is a chain is a link in the
chain to the next war kind of thing is
to you see it's exactly that's that same
kind of cycle so yeah I don't know as an
interesting question it seems to me like
that might actually be a paradox and not
I'm not the good kind
the truth and lies thing the ontology
only being as strong as the bodies and
minds on which it's built I really like
that I really like that that that feels
foundationally important and so it's not
the ontology itself it is the quality of
the substrate from which it grew is the
important thing
IIIi really like that but then of course
the generation of that quality substrate
requires ontology z' which people buy
into in order to make them fertilizers
of said substrate right it's it's it's
it's another one of those cyclical
processes the truth and lies truth and
lies that the the the most disturbing
part of this is not even that people are
easily deceived but they actually in
many don't actually care about the truth
anymore the truth is only something to
appear to be in order to you know make
an argument or win an advantage or
something like where that whether it is
actually true or not is is is is is of
no real importance the notion of truth
is now a thing to be beaten with rather
than a process of discovery and uncover
rewrite the whole word the word itself
has been has been ruined
empires yeah empires this is of course
they do they want people who are stupid
they want people who are compliant and
stupid and obedient this is of course
what they want empires are predatory I
wondered as you were speaking the the
notion of predation or audacity or
whatever it is of empire upon citizen of
empire upon other Empire and surrounding
territory and so on what if all of this
whoo whoo yeah let's all collaborate and
love each other and blah blah blah blah
what if all of that is bollocks
and the ax and the universe is actually
predatory right there the weak are meat
and the strong Dewey what if that is the
governing principle of the universe and
and and all of this stuff
is just a fantasy yeah a story we'd like
to tell ourselves about being these
divine beings on a mission to you know
make the universe realize itself more
deeply and all of it what if all of that
is bollocks and you know that we are
here to thin out the herd and we are in
turn being thinned out you know I mean
who knows what kinds of things are
feeding on us as we speak right now yes
sucking energies out of us that we don't
even know that we have because we've
never they've been sucked out since the
moment we emerged into this into this
environment they you know whatever these
cosmic leeches sucking our life force
out of us right keeping us just alive
enough in order to be feeding them who
knows who knows it would explain a
fucking lot if in fact the earth was
nothing more than a human farm
matrix-style with aliens queuing up with
straws to suck our brain juices out of
us or whatever it might be you know
there's this kind of notion so you know
one has to hold room in an in a in a
truly encompassing ontology metaphysics
whatever one has to make room for these
kinds of possibilities and actually look
them full in the face as genuine
possibilities so that one doesn't get
too carried away and swept up in an
arrogantly sure of one's own
construction and and notions about how
the world works and what it is and what
our place in it is because as we said
before the truth of the matter is who
the fuck knows most languages sophistry
not
used to write truth instead to confuse
use in to abuse any word spoken in any
war any order spoken at any speed they
get somebody else to do what you want
them to do
even the greatest philosophers suffer
from the drive to build a sticky little
Empire matrices of words into which
unassuming and the graduates get trapped
in and have their life you sucked into a
little bit of symbolic immortality for
the Emperor
humans are tribalists and they need war
the question is what is the scope and
what are the rules of the game do we
allow it
to be symbolic by the Olympic game of
the World Cup doesn't seem to be
satisfying for the tribes need for blood
to drink the blood or its enemies
what we need are war games bring back
the gladiators
put 20 Russians and 20 Chinese into an
arena let them fight to the death and
aside for that cycle those four years
they would have won
never before years do the same thing and
are some peoples and soldiers to
sacrifice themselves for put it into the
correct ritual and symbolic context so
it doesn't have the massacre millions of
innocent people on the way and you can
decide about oh yay and have a little
bit more territory or yeah you can win
back the the R or you can win back the
the stress bug or whatever you can have
it for a year Germany because you
managed that killed 10 French burning up
gladiator ring and then four years later
give it back let the territory follow
just as the blood flows every four years
you want to sacrifice there these become
aware of it yet willing participants so
destroying the dreams of everybody else
we can keep perpetuating a nightmare
that you're trying to repress you are
murderous and you desire murder that's
okay new forms of sacrifice new forms of
giving great gift-giving between
countries great games of gifts
potlatches okay you can give the most
you can sacrifice the most of their
surplus wins
Wars of giving I love it Wars of giving
who can give more than everybody else
Wars are really interesting I've been
thinking about it a bit recently in
response to something and apart from the
bloodlust which there is undeniably a
part of us which can be pulled out which
revels in the bloodlust they did
undeniably it is there but i i've wonder
whether that is actually the main appeal
of war and the fighting to the death and
whether it's not more to do with the
single-mindedness of purpose that war
brings about in the psyche the the
willingness to sacrifice everything for
a particular goal that you put above all
else right even your life the goal is
more important than your life the
willingness to endure great hardship in
service of something which is bigger
than you I just wonder if this is not
the actual appeal of war is that it in
in a way it is only those extreme
circumstances which are capable of
bringing out the the truly most noble
depths of ourselves convert you know
perversely is it's really not sure if
there's any mileage in this idea but it
but it does strike me and you know the
if there was some way to access that
state of mind that degree of focus that
degree of absolute involvement in the
thing that you are doing right you're
full participate or involvement your
willingness to give your life for it
whether if that could somehow be
harnessed without the explosions and the
guns and the chemicals and the
viruses and the nuclear radiation and
the you know a destruction of everything
if somehow there were games which were
so cool and so intense and so involving
that they brought us that without having
would that be enough would that would
that be enough to slake our first for
warfare or is the bloodlust to part of
it and if so then yeah the gladiators is
a good one you could scale it down I
mean as I understand it this was this
was what was done back in the day when
individual you know when when the
numbers in your tribe were really
important you couldn't afford to lose
people if you did go to war then each
tribe or each group would send one
champion right and the champions would
would have it out and the winner won and
the loser lost and that was it and you
know there's only one person died in the
conflict and yeah and so does that
satisfy the need for bloodlust if one
person from the group goes and fights to
the death against somebody else we're
all men are men brave and strong your
men weak and pathetic and evil and boil
right does that that or is that just
feeding the monster and making it worse
it's so hard to know it's so hard to
know that tangentially related you know
is it okay to make pedo porn using CGI
right and let P dough's have that and
went to that so that they can slake
their thirst or does that just make
their hunger for real children more
intense there there's the the it's it's
I simply don't know the answers to these
kinds of questions experimentation needs
to be done there needs to be the freedom
to ask these questions and say hey we
don't know let's try it let's see what
happens when we do it with people who
are fully willing to engage in the
experiment with their eyes wide Oh
I mean and no coercion no secretiveness
the yeah transparency is another thing
that has been coming up again and again
and again in all kinds of different
contexts that actually nothing means
anything unless anyone can look at it
and see how it came about right see
where it came from see what were the
what were the motivations that drove its
creation what were the processes that
led to its creation who would the people
involve what are their associations bla
bla bla bla bla all of this needs to be
out in the open I didn't ding that
that's end of time