hey everybody as Jack Murphy you are
back on the Jack Murphy live podcasts
the flagship podcast of the limo order
you can find me all over the internet at
Jack Murphy live especially on Twitter
also on YouTube Facebook Instagram all
the rest my headquarters is the Jack
Murray live.com website come on down
there check out off the podcast blog
posts there's like 100 of them sign up
for the mailing list get involved all
right that brings us to today's guest
Jordan Hall he is a former tech CEO
turned philosopher who's working to
solve some the biggest problems we face
today I first discovered him when I read
his essay called situational assessment
2015 where he explained his idea of the
blue church and bred religion which we
then covered extensively in the first
podcast that we did together back in
February of 2019 that podcast was packed
with such great information and new
ideas that many listeners have called it
transformational for them in fact his
work is in general was transformational
on me too I cite Jordan heavily in my
book Democrat to the plural and our
first conversation was part of what
inspired me to create the liminal order
in this new podcast Jordan I just jumped
right into things with little background
information so I highly recommend going
back to the older podcasts and listening
to that one first we also mention the
liminal order several times and if
you're interested in learning what
that's all about head over to liminal
order calm that's ell i m-i an al -
order calm and see what we're all about
but without further ado I present to you
part two with Jordan Hall hey it's great
to see you Jordan how you doing today
and thanks for coming back on the show I
appreciate it
you're welcome your report of the the
last show that left me feeling like it's
a it was a really good idea just to
spend time in the last show so looking
forward to seeing what happens this time
oh I really appreciate that
odd so people know after our after our
last show a lot of things have happened
and I thought that that podcast
interview that we did was very inspiring
and I will get into some of that stuff
later but I decided to just sort of
write an email to you that late at all
and so I just threw it out there I felt
like I was taking a little bit of a risk
I didn't know how you might react but
I'm glad that it was well-received
positively and I'm really looking
forward to continuing some of those
conversations that we had on the last
one and sort of pushing a little bit
further forward as well hmm yeah yeah
I'm actually noticing that there was
already something like a moral lesson in
what you just said that talks about how
there's a is so funny I almost feel like
it's a nostalgia for a possibility of
people being willing to take a bit of a
risk mmm and the degree to which
individuals are able to perceive the
reality of that and by the way not the
simulation of that which you should be
very careful about mm-hm and then to
respond honorably to that oh well thank
you very much I appreciate that I think
that's that is that being a very
important piece of the bigger story it's
just that very that simple thing well
that's a that's exactly the context that
I see it in and just so we're not being
super vague Jordan I last spoke I think
back in February of 2019 it is now
September 12th and since then I had I
had these things formulating in terms of
the sort of men's community that puts
self-improvement at its focus within the
context of the blue church crumbling and
the red religion rising and our
difficulties in understanding each other
and the world around us and Jordans
conversation put it into historical
context for me that I had not previously
considered and after our talk I put it
all together and and we took a risk and
we created a community based around the
notion that we were experiencing you
know never seen before
change change that you have qualified as
being as difficult to overcome as
becoming human was in the first place
you know once in a hundred thousand
million year ten million year event and
sort of take those ideas and put them
together it from
the most the highest abstract level and
try to distill it down something that we
could do on a concrete basis and you
know with that is the sort of framework
and I reached out to you know the
audience in the community to see if
there would be people who would be
interested in in organizing around those
ideas and then I'm trying to figure out
the best way to move forward and to
become sort of the best citizens and and
parents and fathers and brothers and
community members that we could be with
this sort of larger goal even if it is
very very distant and something that's
way off in the on the horizon but
there's no time like the present
and all of those big changes are made by
little incremental steps along the way
and so we we did it man we launched
we've got over a hundred members we've
got a very active community we've got
people focused on self improvement and
understanding the world and discussions
around these issues that you and I have
touched on and you were hugely
inspirational on that and I know all the
guys in the the order are really looking
forward to this podcast as well as
thousands of other people too so again
thank you because you helped me
crystallize the vision and put it into a
larger context and I'm hoping to get
some feedback from you on that sort of
in in how the whole system works and
also follow up on some other questions
that I had from before but you know
that's sort of the the direction that I
wanted to move in and to hear what
you've been up to - because you know
you've definitely been out there and
I've seen a lot of new content from you
it looks like a lot of interviews and
stuff - so I'm curious to hear how your
thinking has been evolving and what
you're up to and you know what your
latest narratives and stories are as
they always continue to evolve and this
sort of iterative process that we're all
in here
mm-hmm yeah yeah just the thing that
popped into my head
little does obviously a lot but the
moment I hope we actually just get into
the meat of the thing and I'm looking
forward to finding out what happens
there but in terms of the reality the
fact that I find myself in some number
of podcasts maybe I don't know one every
two weeks or so now I don't I have a
strong antipathy to the entire
discipline of marketing
and the entire category of propaganda
and I I intentionally and and knowingly
therefore self in some ways IDI blunting
my own edge but I intentionally don't
have an intent when I come into this
kind of a conversation I do not know
that I have ever once reached out to
anyone to try to be on a podcast I'm
always responded to people coming in
yeah and generally my filter is if the
individual who's coming in feels to me
like they are in earnest they're trying
to do well and have some reasonable
capacity to do so right there both in
earnest and somewhat competent in being
earnest I will say yes and then also I
will endeavour to simply play with them
in their milieu all right so I may find
myself in a circumstance where I'm
having a conversation that is frankly
very far from the kinds of conversations
that ia typically have or that I be
particularly interested in but that's
okay mmm that's fine but it just you
know cause me to think about a ton of
different things that you had said about
how to I'm we're gonna jump all over
plates miles we'll just go for it right
just ride the wave right in previous
things that I've heard you say and then
stuff that I just reviewed we were
talking about you're talking about the
emergent decentralized intelligence
networks and for anybody is listening
now please just go back and listen to
the first one so you can get so you can
get caught up on that and one of the
questions that I had written here is how
do you guide a decentralized network and
given what you just said about sort of
your initiative to respond and to
participate and to lend your horsepower
and thinking and history and experience
to these ongoing conversations can I
sort of deduce that that's one of the
ways that you think it's possible to
help participate or guide or shape or
how do you lead a non leaderless thing
etc this is something I've been thinking
about a lot and in fact just before we
got on before the recording we talked
about the fact that I got to go out and
have coffee and a walk with my wife for
the first time in ten months we have a
tenant old baby and it's actually
exactly we were talking about this is
mmm we got together on the basis of that
kind
a question which is a somewhat odd
romantic basis but so that's how it
happens we were both working on
something called game B and this is this
is a deep question of how do you lead a
leaderless thing how do you guide a
decentralized system and I apologize
because a little bit the language that's
going to come out of my mouth is maybe
going to sound a little bit both
abstract and maybe a bit brainy but
maybe we can continue to try to keep it
grounded in concrete but this is this is
very much cutting edge for me like I'm
I'm really contemplating this deeply
yeah it feels like section there's two
different modes of answering that
question and the word mode here thinks
is like a qualitatively distinct
epistemological basis for even
contemplating a questions or two almost
different epistemologies so one
epistemology is we might call embodiment
that the way you lead a leaderless thing
is you simply live it as best you can in
yourself not with an intent of showing
up in a way that is a model but actually
out of complete humility to recognize
that everybody is learning and trying to
learn and you are also learning and so
your job is just to try to do it and to
become it to become this thing that is
emerging which is a whole task and I
think if you enter into that into that
principle of humility and also a
principle of not knowing the thing will
begin to show up through you and some
deep sense and then you're in a place
where you can begin to have so this
conversation and the the the fact that
you took a risk and you shared a certain
level of intimacy and vulnerability in
your email to me and then the way for me
to respond to that is to listen and say
wow that that's coming from real
integrity and courage and the right way
to respond to integrity and courage is
to honor it and to say okay so now
I'm almost being called to step into
that and say okay what does it mean for
me to collaborate with that same quality
of energy and that's just living it I'm
just trying to live the thing and as I'm
living the thing that just means that my
choices moment to moment are going to
have a certain quality to them and I
should note that from that mode I think
it's important for people to be very
clear on the proposition that for a
human being to embody a way of being
completely more or less requires that it
has been the complete context of their
development meaning the culture that
we're talking about trying to build will
really be realized for two or three
generations hence we're trying to give
rise to something that we almost
certainly won't to actually live to to
experience or very well much and that's
I think it's just the nature of where we
are if that's that's the rule that it is
ours to play we're planting the trees we
were not going to be sitting under their
shade at least not much and I think it's
important to really hold that and ignore
it and then use that as a way of guiding
our own choices so that's from the mode
of an embodied way of being
then from the mode of I guess theory
there's something like when you're
trying to design for emergence when
you're trying to cultivate or catalyze
the autopoietic the theory points in the
direction of things that we might call
principles or meta principles the actual
technical terms are things like enabling
and selecting constraints as a
philosopher of science name at least
Herrera
who
first introduced me to these concepts
and John verb a key has been using the
terms in his in his ongoing series as a
very book as a practical part of what
he's doing but the the point is to have
a a way of orienting our choices with
again principles that sort we've put in
this I'm trying to say it there's a way
that I would say this that is very sort
of daniel trachtenberg er lots of
syllables I'm trying to figure out and
not say with lots of syllables damn well
let me just give you an existing
examples so a meta principle is the is
the what I just articulated so the meta
principle of embodied way of being it's
like okay well shoot that that really
does simplify a lot of my choices that
if in doubt reflect on how can I just
live the thing as opposed to say how
much how can I try to think think about
the thing or plan to think so it's a
meta principle another meta principle
might be something like this thing is
the kind of thing that is you can't plan
it you can't strategize it and no one
person or even small group is going to
be meaningfully responsible for it and
so what ends up happening is the meta
principle for say for me or for you on
purpose
is such a kind of a neat thing it's you
almost certainly have a particular piece
of the bigger story that is precisely
yours and your your job is in some sense
threefold
stop carrying that which is not yours to
carry I find that lots and lots of
people and probably for quite good
reasons endeavor to do more than that is
in fact there's to do largely because
they don't they can't find it to people
to carry those parts and oftentimes they
need a whole bunch to get anything done
well you come more and more skillful at
not doing that be careful to carry less
and less of what is not yours to do of
course the core layer to that is really
fully carry that which is yours to do
and by that I mean both to suss it out
to really sense the parameters and the
shape and the characteristics of why
you're here what is your unique capacity
in the context of a larger story and
become masterful at it like a hundred
percent commitment I mean a hundred
percent no compromise doing whatever is
necessary in yourself to make yourself
capable of fully bringing into the world
of that aspect of the bigger story that
is your responsibility
that's another Metta principle and so
you can see that there's a these two
Metta principles really shape a lot of
the kinds of choices they provide like a
high-level context but they don't does
they don't give any particularity and
you know with the answer to that the
answer to those questions are for me are
up to me like I've got to kind of figure
that out and they answer the questions
for you or up to you and you're gonna
have to figure it out and then I can
take her to a lower level alright so now
what are the enabling and selecting
constraint what are the principles that
make it easier for me to engage in those
kinds of principles but there's Messr
there's meta principles so well how do I
go about finding out what is mine to do
and how do I go about becoming capable
I'm doing it
and this here at principles level we
actually know how so that so I apologize
again profusely for the
level of cognitive complexity and what
is I'm trying to trying to say and
emphasize trying trying to say I have
not yet been able to do the work of
actually converting this into something
that is both true and relatively easy so
this is a sausage-making but now what
I'm doing is I'm trying to move from the
point of a meta principle into a
principle which is kind of like a
heuristic or a rule of thumb or a guide
or an enabler to help you actually live
through this so in the context of how do
I discover that which is mine to do
there's a principle which is really
interesting actually I think about it
I'm not sure how much of what I'm
experiencing right now actually is a
design an interesting design on what I'm
noticing is that there's actually a the
embodiment the notion of embodiment and
and becoming this kind of person the
more you're able to use your most full
self the more you're able to become
whole then we were able to heal now and
we can go into that in particular but so
the principle would be heal by itself
before know thyself heal thyself I will
be a principal what I mean by that what
I mean is because we have not actually
been developed immersed up to our heels
in a culture that truly supports our
being who we are and therefore being
capable of doing what we are or sort of
a were broken in many ways in many ways
so we have bad habits that showed up
because our developmental environment
put us in a context where we developed
coping and adaptive strategies that were
the best that we could develop then but
those have kind of become locked in and
now we're using sort of six or old
capacities to solve 50 year old problem
or
at some point in time we adopted a
particular set of cognitive frameworks
that happen to either be seemed really
good at the time or were imposed upon us
at the time and this was sort of sunk
into unconsciousness and we're using
them even though they're not the right
tool to the job those kinds of things
like there's lots and lots of stuff
under that heading but the reality is is
that our developmental environment quite
frankly sucked and it was just we
haven't had a thing that has really
supported our capacity to be fully able
to just use our wholeness of self to
figure out
so one principle is all right go back
look backwards and figure out how to
undergo all the various practices that
can support becoming whole and by that's
the root word of healing right to heal
is simply to become whole to recover the
wholeness of yourself to recover your
whole body and to bring your whole body
to bear in the moment and to recover
your whole mind to bring your whole mind
to bear in the moment and for that
matter even to grow and recover your
relationships and to be able to bring
the qualities of your relationships as
an extension of yourself in the moment
and what I have noticed and I can say
this with some some confidence that the
question of sussing Allen and becoming
very clear on what is yours to do it's
principally something that is only
answerable by that instrument but the
wholeness of yourself yeah if your
instrument is well tuned if your self is
made has been made whole and then you
spent some time learning how to then
allow that wholeness of self to respond
to questions and and noticing how
answers come up then that instrument is
the instrument to answer the question of
what is mine to do so that would be a an
application of a principle that would
then help to answer the Metta principles
Wow
that was a I was a lot I hope it was
even vaguely comprehensible or useful no
I mean no it's wonderful
it reminded me of I was listening in
conversation I guess you said his name
with John honey last bills last name for
baekje for baekje yeah and I think it
was in that conversation where you were
talking about the difference between
in between proposition and
transformation we're experienced and I
was just reminded of that as you were
speaking there and maybe if you could
talk a little bit about that sort of the
process of becoming and that becoming is
the understanding or you know it wasn't
entirely clear to me there and then if
you could also maybe tie that in with I
have I have gotten the strong sense from
you that you have an extreme faith in
human capability but at the same time
you're proposing or you're saying that
we're experiencing these problems which
seem to be bigger than us as big as
humans as big as human existence and I'm
wondering about how or where that faith
comes from or how why you seems so
confident that we as individuals have it
within us to sort of solve these big
problems that you seem to say are bigger
than ourselves so I don't know if all
that is related but it is sort of was
what was bouncing around in my head just
then yes well yeah I think we can almost
do that in a two-step process because
the second question really opens up a
lot for the first so John actually I
think has a way of saying it that I like
which is in terms of what he calls
participatory knowing which is also at
the foundation he speaks to this also a
term that uses is relevance realization
which is very as far as I know his own
personal and private term but it's the
basis it's like the the anchor or the
roots or the ground from which
everything else comes so if you're
thinking about things the thinking that
you're doing is happening on the
foundation of your relevance realization
machinery let's just a say on the
foundation of your quality of being in
the world your your participatory
knowing and so there's a very practical
orientation towards that it's kind of
like just keep your feet square if you
want to do something
you get your sense of balance solid
before you do the next thing and so one
piece of the notion of participatory
knowing is actually dispositional it's a
choice to allow yourself to be
transformed by the relationship you're
entering into so we can imagine that you
know if you and I were having a debate
we're having a debate at a distance
there's a lot of protection and a lot of
distinction and very little almost I'm
almost by definition I am NOT making
myself vulnerable and making myself and
opening myself up to be transformed by
the relationship I mean even in some
sense the whole point is that's where I
even in relationship we're differing to
not be in a relationship in some deeply
formal sense so participatory knowing is
is the exact opposite it is okay we're
entering into a relationship where
there's a deep commitment to uncertainty
you know I don't know I know I don't
know and I sense that I will continue to
grow in a capacity to have some portion
of knowing become part of me that is an
idea but it actually is it as a change
in myself a change in my my attitudes or
my habits or my behaviors or the kind of
the deep assumptions that I'm making
about the nature of possibility of
reality and so there's a cultivated
epiphany it is a thing that you might
notice where you're in a relationship of
participatory you know and we see this
like this very that sounds very odd us
but it's actually very simple when you
think about it just in terms of embodied
practice like if you're trying to learn
Aikido or you're trying to learn tango
you're engaging in participatory knowing
like if if I actually had a great
experience of trying to learn how to
golf
and my friend's dad I was young my
friend's dad was a really good like pro
golfer and he explained golf to me in
and propositional no mean words right so
I whole bunch of notions in my head and
I don't know if you've ever done any
kind of sporting learning of that sort
but if you haven't I know I know most
people have there's a very known common
experience that ain't worth yeah
you get down there and you try to swing
the golf club and you realize that every
single word gets completely in the way
and the thing to do is just to do it and
that as you're doing it and by the way
if you're doing it with someone else
like dancing if you're taking dance
lessons and you and your partner like
you know you and your partner are both
taking dance lessons and you're not very
good at it and you're trying and you're
trying and then the the dance teacher
she steps in and she's really good at it
and you noticed that oh my god it's so
much easier because she's really good at
it and because it's so much easier
there's a way for you to almost like
relax into it and there's just things
that you absorb into yourself and it's
an increase in capacity that happens the
basic level that you're not thinking
about and any degree to which you're
thinking about it just getting in the
way so that's the the essence of a
really good example of participatory
knowing and by the way is a good example
of the notion of what I was trying to
refer to as embodiment that even when
we're talking about things that are
fundamentally intellectual at the end of
the day it's still gonna be 85%
embodiment and we can go to that if
you'd like but that's a really important
to recognize so given that now let's
talk about the second question as an
example so let's enter into the second
question as a as a zone of inquiry as a
shared space of uncertainty and a
feeling of the mysteries so I mean in
reality I
find myself always both to daunted and
tickled by the paradox which is to say
I'm deeply cynical about humanity deeply
disappointed in myself in others in your
behavior or in your cynicism in my
capacity okay my behavior as a result of
my capacity when I look at the magnitude
of the challenges that we are facing and
of course to almost a hundred percent
there all of our making where and so we
are responsible for our own
circumstances and then I look at the
constant degree to which human beings
avoid delude dissemble lack of have a
lack of care project me oh my god the
litany of vices that one can assign to
the human species of which I guess in
some very fortunate since I am a very
strong example it's hot it's large
alright so let us map even the least bit
false about that but it's a paradox
because okay let's put on the take off
their colored glasses and put on
the rose color but there's also a
grandness and a possibility in the
beauty and constant moments of surprise
and delight and an awe-inspiring genius
and kindness and we are in fact
responsible for our circumstances and
here we stand at the precipice of
enormous possibility and in fact to be
perfectly frank I am oftentimes to
standard in my own capacity to get up
and shake off and step back into
hopefulness and commitment to simply
both forgive myself for my advices and
choose to grow in my virtues and and
this is true of many people my wife not
least of all and so that's just a
paradox
and it just going to sit there and I
think that creates the right space like
the space of humility and the space of
awe as well as the space of
responsibility I think that's the
disposition like to be able to sit right
in the tension of the paradox maybe the
right way to really be in relationship
to the moment a lot of times I think
I've heard you say that part of the way
to move forward is to look backwards and
to look back into what I think you've
called poetic mythology those sort of
archetypal stories and such and then a
lot of the things you're describing or
just remind me of just focusing and re
centering and you know allowing yourself
to become sort of in the moment and more
mindful it's interesting to me that part
of the prescription to move forward into
the scary new future is is to look
backwards and to try to reconnect with
or enhance some of our more traditional
methods of self improvement or focus or
attention or you know tuning the
instrument I think I've heard you say
also referring to us as instruments in
the system what do you make of that like
how did how did that get stripped away
from us are all of us looking back that
way
was it wilful was this an emergent thing
that just happened by accident that
maybe we've you know the past answers
have been a little bit obscured it's a
nefarious is it just an accident hmm
well yeah first I'd like to just sort of
point out is that I think I think we're
in a really good place right now and I'm
taking by the fact that in a very odd
way the conversation I have with my wife
is mirroring
this conversation step-by-step that was
a little the very next thing that came
up Wow
so let's see her name is Vanessa by the
way so I referred to as Vanessa yeah
yeah she's very vastly more meaningful
than just as my wife so in that
conversation one of the things that we
really settled on was to recognize both
the past in the future and I think again
it's important to hold both and it's to
be really centered in the center of that
I almost feel like there's like a two
rings one ring that's coming from the
past and loops around the present
another ring that comes from the future
loops around the present and they're
both kind of pulling on each other and
we sit very much in the center of that
and as a way of being in right
relationship with both directions we
should just say that there's actually a
certain error in the archaic so there's
a right relationship with the past and
there's a wrong relationship with the
past there is no returning nor is it
appropriate or necessary to endeavour to
return to the past you at the same time
there's a recovering or remembering and
are reconciling with with all of that
which is our the nature in human nature
and I want to really emphasize that
because a lot of this is actually also
reconnecting with nature and with the
natural so what's happened here in the a
few moments ago you mentioned the notion
or the proposition that I've been making
that the moment that we find ourselves
in is more or less at the same order of
magnitude as that which separated humans
from the rest of nature the thing that
me is Homo sapiens human in the human
nature and so perhaps it's worthwhile
even settling on that moment because
that's a bit of the answer to the
question they were just posing if
something happened and it seems actually
to be reasonable to say about a hundred
thousand years ago something in the
Upper Paleolithic transition as John
calls it out in the beginning of his
series something happened where humans
found a way to become a Simic
to the rest of nature to the rest of the
of our ecosystem our capacity to learn a
capacity to engage in abstraction to be
able to look at a stone and have a sense
of the notion of sharpness separate from
a particular example of it and therefore
to be able to begin to optimize on how
to move a stone in the direction of
sharpness and to build capacities to do
that and by the way to then share that
abstraction and that technique with
other humans is a big deal and
that has led to a lot of change and
that's a lot lot lot of change like
let's take an example disease disease is
a consequence of that shift there was
very little disease like childhood
disease like the measles the mumps
all those things more or less didn't
exist prior to the Agricultural
Revolution it was developed as a
consequence of close relationship and
density of population of humans and
various kinds of mammals like cows and
pigs and birds and whatnot and that made
a big deal like that was a big a big
deal to suddenly have disease and think
about the developmental density it
created when your children were just
sort of spontaneously dying and how that
broke the heart in a way that just
wasn't part of the developmental
environment of pre-agricultural humans
and then of course sorry I'm jumping
ahead a little bit but we have the the
Upper Paleolithic transition and then
we've got the Neolithic transition what
I've been calling game a so there's our
two major transitions and in both those
transitions the experience of human
changed a lot and changed a lot in a way
that it's quite distinct from the
context that gave rise to us to our
evolved human this our relationship with
being part of connectedness to
ecosystems to to life and these changes
were changes where the adaptive capacity
cities that got us there the adaptive
capacities of just being Homo sapiens
we're no longer fully responsive so you
know moving past the Dunbar limit I've
talked about this again this kind of
academic but if you're interested in the
story of game a gym rut night they kind
of very good conversation about that
about a month ago on his podcast
suddenly this bizarre thing of living
with people that you're not physically
related to and with people who have a
different developmental environment a
different culture different language
different beliefs and not killing them
well that's a kind of a new thing and
required a lot of work and change and so
to becoming civilized involved a
hammering of the the bronze of human in
a way that was simply out of step with
what evolution had gifted us our native
capacities and to the degree to which
one was able to hammer a shape out of
that the steel of human that was more
capable in the direction of civilization
you were more successful in the in the
bloody game of game a you know so to be
Roman was more successful than to be
Greek and in a big way to be Roman was
also to meaningfully civilized or
domesticate and separate from the
wildness of natural human in fact to me
Roman was a hell of a lot better than
being one of the Germanic or Celtic
tribes for a while it was the general
until it wasn't
the Germans became Roman and then step
one step beyond it and then it wasn't
and so that's that right so there's a
store there's the Ark or the narrative
of the civilizing process and the the
power of harnessing and refining the
capacity to create a culture that is
based on the possibility of increasing
our power of techne and then in creating
people really creating people like
that's what we do we domesticate humans
who are able to simultaneously take
advantage of this power of technique and
then to further all right so that's the
who evolutionary dynamic between
indentity and culture that has been the
story of game a and it has is a
characteristic increasing our power but
it also has a characteristic of being a
bit damaging and it damages are our
fundamental vessel and often times quite
randomly because we don't really know
exactly what we're doing the expiration
of you know the Spartan experiment and
the Athenian experiment and the Roman
industry of Western civilization could
also do the the mean experiment and the
Zulu experiment for experiments right
and they're trying to find solutions but
they created havoc all over the place so
and yes by the way a lot of nefarious
intentionality and there's a very less
so this wise there's well-intentioned
but naive there's random and there's
just downright malevolent in the story
of humanists like we take mistake public
education as an example there is what's
called wise a sense that it is in fact
possible for us to do a better job at
being thoughtful about how we care for
the development of humans then is
commonplace among most families 1810
1780 yeah yeah that's true an education
to real thing and we could do a better
job of it if we're thoughtful about it
and to be sure we actually know a lot
more about human development human
learning than we did back in 1530 so
there's a wisdom to the capacity to
become better at raising children
well-intentioned abet naive that we
actually are good at it and that we can
sort of throw 30 kids in front of a
teacher and try to create a curriculum
and that's gonna work and not have an
enormous number of a of unintended
consequences and that our wisdom is
actually deeply deeply wise that's just
naive and is you know creates all kinds
of havoc random well we've got a
whole bunch of people who are no longer
able to work on the farms
and don't quite know to do with them but
they're all common new into the city we
got to do something about it
better throw him into something else or
well something about the way that
the economic onna me is shifting in the
1970s that were beginning to move in the
direction of the to wage household and
that really does mean that the
stay-at-home mom being able to take care
of the kids it's kind of going away we
got to solve that problem we're gonna
have to have a lot more school and more
formally taking care of kids in a way
that is essentially socialized but
that's random like that's not really
thinking about it as responding to a
crisis with a very vague tool daycare or
a daycare holy crap
think about what a brief collage daycare
was and we do a lot of that I mean think
about how oftentimes we get ourselves in
a circumstance where we learn by
up and then step away from it like just
like the introduction of the automobile
like wait you know seat belt that might
be a good idea it may be a good idea to
not be hurling a 3,000 pounds of steel
at 60 miles an hour just kind of
randomly let's try to be a little bit
more careful about it but we you know we
evolved in the randomness and then
straight-up malevolence oh well it turns
out that if I actually have the children
of the entire population learning what
it is that I want them to learn I get to
choose what they learn and I'm gonna be
intentional about that and I may not be
endeavoring to destroy them I mean it
may not be like truly truly malevolent
but I'm probably not acting entirely out
of their best interests and I'm biasing
in the direction let's say of having the
results be more in alignment with my
interest and those are all I think all
at play and they're all at play and they
play very in variation over time I would
say I've noticed that there are points
in time where usually after major Wars
where our collective zeitgeist has a
certain embodied recognition of the
necessity of getting our straight
and behaving honorably towards each
other and we kind of do a pretty good
job can I interrupt you right there
that's a great point
how close are we to one of those moments
of recognition okay wow that's a that's
a shift so it's exhaustion but you know
I think that's a really interesting
comment that you just made that it takes
something like a war for us to step back
and realize where we've been making
mistakes is that you know on our horizon
well let me um
assign the blame to someone else for a
moment now there's a guy named Peter
Turchin who I met in the context of the
Santa Fe Institute more than 10 years
ago like 12 years ago maybe than 15
years ago he's uh I believe the creator
of a whole discipline called Clio
dynamics which is an effort to actually
have a the use of science to deduce
something around well I guess history or
how it is that events occur in the story
of history and one of the areas that he
spent a lot of time he's written a
number of very good books by the way the
rise and fall and rise was one that I
read a while back but he's got a bunch
and one of the things that he was
studying is precisely this question of
conflict in many different variants by
the way and one of things he noticed is
that there does actually seem to be a
certain cyclicality and therefore
predictability to conflict roughly 50
year cycles actually and so according to
his model were sort of perfectly do 2020
we should expect to see a big spike like
in the Civil War ish zone my ish what I
mean is like it's how I explain it like
if you were to grade the magnitude of
the presence of conflict in a society
using a whole bunch of different
variables but they actually spent time
building you can kind of measure the
amount of of conflict and so well it may
not be kin in the sense of well there's
probably not gonna be guys wearing grey
and guys wearing blue and kind of
shooting at each other with muskets or I
guess rifles with bayonets fixed in a
very 19th century sense like that's
not what I mean for what I mean is very
difficult to not know that you're in the
middle of something serious maybe that's
a way of putting it
and quite unclear exactly what that
looks like so somewhere between what we
saw in the civil rights movement we've
had a spike that was like a local spike
sixty five to seventy three or so 65 to
75 and then 1865 to 1875 like those are
our spikes and there was another one in
the 20s somewhere in that zone and I
imagine actually if you were really to
double-down like really ask him my sense
is that he would be inclined to point in
the direction to the 1800s rather than
the 1900s as the closer example given
the characteristics of the larger
environment yeah they may go more into
that so given the characteristics of the
larger environment so for example
economic fragility you know we have a
level of systemic by systemic I mean
global and deep economic fragility that
is a lot now we're now we're not sitting
on top of a super robust global economic
system right now we're sitting on top of
a super fragile global economic system
which means both that people as
individuals have both the reality and to
be perfectly frank an unconscious
feeling of risk that some small movement
could lead to a lot of people feeling
that the bottom has dropped out and that
they would feel a a change in the
quality of their life they would feel
bad to them globally again
that's one example another example is
well you know what do you mind if I go
up a level and come back down not at all
sir
okay so there's a model that I I think I
both wrote about and spoke about no I
didn't mean ever written about it but
any well talked about it right now
did I I came up with to try to explain
something that was confusing and
frustrating to me in the 2008 financial
crisis so I called it the four layer
model and I think actually it's more
like concentric circles and or
concentric spheres in a larger sphere
like the earth so from the core out and
it's probably like seven layers but the
surface of it we might say from this
perspective let's just talk about
finance
so finance is on the surface below
finance is the economy all right so
that's not that hard in the context of
finance we have things like stock
markets and money supply and you know
derivatives and things that are
financial instruments and in at least in
principle those are supposed to be
anchored on top of the real economy like
people doing work and technologies and
body in factories and stuff like that
now in practice they're not really but
in principle they are and that fact is
actually an important fact well then
there's at least two more layers that I
was wanting to point out and I think
it's useful to point out here because
it's to the point the next layer is the
social which includes like the political
but also things like journalism so our
sense making apparatus science the
various institutions that we that we use
to make society operate on top of which
the economy sits right the economy
depends on rule of law the economy
depends on function and political
institutions economy depends on
functioning scientific institutions
right there's a whole bunch of things
that there's almost like a there's a bit
of verticality here is obviously
relationships and Finance effects
economy economy affects politics you
know it goes up and down but there's a
certain more fundamental is and the
the social of the cultural it's you know
the the unconscious values and the
implicit axiomatic s-- and the the
sensibilities and the language and the
assumptions that cause us to perceive
the neighbor as a neighbor and the
ability to feel neighborliness towards
someone they'd later to walk down the
street and see a person who's an actual
stranger and not be afraid of them in
fact to be ready willing and able to
help them and enter into a relationship
with them in some way a sense of kinship
with those who are not in fact to
actually kin and the cultural layer and
of course the social layer is entirely
dependent on the cultural layer you
can't have a rule of law when you have
ethnic genocide going on like those just
antithetical and the cultural layer is
more fundamental but we can see is that
there's a way to almost like launder
currency up the stack it's not a good
idea but it can be done so if you
compare what happened in the Great
Depression to what happened in the 2008
financial crisis in America and actually
comparing that to what happened in say
Germany and Austria is quite useful in
2008 we made the quite self-destructive
and foolhardy I would propose choice to
subsidize the financial layer at the
expense of the deeper currencies so we
debased confidence in the political
system by bailing out the banks for
example and I think anybody who paid any
attention can kind of nod their head and
say yeah I meaningfully lost trust in
political institutions in how that
was handled I didn't come out of that
period of time going man those
politicians sure have their
together and they're honest they're both
competent honest I came out of it going
some combination of incredibly dishonest
and incredibly incompetent neither wish
yes increases the currency of the
political institutions anyway of course
as we kind of moved forward in the
timeline
insistence of the political institutions
to continue to go to not maiya Coppa and
to not step into a recovery of that fact
then led to the cultural level at the
doubling down and here we ended in 2016
like I can I can tell a story and I feel
very comfortable telling the story that
2016 was what happened when the people
who lost faith in the political
institutions in 2008 find said bucket
yeah and then what happened was it's the
political institutions instead of saying
yeah you're right
gosh we really up said no no
you're wrong and a culture war got
ignited so now what happened is we're
now bailing out the political level the
social level at the expense of the
cultural level so the fake news
narrative instead of journalists it's
all going well yeah you know I apologize
we have been a mixture of comprehensive
greed self-serving mutual masturbation
and duplicitous propaganda for probably
your entire lifetime and that's really
 up and we're pretending to be
journalists when the fact or not so
we're gonna stop and you know gosh my
bad
they said that said no you're wrong
you're up you're bad you're
terrible and so of course culture were
sort of like a strip mining of the
culture by the finance layer yes
something like that
very very much something like that so so
then compare that to the 1930s you know
in the nineteen thirties in America the
financial layer blew the up and it
hit the economically are pretty hard
right we had a real-live economic
depression lots of people were out of
work we had real degradation of capital
things like that but it didn't really
hit the political layer that hard and it
actually seemed to improve the cultural
layer like if you go back and obviously
most of these people are no longer alive
but certainly back when I was a kid you
can have storage with people who had
lived through depression oh yeah I
remember having more feeling of
community then than any time since then
you know people came together
communities supported each other
neighbor helped neighbor in America and
belief in political institutions went
way up now we may have set ourselves up
we may have believed too much and put
too much burden on
your New Deal like deep deep centralized
government that may have just been an
error but the belief in it was high the
confidence that I'm from the governor
I'm here to help was not a complete lie
was high and then we had World War two
right where we all pulled together and
we became a nation and we all supported
each other in a way that led to the
civil rights movement in a positive way
and when people came back there was a
very strong confidence in culture the
culture was strong and there's a strong
confidence in both the well the
competence and good faith of our social
institutions and then of course the
economy and the financial sector kind of
take care of themselves on that basis
now if you compare that to say Germany
and the Weimar Republic the financial
crash led to an economic crash which
punched right through the the social
institutional fabric which was weak
anyway and punched right through the
cultural level and ended up with you
know genocide and genocide is one of the
things that tends to happen when the
cultural fabric gets torn to shreds
because if we revert back to the
biological lover level which is below
the cultural layer right if you go below
the cultural layer now you're in the
biological layer and the biological
layer is ethnic cleansing the biological
layer is oh well you and I aren't
actually kin and I can't really trust
you because my biology doesn't I'm
fundamentally my biology doesn't trust
your biology my job is to out-compete
your progeny and the further away you
are from me in kinship the less I can
trust and collaborate with you you know
culture is a rare and precious thing
that it shifts us away from that
biological mandate and if we blow
through culture we end up in a really
truly bad place so okay so the contact
we find ourselves in is a context where
we've kind of been taking very very
strong drugs for the past long time
actually maybe even since the 70s to be
frank to not deal with our problems
we've been on quite a quite a bender and
a wide-variety like these are
eight-balls these aren't just coke you
know we're really we're not we're not
just boiling things that we're injecting
them now and I apologize for those who
may actually have a direct personal
experience with people who in fact have
had actual chemical addictions because I
know that it's pervasive as
truly terrible and so let's like feel
that as a real reality and to recognize
that that real invited reality is
reflected in everybody else like we're
all addicts and some deep deep sense to
lots of different kinds of addictions
that's not very good circumstance and
that's not a good place to start when
you're ending at a point where the
secular cycles of the things that church
is pointing to are pointing in the
direction of more rather than less
conflict you know it's uh it hasn't
rained for a long time and now we're
entering into the fire season hmm well
let me make some predictions here right
and it could to be good that's a pretty
solid prediction you will like you to
have fires and the fires are likely to
burn hot and I don't have to be a
prophet to make that kind of prediction
it's a prediction it's a probabilistic
it may not be and there's two pieces to
it one is oh wait hold on remember that
story about the way we separated from
nature we do have the possibility the
fact that we're having this conversation
we're not just the woods we're not just
the force that happened to be in a dry
season when fire season is coming that
just has to sort of be with the fact of
just raw probability we actually have
the capacity to make conscious choices
in the context of our ability to
perceive reality and in fact only can we
we must we can't help but we make
conscious choices that's what we are
that's the the aspect of nature that is
now human nature and oddly enough
magically enough we find ourselves to
the point where the story that you
brought in in terms of let's look
backwards and let's do the process of
thinking about the humaneness of human
nature now meets the part where you look
for words so let me complete that arc in
terms of looking backwards but it's
acknowledged that the process of
civilization brought us to where we are
now and as part of that process we have
done great damage to ourselves okay no
no there's no point in assigning blame
it's just where we are we have done
great harm to ourselves so we need to
heal ourselves
as individuals like each of us as
individuals have to begin healing
ourselves and that's the only way it can
actually happen because most of the
stuff has to be something you choose to
answered I can't heal you and I can't
force you to be healed you have to
choose to do it I can support you once
you've chosen but that's it so we have
to heal ourselves and that healing is
gonna be an individual journey because
each individual's got their own history
it's different from me that it is for
you we can again help each other and
support each other and give each other
wisdom and perspective but it's a very
particular kind of thing and there are
people who are really really good at
supporting each other so let me not go
there
so that's one piece and again healing in
many context has that kind of almost
like a kind of a weakness to it like oh
I broke my leg and now I need to heal I
don't really I mean that yes and also I
want to hearken back to the etymology of
to become whole to tune your instrument
the process of training to be a martial
artist is a form of healing is a form of
learning how to bring your body into the
fullness of relationship that is just
your patrimony that it is just
that the inheritance of being a human is
to have a body that is capable of these
kinds of things and to become aware of
and to bring mind and body into perfect
sync is healing all right so that's that
movement and that that healing is one
that again extends from the interior of
yourself and the physicality of your
body and its relationship with the whole
of the aspects of your Society of selves
in your mind and also your other
relationships as a human in the human
and the family and the kinship that you
actually have your friends and relations
and then also with nature and reading
learning how to react with and remember
the benefit of the natural environment
you know the react reality that there's
something about being a human in wild
nature that is deeply deeply necessary
and deeply vitalizing and supports a
quality of being
that is this thing that we're trying to
get to that is very difficult to do in
the you know in Times Square so that's
that's one arc right
but then the other side of the arc is
the future and the future pulling us
forward the ability to say here we are
the it has been a long dry season and
fire the fire season is coming ok well
we happen to be that aspect of the world
that has the capacity to have foresight
we happen to be that aspect of nature
that makes conscious choices sounds like
it's up to us it's our job that's we're
here for so let's try it let's see we
can do let's see how we can use our
capacity to be aware of what is real and
to be present to what is real to not to
avoid it or to pretend like it's not and
then see how good we can be at in
ourselves and in increasingly robust and
skillful relationship with others like
us other humans and by the way and with
the support right relationship with
nature begin to actually make effective
choices in this context can we dodged
the bullet it's almost like the matrix
hmm there's that that really interesting
scene that there's a way for neo to
shift to a mode where he's actually able
to dodge the bullet but of course that's
on a multi-generational timeline with
all of our collective efforts going into
this this solution that none of us
really knows exactly what it's going to
be but it's really as far as I can tell
it's about feeding the system right it's
about making making yourself a
functional efficient part of the system
and then tuning the system up to
eventually spit out some sort of some
sort of answer so it's like I think it
was Scott Adams who first turned me on
to the idea of focus on systems and not
goals and in this case it sounds like
the system starts with taking care of
yourself taking care of your family
taking care of your community and be
healing as you say reconnecting with
nature reconnecting with your inner self
reconnecting with your inner strength
reconnecting with people right you
described to me before how social media
creates weak affiliations that we've
replaced strong bonds that we've
replaced them with and so we need to do
a lot of reconnecting which is exactly
why I reached out to you and why we
created the the liminal order was to to
have those connections and to start with
ourselves and I'm going I know we have a
limited time here so I'm gonna wrap up a
few things really quick and try to hand
it over to you to get your take but
they're all kind of connected at the end
of our last conversation you said that
people as an atheist you said there's a
non religious person you said that
people need to become more christ-like
and that had kind of that really stuck
with me and more than one really smart
person that I know who claims to be an
atheist has what are they saying to me
become the least skeptical of religion
as they've been sort of in their lives
and I'm sort of sensing a trend around
that and I you know we're not obviously
gonna answer that sort of right now like
why that may be the case if it is if it
is actually true but in my mind some of
the key elements of that are service
community giving forgiveness healing as
you say and so we organized this
community with the notion of service
built into it and so there's service to
our fellow it's an all men's
organization to our fellow men and then
you know to the community at large and
then to our own sort of individual
communities that we live in and so we're
organized around service and a
commitment to self-improvement for the
sake of being a better service and you
told me at the end of our last podcast
that once you figure out how to take
care of yourself and maybe your family
come back and talk to me and I think
like I feel like I feel like we're
making steps
in that direction and so yeah be
interested to see get your reaction to
some of that and just throw it out there
and to say thank you also because like I
said those conversations were really
helped me crystallize a lot of my
intention and what was meaningful to me
and what I see is meaningful for other
people and so far man has just been a
wonderful experience so there's a thank
you there's a comment there's a question
there's a toss up I know we got about
five or ten minutes here so I'll let you
carry us out with that yes thank you
well the first thing is that I would
want to make a little bit of a
correction is that and maybe I even said
this so make a formal correction that
I've never really been an atheist in
fact I've always had a perspective that
atheism is just adolescent rebellion
cloaking yourself as sophisticated
ideology okay but I have always been
quite skeptical of formal theology and
from a religion well first I really like
what you're saying
it feels very powerful and what I would
say is that there's something that seems
like it comes next so that as you have
learned how to take responsibility for
and to care for yourself and so those
relationships are the most meaningful
the next thing that seems to come up is
what we might call your calling or your
vocation or that which is yours to do
the thing that you are here to carry and
I don't think that's random I don't
think that it's sort of like carry
whatever the happens to be nearby
although to be sure pitching in and
caring if carrying these happen is a
perfectly virtuous and helpful thing to
do sometimes that just is what needs to
happen but there's something about you
as an individual the arc of your life
thus far the challenges that you have
been faced with the challenges that you
have to some greater or lesser extent to
overcome
the capacities that you have been gifted
with and the limitations that you've
been gifted with that uniquely qualify
you to carry some particular piece of
the larger story and so that's like
that's the next thing that as you have
learned how to tune your instrument and
as you've learned how to practice on
yourself and those things that are the
most meaningful in terms of caring and
by the way in terms of discernment like
really getting sensitivity as a parent
for example being able to notice when it
is appropriate to and how to support
your child in her exploration of her
life that is her life you're here to
create a context that allows her to find
that to her best and no more and unless
you can have that same relationship with
your life
and that I think is the thing and so
it's a some might say what is your
purpose and that then becomes a very
powerful thing and when you find that as
you find that you then begin to find
yourself becoming very clear not saying
no to things that are not in alignment
with your calling and very able to say
yes to supporting people who are very
close to her or themselves connected to
that in some way and then we find
ourselves in what I would call a
de-facto collaboration if you are
working on your calling even if I've
never met you in never Shout and I'm
working on mine then we are nonetheless
collaborating on the same shared future
and if it turns out that we're side by
side then you know so much the better we
can actually collaborate more more
obviously but that I would say is the
next big thing the next step is to use
these skills and these friendships and
the capacity to be checked in called out
and supported in discovering and growing
and challenging that happens where you
actually take a responsibility for
yourself and your relationships to then
say okay what's yours and by the way get
good at it yeah
well that is certainly a lot for me to
think about and I really appreciate it I
know I'm gonna go back and listen to
this one a number of times again and I
have about 50,000 other questions that I
could ask you but we did agree on the
hard stop coming up here so I'm gonna
wrap this up just real briefly do you
have anything coming up on the horizon
that you'd like to talk about I know you
said you're antithetical to marketing
and whatnot but is there anything is
there anything is anything that I mean
is there anything you're excited about
coming up right now nothing you're just
enjoying the baby doing the rounds
talking to people working on yeah well I
mean there's one thing that maybe we can
have a conversation about in six weeks
two months there's a little there's a
project that I've been looking at for
almost 15 years and it looks like it
might have a possibility of happening
which would be cool and super fun and
then even from my perspective would
maybe be a big piece in alignment with
my calling so has a lot of good things
to it
but I don't want to go I don't wanna
jinx it yeah there's certainly way too
early to talk about it too much but
that's that might be an interesting
thing to talk about and if it becomes a
little bit more real then perhaps it's
exactly the right thing to talk about
in the meantime I'm just doing the same
as all everybody else you know making
lots of mistakes trying to learn from
them and spending a lot of time as a dad
I said the thing that I'm most looking
forward to is going back to my parents
house over the holidays and being with
my family wonderful well thank you very
much for taking time out of your day to
talk to us I really appreciate it and I
will certainly follow up with you in
writing in an email in the next a little
bit of time and hopefully we can circle
back and do this again in another few
months and sort of just keep the ball
rolling I really sincerely appreciate
your time thank you very much Jordan
great thank you I really enjoyed it I
thought this is great
[Music]
you