I forgot your book is called social I
know you're gonna have to say it the
social singularity social singularity
and I had a chance to watch one of your
videos on what it is and it sounds like
we have a very similar vision of what
technology can do for civilization in
the future that it can help us be a get
away from politics this centralization
model of politicians running in our
countries and having this top-down
structure of an economy that doesn't
serve basically anyone except the 1% but
our visions in getting there mine is
centralization to get there like
centralization without hierarchy to get
to decentralization and because I just
want to talk I'm not quite sure of the
road map to get to there my vision of
decentralization when I get like lack of
a better word triggered by it where I'm
like no but it's it's is like people
sitting around deciding how to use
blockchain and decentralization to solve
a problem which is like figuring out how
to turn any problem into a nail so we
can apply a hammer as opposed to how do
we solve the problem oh wow
decentralization can be used here or
centralization can be used here and a
solution and then doing so openly and
transparently so can you explain a bit
of the road map of how we actually get
to this vision of the future the social
singularity yeah maybe the road map
metaphor is is where a lot of a lot of
folks go wrong and and I'm not and I
don't mean to direct that to you I think
it's just a sort of general you might
call it a hangover from the project of
high modernism you know hut where high
modernism is sort of this sort of this
kind of idea that we can apply some sort
of social scientific means for
architecting society or mass rather than
rather than developing protocols that
will allow for
or a lot of iteration and a lot of
experimentation and those are two very
different things let me just give you an
example of why I think you're right in
the way you started this conversation
you're probably familiar with the term
crypto winter right which is crypto
winter is the sort of after a lot of the
major crypto currencies and and
tokenized projects essentially died over
the last couple of years it was in great
part because there was a lot of what
they called dumb money out there where
people were just throwing money and
anything that was plausible and written
in a white paper and yet some of you
know some of the people who were
dreaming up these systems were
brilliantly brilliant people but they
really didn't connect with a cause a
specific customer need where they could
address that need and then scale up and
in a manner that we're used to for any
other kind of enterprise right you know
you if you learn to address and eat a
specific need get something to market as
an MVP then if it's creating value it
will scale up well a lot of a lot of
folks were architecting these
magnificent systems but they really
didn't connect with a specific pain
point out there in the world and so what
you got were these sort of like let's
decentralized but not because we should
so to your point that's a lot of what
happened and yet I think the fundamental
institutional protocols we have are are
headed for I don't even want to talk
about in terms of magnitude but it could
very well be a collapse in our future
because because our governance systems
which are traditional let's say just
Democratic Republic's have become far
too top-heavy and the kind of complexity
they're attempting to reckon with is is
too great for hierarchical systems and
bureaucratic systems it just it will not
last won't we won't be able to sustain
itself either physically financially
you like or otherwise and this these
systems are starting to show their
cracks but I do agree with you in that
first point that that we need to in when
we think about decentralization there
are all there are sort of levels of
description to determine whether
decentralization is appropriate for it
for that context or that level of
description and that's really where
things get interesting I think okay
thank you that is I think the idea of
architecture on mass yes as someone who
a little bit has done architecture and
mass in my mind and then right but how
do we Institute it and how do we that
there is this you can picture this
utopian world and implement it but we
don't know all of the ripple effects we
don't actually know you know what I mean
like if you like for instance I was
thinking of technology and we used to
feed everybody and there is this point
of like oh my god our world collapses if
everyone's fed like our a kind that no
one gets fed right like if the supply
chain is in getting stuff to the grocery
markets and we don't know how to feed
ourselves there's a point where there's
a lot of risk there right that even if
somehow everyone could be fed our
economy is based on people being
desperate and needing to work for food
and so in all the sudden everyone's fed
that all collapses and if we don't have
a way to actually stop the effects of
the collapse before allowing the
collapse like cause emic collapse really
because there is a collapse coming and
we need to be environmental one the
political one all of it like we can feel
it we can feel that what we're doing
isn't sustainable but creating an all
new system that is complex still is
complicated and an implementing it has
all of these ripple effects so we need
like a system a protocol in place and
I'm starting to learn what protocol is
to me it was just like technological
jargon that must be over my head I'm
like do I need to know how to create the
algorithm it's like English is a
protocol like oh okay
it's like a sieve just a way that we can
communicate a way we can say here's the
underlining we don't need to discuss
what every word is but when you say word
I don't know we can discuss the
definition yeah
a disconnection and I like that because
it doesn't amended maybe I'm wrong with
what protocol is but if I have a word
and you have a word and we talk about
the semantics of the definition we don't
necessarily need to agree on one of
those words be in the word I just know
that when you use it you're using it in
one context music in other context or do
we have to then agree on what the word
means and only use it in that context
like do we have to have the same
protocol to use like all of the like
does the protocol have to be identical
between us to use it together I don't
know and it's a question worth exploring
I'll just tell you quickly the way I use
it and the way the way I'm hoping to be
heard or to to be have the message be
received is pretty simple and I I think
of it as in terms of rules or
institutional rules it's sort of like
what are the rules that govern human
systems and I am distinctly anti utopian
when it comes to this and I'll just put
that straight out there I think when I
think of in terms of the appropriate set
of rules institutional rules or
protocols I like the term protocols
because it harkens to technology
protocols as well and that seems to be
intuitive to people when you say use it
in that context you know like HTTP and
the web allows us to have the Internet
right that's a set of protocols that we
use to have the Internet and there's all
this variation variety wonderful
emergent phenomena that we couldn't
possibly have predicted but we still had
the rules as the substrate hm HTTP same
or similar at least goes for
institutional rules and that's really
what I'm talking about when I say that
but I am NOT for a blanket or
cosmopolitan set of protocols and
instead I look of it look at it in terms
of what you might call a utopia of
utopias which is to say competitive
governance systems when we are iterating
and we are trying different things we're
getting localised feedback loops in the
world and one set of protocols might not
comport with someone's conception of the
good nor might it comport or match with
circumstances of time and place and that
is a really important thing that we I
think a lot of people when they go to
this sort of high modernist place if we
need to even if they think in
distributed systems terms there's trying
to think of it for all of humanity like
we got to fix all the biggest problems
with the world by architecting a single
system with a single set of protocols
and save the world I think that's the
wrong way of going about it and I resist
that because it it it requires we give
up a kind of epistemic humility or a way
of you know acknowledging the
limitations of what we can know and what
will emerge from the different sets of
protocols but if we make different
efforts in different locations we can
mimic or adopt features of other systems
that could work in ours and try those
out so we get a pluralism of systems and
I'm super comfortable with that now in
fact I think that's the only way I think
there is is a that like to be able to
experiment and play and have the
implications not be catastrophic
where like even for the individual
trying and playing right but they're not
financially devastating that we still
have food on our table and is a big step
like to make sure that that isn't one
central hammer to apply to every nail
and turn everything into a nail and one
one protocol that is to admit to address
everything I Laurel you were saying that
it was like a little bit yeah I know I
get it
that that is what my vision of is I want
people to be able to come together not
in a hierarchy down I'm the leader and
you listen to me and I've decided I'm
deciding the protocol and now you need
to follow it but in a way where anyone
can have a can say how the protocol
isn't isn't working for them and so
there or doesn't mean that I'm on
because I can't fix the protocol I don't
underst
really understand HTTP like I'm like
yeah okay I don't use the Internet
right but I don't I don't have any order
I don't understand I don't understand
the backend which is part of also why
decentralization is that I feel like a
lot of the solutions a holo chain all of
that stuff isn't accessible to people
who do not understand technology and so
because it doesn't even include the
people in the conversation that aren't
good with technology it can't get to
that stage right it can't it's it's um
it's like well this is just caught like
it's a bunch of techies talking amongst
themselves like this is a no-brainer
well it's a no-brainer to techies right
and so don't know and if it was just if
they're still gonna fix the world that
they're still gonna create a proto PIA
great but I don't think they can in that
space I think that the trust we have in
our governments in our currency is
eroding but it started out not complex
right like it started out fairly easy to
understand I'm trading I'm trading my
eggs for coin coins for your cow right
like it was it was now it's it's with
you know via taking off the Fiat and go
out like it and shorting stocks and like
it's way too complex how money is
created in our society and the central
bank's they're not owned by anyone it's
become this monster but I don't think
that cryptocurrency in its current
format will take over from that because
it's too complex and people don't
understand it's generally techies buying
cryptocurrency
or people doing it for speculation
reasons whereas if we together as a
million of us were able to come up with
a cryptocurrency that was the best of
all of them we would already have the
power to make that occur to currency
right because the currency is only a
currency because people agree to use it
yeah if we created one from the ground
like we could create ubi
tomorrow right like if million of us got
together and said hey we're gonna have
this cryptocurrency we're gonna say that
this is a currency that's work in
exchange for our goods and services and
everyone gets a hundred dollars a day to
use it right that's not ubi hundred
dollars a day that would be extremely
whatever that's like three thousand
dollars but I had a long as a month
right to use on our goods goods and
services your you know
and talk to an expert nuts or whatever
that we could the point is to create the
protocol together right to say here is
what we do and then give it power that
the sent and to degree that
centralization rights it's a million of
us coming together it's not a million of
us allowing five people to come together
and tell us what perfect currency we
should use and so that's where the
decentralization in my mind is like
crypto currency where it's like they're
all competing with each other so no one
emerges is the winner and there's
because they're like but one of us is
the solution it's stopping people from
realizing that they kind of need to come
together and like that's the protocol I
want to concentrate on it's like how do
we come together to create things how
can we get a million people together to
create their own healthcare system and I
don't think it's decentralization it's
in my vision of what I want to create in
the world which isn't the vision but
it's like I have to keep testing it and
keep saying is this broken in the system
is this broken and me like it's just my
ego or is it something's here right it's
something here to play with and whatever
is going to that participation it just
like if we're able to bring people
together we have so much more power than
if there's all of these dissipated
projects and energy and funding and
everything like it's it's in my mind how
we out-compete they may in game A's
world because it is the amazing world is
by creating something that is somewhat
sent like centralized in the way not
that there's a tiny group of people
that's giving puppets in a hierarchy
over the masses but in a way that's like
how do we get the masses together to
solve a problem even if there's a tiny
or even our let me push back against
that a little bit yeah in a in a you
know hopefully a fruitful way and you'll
have to bear with me because here we
have what you might call layers of human
stack and layers of the software stack
and you might not like this example
given your if you if you have certain
kinds of bad experiences or whatever but
just bear with me for a moment
around 2013 I guess it would would have
been maybe 2012
there was what you might call a legal
gray area in which this certain company
began to operate they clued together a
bunch of existing technology and created
what we know now as uber
okay now uber is not a decentralized
technology in the same way that holo
chain is it's very centralized you know
it's sitting on a bunch of servers and
there are a bunch of guys in Silicon
Valley you know tech bros managing it
and all this stuff but it is relatively
distributed or decentralized at the
human layer right so they're taking a
piece out of it which is and extracting
a whole a lot out of the transaction
which is something that holo chain might
folks not might not like and so they
might want to come up with a competitor
that leaves more to the to the to the
driver into the rider and doesn't take
out so much of it doesn't extract so
much as a an intermediary however if we
just look at it at where they were in
terms of that time in place it was
highly there's a there's a distinction
between distributed and decentralized
but it allowed to disintermediate the
taxi monopoly so relative to what had
come before they were able to gain
massive constituencies of support and
use relative to the status quo ante
right relative to whatever come before
and that was an important lesson about
the prospect of decentralization right
around then Bitcoin was ascendant people
knew what it was it was starting and
then you got decentralization at the
level of technology now all the chain
people are gonna say not fully
decentralized because you you know
there's there still it's not ideally
decentralized but we're talking about
relative to what had come before I like
to refer to Stewart Stewart Kaufman's
phase phrase rather the adjacent
possible so
at that point in time relative to the
past that was more decentralized more
distributed than it had been ever before
and by virtue of that they were able to
gain massive constituencies of support
but a bunch of customers essentially and
that changed the game the legal gray
areas became less gray over time but in
operating in that we will crater they
were able to get a foothold and
massively expand right so whatever you
think about new Birds is is as a company
is one thing but what's interesting
about it is the what had been before
which was government government-granted
monopolies through the the taxi
medallion system were highly extractive
were highly game a in orientation and
any indeed almost everything government
touches becomes game a because of the
very nature of government and as being
hierarchical so you might say they
sprinkled in a little bit of game be to
get uber and and there's still game a
elements to it it's kind of a hybrid and
as you move forward in time and start to
develop more and more of these systems
you're going to get more and more game
beat elements however it's going to take
these experiments experiments to first
show that they can work and then attract
those constituencies voluntarily it you
know if you if you were to say all these
people are doing all these crazy
projects but mine is the one that's
definitely gonna win because mines the
one that is is the awesomest yeah if you
like if awesomest is a word I'm gonna
make it one then then yeah go for it
then then can you attract it's the same
thing with systems of governance
territorial systems of governance if
your system of governance is so Austin
can you attract people from other
jurisdictions right now we're seeing a
flood of people in my state of Texas
from California and it doesn't go the
other way because California is instant
from an institutional standpoint is
driving people away and it
in Texas for some reason is attracting
people that's jurisdictional arbitrage
it doesn't have a plan per se it's just
when jurisdictions compete you get these
phenomena you're in Canada right and you
know Vancouver is have been a place
that's managed to attract a fantastic
number of people from around the world
it's doing something right and I've been
there and I he'll I'd go there too it's
not I don't think it's as bad as San
Francisco but it's getting there in any
case you know these are the kinds of
phenomena that when I think about a
competitive governance I don't think of
competition and gate game a terms I
think competition is a game B phenomenon
and probably half the folks in the game
B group would disagree with that I think
it's absolutely essential to you all to
the way that this proceeds because
everything is an experiment everything
has to exist within some evolutionary
Fitness landscape right and situated in
circumstances of time and place based on
the subjective values of people who
would enter that system and benefit from
it or not yeah and if that system
confers no benefit or like holo chain at
this stage in their development it
doesn't have good UX or UI or is not
compelling for people to use because
it's just buying for geeks then it may
not function in the evolutionary Fitness
landscape and it may die as a system I
hope it doesn't cuz I think it's very
promising but it's just really early so
I've been gone and on about that but I'm
not trying to sound like a social
Darwinist I'm trying to sound like a
Darwinist in this in the sense that
things either succeed or fail in an
evolutionary Fitness landscape the only
way to and and that's just that holds
true period if there's no way to avoid
that you can try to lengthen the life of
the system by subsidizing it and shoring
it up but if it will eventually
we fail if it's not serving human needs
absolutely and it should like that's
where I don't think anything I want to
create or we want to create it has to
because gaming is already in existence
has to out-compete game a in its world
ie the marketplace it has to be
something that it's a natural attractor
that isn't something that is you have to
use this or else right it isn't a
government and it isn't but my issue is
if we create game a corporation's right
that are for profit that or not for
profit but I don't I can't be part of
your organization because I'm not
invited right I I don't know how you
created your protocol then and I totally
want some trains out here wanna keep you
team Ed's did not work out this morning
I just unpacked to help let me I want to
keep going down that because you were my
ears pricked up so like Karen let's go
to the code of the question of profit
hey when you had revenue in excess of
cost why would you ever want to get rid
of that because that is that what that
does that profit and loss system tells
you whether or not some system some
agglomeration of people is creating
value right though because it's not like
this is so this is probably where we're
just gonna disagree because I am like I
my background is in finance and biology
so I understand evolution I understand
like Darwin and and that that side I
don't think the competition of itself is
wrong I think it can get us to the best
ideas I also think we've kind of gone
through history to the point where
competitions done what it's supposed to
do and now cooperation needs not take
over but take over like it can't take
over by just say by outline competition
because that's ridiculous that's kind of
what communism did and it didn't work
but creating a system that there's an
option for cooperation to out-compete
competition only if it's successful
right so in that in the stance of
Facebook nothing is going to come in and
take over face probably and take over
Facebook's role in the marketplace
because they have your friends and
family there can be an own social media
enterprise there might be a decent
last one that does it but the issue is
they have your friends and family so
unless you can bring over your friends
and family to the decentralized one like
they use your Facebook data it's not
really gonna work no one person coming
up with a new protocol that they own and
they are in competition with each other
is going to be able to take over
Facebook as Facebook's kind of monopoly
in that rope the only way we could take
it over or ie create something that
would have competed marketplace is by
creating something together something
that fills the function and we want to
use so let's say 10,000 I must get
together that are somewhat friends that
way right we're like somewhat connected
so that it's the threshold of usability
right you don't want to get be on a
social media platform and have no one
else on there you want to be able to
have conversations there meaningful or
interactions there meaningful and so
competition has its role because you do
want to kind of have a bunch like a
bunch of projects to see which one's
like well you were talking about uber I
was like oh how interesting because now
I'm Buber spaces there right this what
is the what they call what is Hoover in
Airbnb plenty centralized it's proud
yeah it's a it's I mean it's it's kind
of it's decentralized it at the human
layer I think yeah I like that
yeah that like I don't
Boober for profit right the fact that
uber is created so that the shareholders
get the profit is that what you mean I
mean the profit having the the worker
the driver and the the writer be able to
collaborate to say what is a fair price
so you can live and also how can we can
recreate new systems so that I can't
afford uber and it's not even in
Vancouver yet but what are the systems
we could create so I could afford it and
yet the driver still makes the same
money right like there's ways we can do
things cooperatively that you can never
do in competition but it's not it but if
we say you can't possibly create a
competing one you're not allowed to
that's not okay but if your competition
is uber right we're profit goes to
shareholders you're not going to be able
to compete because our profit is go is
stained with between the driver and the
user and creating the infrastructure and
maintaining it but we are together able
to problem-solve in a way that isn't
this is broke and I'm going to go off
and create a competitor that instead is
this is broke
and let's improve it let's create the
diversity within it okay so let me let
me just um let me let me address a
couple of points here and I think
they're really interesting ones you know
the first thing I want to talk about is
I don't want to get rid of the idea of
profit and that means and let me just
put it in revenue and revenue and
excessive costs if your costs exceed
your revenue no matter what your system
is your system is going to die that is
just a very fundamental thing that we
can't change we'd like to be able to
excise profit from the world because we
think of it in terms of where the
profits go and that's highly centralized
no no no I don't want to say and I and I
actually believe it's quite promising
that we develop systems are on what are
called platform cooperatives which is
basically technologically enabled means
for people to form a operatives where
the profits are shared among different
members of the collective perhaps in a
more egalitarian way I don't think you'd
want it to be entirely egalitarian for
reasons that we can go into later but
certainly that there would be a more a
blanket distribution and the risk of the
enterprise is also shared among the
enterprise as well okay among the
participants the in the co-operative
that is totally fine for me that you're
still having revenue niz in excess of
cost it's just how those are distributed
among the team members that changes and
I'm all for that in fact I'm a big
proponent of that there's a competitor a
tuber in Austin right now that's been
working for a couple years and is trying
to get get to market and I think any day
now that's gonna happen called Arcade
City an arcade City does just that I
think they take a fraction of what uber
does and they developed a guild system
and stuff for four different kinds of
you know resolving conflicts and things
like that that are centralized the
doober and add to you know costs the way
they do it is they they decentralize
that and the the guilds handle it but
but basically the drivers and riders if
you look at the like a CPV triangle
there's capturable value between
price and cost okay so I pay you know
something costs a certain amount and the
actual price of it is established over
here and in between is the capturable
value people don't like Walmart because
they push push push push the capturable
value in the direction of your customer
and leaving very little for the the
folks who are in their ecosystem and
that's hard for some of their suppliers
whereas you know more conscientious or
conscious firms if you like will try to
nail it between the you know split at
half and half between the capturable
values of the party of the parties
likewise I think a competitor is going
to come along to Ober and the value that
can be captured between price and cost
is going to go more to the distributed
many than it is to the top-down few that
I'm all for I think that's great and I
do think in the long term once these
systems are appropriately architected so
they're easy to use so the complexities
on the back end and not the front end
these systems are going to start
crushing all of these top-down
corporations because they're organized
like hierarchies instead of hard mines
yeah and we want to move to a hive mind
state of affair to the extent we
possibly can
but with Weir's in our nation see in
developing some of these technologies
you know so we've got a long way to go
absolutely when the other thing is new
you're first talking about uber because
of what I said about the cryptocurrency
right the million of us getting together
and creating a new one would it would
have a foothold overnight um but that
grey area right that legal gray area
that honestly the collective can't play
in once we're big enough we can compress
were big enough we can dismantle the
patent system we can do any of that
stuff but if you don't even if a million
of us got together before uber was
created and said let's create a car uber
but distribute it alike but the hive
mind the platform cooperative it
wouldn't take off because legal would
have deceptive right it would have been
low this is illegal this is this and so
there is that
oddly enough right there I mean I just
I've been wrapping up a project that
has I've had to pivot so many times
learning the different ways in which
it's illegal to do it and it's it's
frustrating as hell it's you know it is
a lot of people you know for me this is
a post partisan post political position
and when I say this it's that regulation
works both ways people who are partisans
on the Left say all regulation is good
regulation it's for the common good blah
blah blah and people on the right say
you know stop regulating you know don't
do anything but what what you usually
both fail to realize is that regulations
almost always work to the advantage of
incumbents who have a vested interest in
the status quo of those regulations and
those incumbents use the regulations to
keep a boot in the neck of competitors
especially the small ones and it's
really easy to snuff them out if you
have the regulatory state on your side
that happens all the time so the kind of
stuff we're trying to do doesn't matter
what our intentions are some of them
will never come into existence simply
because they'll be regulated away and
behind the scenes will be a special
interest corporation going make sure
that that gets enforced because we don't
want them competing with us in this in
this way uber became that kind of crony
collude err in time once they did figure
out the legal regime that was yeah well
closer to what they were doing they did
everything they could to make sure that
the regulations kept competitors out
which is why you only see very few of
them in the marketplace right now like
lift but you know it's it's it's a
rational thing to do to try to capture
regulations to your advantage
rationale in an economic sense but the
the but it's a very game a in fact most
everything that we tried that we hope
that leaders and power will do in
service of the common good ends up
collapsing into game a phenomena almost
every time yeah I mean that's a lot of
what what I'm trying to create
it's been years I was belong before I
heard game be game B gave me the
language to talk about and I'm like Oh
auntie rival arrested Albany when and
and is like governments don't work
because they're not voluntary we vote
for them once once you know every four
years and then they rule over us and
they have to rule over the hundred
percent and so you you don't get it opt
in or out of your government right you
don't get to choose where your taxes go
you don't get to and because a lot of
that it doesn't they're really slow to
put to put implementation and they're
never gonna make everyone happy
everything costs a lot of money a lot of
time in is subpar
right they don't have to compete in the
marketplace they get a like invents
money they just like are kind of crap
but they'll keep you in our society
running into a degree the profit side
seems to have broken down society for in
my opinion because I am now I was
anti-capitalist like where I'm like no
profit is the prop in my mind profit is
the problem not I agree with you that
cost can't exceed what like we need
there to be a margin between what it
costs to make something in real
resources and what it is distributed for
and that that bit of difference needs to
go to keeping the system in place and
improving the system not to go into two
people's pockets so that they because
because the profit motive in my my
opinion and with a lot of backing of
logic and economics is an incentive that
breaks every industry it doesn't seem to
help if a competition does help it and
so like to be able to create competition
that's fun in a game and you win
procedure note like you win that you won
not profit because then you do do things
like change the laws and you is kind of
like I'd businesses can have can be in
business for profit and purpose right
you can't be in it for just profit
because you won't get customers there'll
be no purpose and if you're in it from
just purpose and there's zero probably
you don't care you're just overspending
you're a millionaire and you're just
giving the food away to people that's
not something yeah if you have to take
most in consideration if you're in game
a at all but one of them is your master
right social enterprises generally it's
the purpose that is and they get enough
profit in order to serve their purpose
most for-profit companies most
corporations are
profit and they're gonna service their
customer enough to get together Bluebird
is gonna make different decisions
because they're in it for profit then a
platform cooperative it's in it for
purpose
I either in it to give their drivers a
good job during it to get people from
point A to point B right there's a
purpose to what they're doing when they
make a decision hopefully the flatform
cooperative is making it further for the
decision of their purpose which means
they have to keep profit in mind rather
than making it for the decision of
profit but they have to keep purpose in
mind yeah the the participants in the
platform cooperative are in it for
profit in some of them in and so that's
where what I'm proposing we do what my
mission is is a platform cooperative
that's a consumer cooperative not a
worker cooperative worker cooperatives
are there to make money there are
workers right they're there to make a
wage and so they're gonna make decisions
to make a wage and worker cooperatives
are historically amazing and also making
socially and environmentally responsible
decisions because they can see the
bigger picture
just like the consumer ones are very
good at making the workers lives right
like they care about health Karen and
pain the entire supply chain either/or
is way better than what we have but a
consumer cooperative isn't about profit
it's about purpose right it's about neck
I don't know if you guys I don't think
you guys have neck in the United States
not equipment cloth it was a cooperative
that started here but it's consumer
cooperatives so in order to shop there
you have to pay five bucks
they have a lot of problems because
their game a so we do vote to make a
good supply chamber than the stuffs
overpriced people just walk down this to
like you don't even I'm a member there
but if you're fifty bucks extra for a
pair of shoes I'm gonna go to the
competitor I don't you know I mean like
I still have to make that decision but
if it was truly consumer cooperative or
we could figure out right I'm telling
you I'm going to the competitor I'm not
not allowed to go to the competitor but
I'm like listen it's 50 bucks cheaper we
need to figure out this profit thing
right we need to figure out how to
ethically make stuff and get it at a
price that I can afford right and that's
not for profit because profit the whole
supply chain
everyone needing to get profit is what
makes they
astronomically expensive and
astronomically cheap right because then
the regulations and the subsidies and
like the cost is offloaded to the
workers and extracted for the for the
shareholders right yeah I'm I think this
is a really interesting Avenue of
discussion because I find sometimes just
as with the word just as what we were
talking about in the beginning the word
protocol making sure that we mean the
same thing when we say it I tend to want
to do that with the word capitalism
because I might make the distinction
between crony capitalism and capitalism
while others might not for me it might
be easier just to take the word
capitalism out of the equation and put
it as markets yeah we're at where you
don't have where you do have private
ownership of them the means of
production as long as it's a physical
good or a physical piece of land I am
less and less interested in any kind of
intellectual property rights I think you
and I agree on this this is a way for
people to establish cartels and
monopolies through the patent system and
I don't I agree with less and less that
everyday now there's some compelling
arguments for why you would want a
patent system but I generally am finding
these these arguments less compelling
and I think that the social upside to
getting rid of these kind of patent
regimes is probably stronger
that being said I'm still a capitalist
in the sense that I don't think there's
any that they're you know if capitalism
is defined as creative trading trading
something that you own whether that be
your labor or your your a good
production good for or an experience or
whatever for mutual benefit then I'm a
capitalist and I think and I think if we
if that's the definition you would
probably agree I think what we both find
objectionable about capitalism today is
it the corporate form as it's currently
sort of in the books is too extractive
too top-heavy tends to create you know
massive hierarchies where does it both
decision make too much decision-making
power and too much of the gross revenues
go to the top and that and that
alternative corporate forms I think if
we can master them and start to use them
will out-compete those hierarchical
forms simply because the something that
is a system is more whole onic or more
networked is likely to be able to adapt
more readily to the Gaels of creative
destruction than other forms and I so
I'm saying when about game B in the
sense that once we move to these
alternative forms and they send the
hierarchical firms and their old legal
structures start to fall away these new
forms will be ascendant that is my hope
but that remains to be seen
there's a lot of promising work in this
way there's a bunch of guys who found it
like Brian Robertson who founded
holacracy one with a guy named Tom
Thomason these guys are great they're
doing exceptional work on both the legal
frameworks for these kind of cooperative
structures as well as developing
internally whole onic systems that are
not hierarchical that they're doing
amazing stuff and Jolla Craddock
organizations are powerful and scalable
I think holacracy could scale to the
level of society which is not something
that a lot of people are willing to
admit who practice so Locke recei but I
think that that that is one model that
could scale and and eventually replace
democracy or the Democratic Republic I
would like to see that by a video like
this is the whole cola kradic is what
I'm interested in like just how do we
actually
govern something for lack of a better
word without hierarchy when currently we
kind of need hierarchy because the tools
aren't here right like the holo chain
decentralized space to me also isn't
except like I said technical like
intellectually not accessible because
I'm non-consecutive I'm the same time
I'm sure the concept of falak a holo
kradic would be accessible to me so is
there a way to learn about it without
waiting for them to create the product
that doesn't because they also own a
mean like it's such a long time between
I have an idea didn't create this and
them actually creating and putting it
out there and I can't participate in
yeah that's kind of part of that so I'm
gonna use the term management loosely
but holacracy is a management philosophy
or framework it is it is instantiated
more effectively with technology but
it's simple technology is nothing like
blockchain and oriented or anything like
that yet now it may get supercharged by
something like that in the future but
right now they use a simple web app
called glass frog to instantiate
holacracy and it's just a way of really
logging the the roles in circles what
they call rules and circles in the
organization so basically you have these
I can just give you a quick a quick
sketch of the way holacracy works they
essentially have two basic part they
have a constitution which designates the
the overall architecture of how
decisions are made and ensures that that
there's some fundamental charter to an
organization that you adopt okay so you
adopt the holacracy constitution once
you do that you're basically agreeing to
to give your power over as any given
employee whether the founder or the
frontline to the system and instead you
adopt roles that are suitable to your
skills and talents and remuneration is
not equal that it it pretty much flows
to how much value you create in service
of the mission so any Jolla Craddock
organization has to have a mission of
course society doesn't have a mission
but but any given
hold on in society might have a mission
okay
keep keep this landmass safe might be
one of them or whatever so the whole the
whole onic nature of this system meaning
the the circles that the team activities
are governed by processes two basic
processes tactical and governance
tactical are the decision the day-to-day
decisions that are one-off and
governance are the policies procedures
and roles that are established for the
entire organization but these are
constantly processing tensions between
and among roles people in the
organization as well as things that are
happening from without so it functions
like an organism and the organism is
response responding in its local
knowledge based on the circumstances of
time and place for that specific
particular whole on what's relevant to
you working in say the marketing circle
is not going to be relevant to some
other circle because it's simply not
their purview now it may be that there's
a tension that they want proc process so
that there's an there's a way that these
two circles come together to resolve
that tension but ultimately it it's
usually there's certain kind of
ownership rights of the circle on the
purview of activities that circle
circumscribes and that's if you like the
reason for the holo in both of these
systems is that comes from whole on or a
holistic system that has nested
responsibilities that interconnect based
on service to the Mensch mission and
instead of resisting tensions or passing
the buck or doing what you're told
because that's what your job description
says you're empowered much more readily
to solve problems and to create value as
an intrapreneur if you like which can be
rewarded by the system rewarded by your
colleagues and and your perp your
everyone is processing the bad things to
get them out of the system
so you're kind of you're you're looking
at what needs to be changed head-on
rather than avoiding it is there a way
like this is all in its infancy so the
technology isn't here yet
right like they don't like this exists
as running organizations all over the
world there are a thousand more
technology yes but it's probably
expensive is it expensive to use the
technology I'm guessing over no glass
frog is there in fact there are free
versions of glass frog out there I think
there might not be glass frog but it's
it's really cheap they've just developed
Gratton glass frog it's not
sophisticated technology it simply
tracks the roles and the policies so
that people can easily look up who's
responsible for what and coordinate and
collaborate easily it's it's it's sort
of like a secretarial function in a lot
of ways you know there's the
Constitution and you can look that up
and there then there's also okay I'm
wanted there's something I'm a process
attention that has to do with marketing
the marketing function which you can see
is like an organ in an organism or a
part of the ecosystem so I see who's
responsible for what and what policies
are constraining them before I ever
reach out to them I can
I'm quipped with knowledge that they're
having to deal with in the rules and
constraints they're having to deal with
and if we want to make changes to those
rules and constraints we can do so
collaboratively as long as and they're
they're sort of like meta rules involved
in this as long as it doesn't obviously
threaten the organization to do so right
so everything can anything can be tried
anything can be iterated on but there's
a process for ensuring that there's no
catastrophic harm that can come to the
organization by changing some policy or
doing taking some tactical action anyway
I'm getting in the weeds about holacracy
but suffice it to say there is no there
is no hierarchy there is no boss
bosses are eliminated everything is
about roles everything is about
competencies what you're good at what
your school is supposed to work on and
it really does keep knowledge and
decisions more highly localized rather
than up and down chains of command where
you have a whole layer of middle
management that is interpreting the
stuff from the higher-ups and then you
know trying to process feedback and
assign tasks to the rank-and-file that
is a has been a successful system in
time but it's outlived its usefulness
and it's no longer sustainable the
world's just too complex so I have a
Venn diagram I work with just in like
what I'm he's like this is how things
get done it's like in order for an
activity to get done you know enemy you
know potholes get filled a marketing
campaign to be done you need three
things to happen simultaneously one of
which game a doesn't play they just pay
you to do it and the other ones it's
that you need to like want to do the
task you have a desire to do it they
just over compensate that by paying you
right but you never actually get to what
I call the sweet spot you need to have
the skills to complete the penthouse you
just actually know you just need to be
aware the task needs to get done and
there's just a compensation between the
three like I just wrote this out now
like if you're I can't do this it's
backwards if you're here it's like
everything gets done you don't have to
pay people it's amazing and it's just
and there's a way to compensate our game
aid compensates for not wanting to by
paying it right if you're just off error
technology's really easy to get you
aware there's the task to fill right
then if I can so my question is within
the holacracy is part of my problem in
just in the world personally is that I
never seem to fulfill the world like
there's a Job Description right the role
and you have to be able to have be all
of these competencies I have four of
them and not the other four I do this
for amazing and this for like crap right
and so I can't take the role because I
can't I can do these can I just take
that can I just take like how do but I
might be really awesome and finding
tasks for other people to do right like
this task needs to get done but I can't
do it which is basically my entire
system of like I can't even communicate
the whole idea properly let alone do the
coding the decision-making any of it all
up myself and so I don't know what I'm
asking
is there a way to deal with this on that
system of like yes I okay cool
it's um that the I won't go into too
much detail there's a role called delete
there's a like a meta role a
constitutional role for each circle it's
called a lead link and they're
responsible for assigning certain
certain kinds of job roles within a
circle but in hoc recei the person could
say no I don't want that I
I'm good at it but I hate it and I'm and
over time I'll wear me down or I love
doing that but I'm just not very good at
it yet so let me get some training first
and then I'll take that role on right
the lead link is responsible for being
the eyes of the circle to find out what
the the needs of the circle are right
because if you don't have that someone
keeping their eye on the horizon the
relationships to other circles in the
organization work or the needs of the
whole on that the whole LAN will suffer
the circle the team will suffer in their
responsibilities but yeah absolutely
that's that's the way they do it and and
so it's it's really about constant
communication and collaboration to fill
roles and if they they can't find
someone to fill a role especially a
vital role within the organization
that's how they hire and and so you
think of these roles as these you might
have anywhere from five to ten of these
major responsibilities they call roles
that you're involved in so you might be
a member of different circles different
öhlins because your roles are so varied
right so you the kind of person that
yeah I heard you described is like this
is this is this kind of hierarchy obtuse
job description that's very rigid yeah
you're like yeah I can do for these the
other four not so much most people just
say I'll figure it out on the job I got
I got to eat I got to pay my family so
I'm gonna I'm gonna figure out how to do
ya know spreadsheet you know or
whatever which is what I would do in
that circumstance is like okay I'm not
really good at spreadsheets but if
that's the only thing I got to do a
rapid learning curve on I'll figure it
out fast and I might just they might
find out four months into it that wow
this guy really
suck at spreadsheets hopefully they
won't fire me but in holic recei you're
processing that tension from moment to
moment okay yeah so like you're also so
there's also a process of like this feel
I don't feel like I can do the
spreadsheet right now like it's like the
mental and emotional piece of it because
you know that you can get help so that I
think that's a big part of it too right
like cuz you don't want to go to your
boss and the other circumstance your
boss and be like I don't know how to do
spreadsheets you hired me to do you see
you're gonna try it to the best your
ability and you're not gonna be the best
at it first is I don't know how to do
spreadsheets I don't want to learn how
to do spreadsheets someone else needs to
take on that spreadsheet and there's
someone else to take on if there isn't
then you hire someone with laziness
spreadsheets
yeah and hopefully holacracy is robust
enough to - before you ever get into a
role of doing spreadsheets that you say
this is not my jam right you're really
only dealing with a constellation of
rules that you're suitable to and that
to some degree you can at least tolerate
doing if not have passion for so that
yeah I would encourage you to look at
the book holacracy by Ryan Robertson and
you may find and it's not it's not
really um a technology driven thing
although glass frog is quite useful you
can apply holacracy without using glass
frog it would just be a little unwieldy
and it would be harder with a
distributed team you know people who
were you're in Vancouver I'm in Austin
you know it would be a little a little
more difficult you know you'd have to
use Google Docs and things like that and
get it get out of control pretty quickly
glass frog just helps you manage those
processes and decisions but it doesn't
otherwise do very much of anything else
it's not like it's not like a you know
some incentives based blockchain thing
where it's tokenized and this and that
it's just
in fact they they kind of resist
incentives based thinking in Halak recei
but i mean i'm in alignment with but I
can see by like that's where true their
technology needs to be diverse like one
central pot of technology so that the
data is centralized not centralized on
one server
but centralizes and anyone can use it
but look at ya and you know and then
he's like what I want to do is create a
collaboration platform right that is
able to either you're able to bring your
project to or which has been done this
is not new things right like there's
like eight people in the game bSpace
creating what is really a clatters I
mean I was just doing it up to the last
week Dow stacks you know non blockchain
or non distributed ledger based
collaborative platforms that have
incentives and winnowing and voting and
some people hate voting I I developed a
with with other people a really cool
voting system but only did it because I
had to because you had to have a
collective decision-making mechanism
that was superior to 50% plus one
because I couldn't use other forms of
collective decision-making that are not
democratic long story but these are
these are kinds of things that we're
really at pushing at the edge of what's
possible with collective decision-making
for example dominant assurance contracts
assurance contracts these are ways that
like an assurance contract is is what
they you know like Kickstarter uses if
so many people agree to the to put in
this minimum amount then the decision
gets made right that kind it's not it's
not a voting system per se it's a
voluntary system a way of privately its
private provision of public goods if you
like that and those kinds of systems are
going to be coming online left and right
we need them to be competitive we want
yours to be the best so that I can join
yours and we're yes which is the issue
right if I can join if we're all in
competition and then one wins like the
winning has to be that the other ones
can come on board to it right the people
can come on board to it and then like
things that were good about the old one
can come on board to this one and that
to me is having one collaboration
platform which is I don't have one I
don't not coder right I can't code this
 so I don't have one just like
for people it's not in the process it's
like how do we work through the process
of creating something together and why
creating the technology that's designed
for creating something together and then
following that protocol whenever it
breaks down because it's gonna break
down not just in the codeine which of
course that's up to the tech people this
all right like this crashed but like it
breaks down emotionally it breaks down
because we didn't figure this piece out
because it doesn't have this tool you
created into the next iteration right
and you prioritize what the best piece
is instead of just one group saying this
is my vision of what collaboration
platforms should look like what's our
vision of what a collaboration platform
should look like and then let's make it
and let's make it beta so that it's you
know Naveen like and then what is the
next piece and the next piece add on to
it so eventually there's one platform
that does have all of the pieces so you
can coordinate glass frog through time
zones and global thing right because
it's always there's always this slightly
broken piece about every technology
that's out there I'm like an end because
I'm not a techy person figuring out one
is hard good learning curve let alone
figuring out not like these seven and
then how to coordinate them together
right so yeah I mean I think I think
you're never gonna you're never gonna
get there
there's no gonna be no moment no
apotheosis of all of the technological
goodies in one system there's always
going to be a process of competition
potential for defection and the
successful ones are gonna have network
effects Facebook is a great example of
network effects that have kept a certain
kind of gravity I can't tell you how
many people you are sitting on Facebook
every day bitching about Facebook and
and how awful it is and like are you
aware of the irony here you know you
spend more time using Facebook to bitch
about Facebook and and yeah some
perverse value in that I think that they
get out of it but no I you know and I I
but I do think that you're right in one
sense you want to you want the the best
features of the system that gets out
competed to somehow be assimilated I
think with open source and platform
cooperatives and you know these the some
to some degree
just dissolution of the IPE cartel
system will allow for that kind of
constant process of overcoming entropy
with emergence and we may have to
operate in some legal gray areas to do
some of this stuff yeah and rare yeah
it's the part robe like I don't know if
the co-operative model is the place to
play with that but it gets to the place
right if you have 10 million people in
your cooperative it's actually not that
hard to break the patent system right
like if we okay 10 million people maybe
not a billion people you can break the
patent system and in a legal way right
we were like we aren't just lobbyists
and going toward the government we are
your constituents that are like we don't
want that anymore passing laws to undo
it right like the obviou opposite of
lobbyism but that means you'd have to
get people to agree on it right and even
we can see the positive and negative of
the intellectual property the patents so
not everyone's gonna want to be on board
so it's it's partly that but I do think
that or I wouldn't be doing it that
there is a space like you can't be
everything to everyone if you have your
own individual project you're only gonna
design it for you or for a specific
group of people that you think needs it
and so if it doesn't make someone's
needs game a capitalism the market is
like rice you create a competing product
that's a no-brainer and it's like
hopefully mine's better but the issue is
one it's dissipated so the fact that
this one needs $50,000 a month to stay
in business and this one needs $50,000 a
month
are there enough customers out there for
that like that is a piece of tech to me
that's broken is they seem to price it
at the point where they need it to be
just keep it in business and profitable
but of course but they don't actually
price it at the point people want to pay
it right they don't actually make me
supply meet demand they're like it cost
$50,000 to keep our servers so we need
$50,000 we have 50,000 customers don't
needs to be $1.00 per month we're like
good I mean they're gonna go out
weirdness if they don't price it
according to the supply and demand
they're gonna do they do all go out of
business that's like everything costs 10
dollars a month per person I'm like but
and everyone has to keep the lights on
and everyone needs an HR department
everyone needs a legal department unless
they're participating you know it wants
and
yes so like the more were able to come
together and create like you have your
own individual project but you can use
our HR department or our legal
department or whatever it is where there
is this centralized entity that's fee
that's helping you writing you're
helping it and it's it's not in the
hierarchy down it's not like you have to
follow this but hey there are these
there are these tools and in that way
instead of like if we have one product
ie one platform that's designed for the
product like the young the mission right
of like helping people collaborate what
does that look like right it's it's
being able to have face-to-face
conversations that are what's scheduled
right like how many people do you want
to get together whether it's because
we're creating a project together and we
need to be able to coordinate that or
whether it's because I want to have this
conversation with somebody who
understands decentralization how do you
coordinate that it's it's just bringing
people together saying everything we
would want in a collaboration platform
which is impossible then picking the top
priority of what we want in it creating
that and then seem that the next
iteration next iteration is so
eventually if there's something that's
missing from it for you instead of going
to create a competing product which is
going to dissipate it and you're gonna
have the risk and you're gonna have you
just create it within this one so then
everyone have something that is all
things to all people I mean that's
literally why we have markets I like
chocolate ice cream you like vanilla I
think we should have this feature you
don't I mean this is you're never gonna
get you might get two people to agree
but you know we'll get 200 people to
agree never right which is why isn't
this mechanism absolutely which is why
it's most of what like most of what you
want you get most of what you want most
of the time right you don't get all of
what you want all of the time that's not
how a collective or a community or a
family or life works but if you get most
of what you want most in time that's
pretty sweet that's pretty pretty
awesome so if there's and again I'm not
the techie so this is where I'm like my
mission might not be possible
currently right that there are things
that when you Brandon it's for-profit
you can do that you can you that you
have to do that you don't have to do in
a cooperative right
like there's ridiculous like there's
people who are it's clearly triggered by
colors right like they cannot see bread
and people who like whatever their
colors blue well clearly if your colors
blue you can't use Facebook right like
that's not if it's our Facebook who
 cares if it's red or blue just
make it blue for you then make it red
for you right we don't need a logo that
is gonna be the same across everything
because that's not the point the point
is this it's ours we know it exists you
can you can format it to yours right so
if there's plugins but it's like no
actually you can have all of your
features there's a very beta this is
very simple anyone on an iPad can use it
a five-year-old can use it someone who's
never touched technology till they're 90
can use it this is the basic and then
you can add the plugins and part of that
is having people who aren't techie being
like I don't know how to do that and I
don't they're not coordinating well
together
technology is the thing that it's easy
to it's more cost effective to have more
diversity without breaking the like
thing right like if we want one a dozen
firms of ice cream
we need a factory that makes a dozen
forms of ice cream yeah I mean I think
the the the heart the hyper the
collaborative environment of it's almost
like a whole of chain is a good example
of this their technology is
fundamentally for Keable at every level
right so you can if I'm not mistaken and
I could be miss speaking but uh you know
Arthur Brock would would correct me but
at some at some fundamental level it's
designed so that it's not it's never
just yours someone could easily take it
and adapt it and do their own stuff with
and and that's that it's made to be much
more like a it they use biological
metaphors frequently which I like but
because of the nature of its its
evolution and change it's it's it is
designed for evolution and change and
not for anybody being able to squat on
it and extract so that's pretty cool but
it that means if there's hyper
competition and it could be hyper
competition between two forks and
you know the I don't know if you've ever
heard of the this um this old Harvard
he's dead now but his name is Albert
Hirschman he came up with this book
called exit voice in loyalty and exit
voice in loyalty is essentially these
these processes of this a human
algorithm of social change you can
accept a system let's say you know with
voice you can try to change the system
by expressing your opinion persuading
others to change all that good stuff
that's voice and and if you can get
enough people internally to agree with
you something might change but if you
can't you use exit right you you start
out you you you you leave the system to
start a new system hopefully to attract
new people to your system and then
there's loyalty which is to say I
couldn't change it I couldn't use voice
or exit so I'm gonna stick with it
because I love these folks even though I
think they're wrong headed right or
whatever or by God even though this is
you know this is trash whiskey I'm gonna
continue to drink maker's mark even
though they put in water in it now yeah
whatever just because I'm loyal to the
brand but these phenomena sort of
cascade out into society in pro-social
ways and holo chain is one of those that
that works that way leaves you the
opportunity to fork and try something
new Italy and it doesn't and the benefit
of that is things are less extractive
the systems are less extractive because
it was always someone who can come
around and do it who might have a
different way of doing it might attract
a Nuke constituency around their version
of the product and I think that's a
probably healthy and I think that's what
our governance systems need more of
frankly you know power to the provinces
if you like in Canada make it more like
the Swiss the Swiss have the can tones
and the Canton's are much more empowered
to make changes there they're sort of at
parity with the federal government of
Switzerland and I think that is I think
for they have the best governance model
in the world in my opinion and I'm an
American and I love the US
institution but US Constitution could be
interpreted that way but it's not so we
have a very top-heavy extractive kind of
state of affairs because of that and I
you know the the the provinces in Canada
are subordinated to the federal
government to a very great degree I take
it yeah I mean we got our funding and we
get theirs like doing BC Alberta at the
moment because we won't let them build a
pipeline through province theirs yeah
yeah
then our Prime Minister bought the
pipelines so if he thinks we have to do
it lots of fun lots of fun things
happening at it but um I mean I love
open source the idea the concept of open
source which sounds like hollow chain
that is what it is right that you can
fork that you can create your own thing
my issue with that is that it does
dissipate the energy my friends are on
this Fork I'm on this work how do we if
we solve that that's if my friends can
be between anyone and I can choose which
product to use and my data my
connections are with me
awesome no problem but if then all the
competition yes but can we also figure
out what resources are going into having
that competition and minimize that right
minute having the one nature farming if
they want to use it they want to have
their own by all means and do we even
need an HR department whatever but I
think the departments that are necessary
having them be available to people where
there's not my point
um when I was introduced to open source
we were talking about it like a cookie
recipe so you have your like
grandmother's cookie recipe and you you
you give it out and people you know they
choose to add raisins they choose to add
walnuts they choose the person who's the
owner of the open source right the
person who created it mudsill of
themselves can say well whoa we like
those walnuts but you're also going to
use those walnuts right or no you you
can keep the walnuts but we're not going
to change the recipe they can choose to
change the like original recipe or not
yeah system it's a distributive system
but it's they're still gatekeepers yeah
in that model mm-hmm and so within I
mean I don't know the difference you're
not in like the holo chain one as far as
what that looks like in a cookie analogy
but like having a central body I eat all
of us with with voting power be able to
stay you can still absolutely fork right
you can still absolutely take this
information and go with it
I want a way as someone who cannot do
that because I can look at I could like
WordPress is open-source if you are a
tech person you can use word source for
you WordPress for next to free or free
and have it do amazing things for you
with all of the plugins and do it all
for free I can't because I can't utilize
that right so like that is how if you're
a non tech person open-source isn't free
open-source isn't someone else's selling
it to you and so having a way to say hey
I need it to have this feature right
this part will help me with this
disability this part will help me with
whatever it is right like to be able to
say hey can someone work on this and
have a way that we can vote on what's in
this central thing right what's in the
cookie the cookie recipe we're going to
distribute including hey if there
because cookies are very unique you
can't have everyone how can you get a
walnut cookie out of one bag and I get a
raising on under the same bag but we can
have a walnut version and raisin version
and you know like the same factory can
make them if people are dollar G's which
they do you know like there's a
efficiency to kind of doing it together
the open source does and there's
diversity than it doesn't solve right
whereas a non tech person I can't get my
needs met because I don't have the
intellectual capacity to to do that I
have other skills not those skills so
there are some very good well actually
they're not very good when one of their
okay but they're at their in their Nason
see so they're the same problems you're
talking about with using you know
wallets and tokens and and all of this
stuff are problematic in the etherium
framework they have what is called a
distributed accountable I'm sorry
decentralized a Dao distributed
autonomous organization or decentralized
autonomous organization okay
that's the etherium framework in whole a
chain they have a conception called sac
or sovereign accountable commons but
basically what you're looking for is
means that if you share a mission with
people in this community they are a
governance framework that's instantiated
in some sort of technical means and
they're able to arrive at a
decision which is a unitary singular
decision right if I can't if I do X that
means I can't do y it's a single
decision you have a whole bunch of
people that need to make that decision
together in some way so they have a
consensus mechanism or they have some
other way of arriving at collective
decision making the the Dow or the DAC
Dax I think or distributed autonomous
companies I think that is a term of art
from co-ceos framework if I'm not
mistaken distributed autonomous
organization is the etherium one and SAC
sovereign accountable commons is the
whole Oh chain one all of these are the
first instances of giving you exactly
what you're asking for Jubilee and so
it's coming and I've been working on
because I was trying to come up with
with with a form that would do what I'll
call mutual aid a mutual benefit mutual
aid being like if you fall down the
community help evaluate see and helps
pick you up right it's sort of prudhoe
nyan anarchism where you come together
as a collective to help each other it's
it's like the mutual aid societies of
the past only in these crypto settings
if you will the other being what I call
mutual benefit which is more like we're
helping people who are promising do
their projects do the things that
they're working on that falls under our
mission that we share I'm still working
on these and and I'm not able to use
blockchain because it's basically
illegal in the United States now and it
pisses me off to no end but I won't but
these these we are absolutely at the
genesis of a beautiful revolution in
giving you exactly what you're looking
for so are there people like me ie tech
non tech people part of these
conversations too English they be able
okay because that is to be one of the
big sticking points is it's like you
need to have a certain threshold like
even where they're like yeah get
involved go to this forum I'm like oh
that forum doesn't work like it's like I
don't where do you find things but
searchable what's
there is so many of these amazing
communities are on discord and I can't
tell you how many times I have followed
the link to go to this court and this
court gives me a whole new accounts like
this is not Facebook it's not lose
you're friendly and people are like disk
or it's easy I'm like if in order to
have the tech conversation I could be on
discord and discord is not tech friendly
in my opinion like isn't friendly to the
non tech you see like if you need to
yell at me that it's easy it's not easy
yeah and if your discord channel gets
too big there's there's too much noise
and not enough signal there's a lot of
problems that Dow stack is one of the
most promising douse out there it uses a
prediction market in combination with a
voting system to for essentially a kind
of a balanced consensus mechanism that
allows the community to make decisions
on behalf of the entire corpus right
instead of a single person it's a it's a
great system but from a UX and UI
standpoint it's still not there yet just
many things in the etherium development
environment that we require do you use
all of these things meta masks for
example you might not have heard of that
but it's suffice it to say it's another
thing that's an impediment to normal
users like you and me getting in there
and and really rocking and rolling but
they're gonna fix that they're gonna fix
the UX UI they're gonna make it smooth
as a baby's butt eventually and we're
all gonna be like Oh where's this been
all our lives right just it's just so
early it's coming from the geniuses
right so they they develop things for
themselves that seem really easy to them
because they're super left brain people
yeah you get the creatives like you and
me and we're like come on focus more on
UX and then I like work hey we're
getting there we just we we started with
what we're good at because we're loving
people and then you know that that
process is gonna play itself out a lot
better I mean if you even think about
email at there in the early days of
email I remember and I'm old enough to
remember this where you had like command
prompts and like ASCII in her face
to send an email and it was I didn't
ever use that but they you know I'm
sorry here was that it I feel like I see
1991 okay emails for the first time in
the 96 no I was like I don't remember
that but yeah and I was at a university
I was at in graduate school I was no I
wouldn't been in grad school maybe I
would have I don't know a 98 I remember
seeing people still using ailment email
clients like that but in any case so it
used to be that way and I I had no idea
how to use I was like oh this sounds
interesting but you know catch me it's
usable yeah that's my like meet a
scientist I went to go back and learn
statistics and now it's all like on
computers I'm like oh no I'm not
learning a Mathematica was like my
nemesis it's like I always like it's
supposed to be easy coding is not my
it's like one semicolons out and you're
done I'm like I've been speaking English
my whole life and I can't even do that
properly so like spelling properly
without spellcheck I'm like Cody and not
on Amen yeah it's and yet I think you
and I both are the kind of people that
those folks need yeah I think we all
need each other we need all the people
we need all the people to be like this
is why this isn't working for me without
passing that like there's this nanny
system right the government solves our
problems like everyone's out in the
street right now station rebellion
yelling at the government to do
something like they don't know what to
do what do you expect them to do they
literally don't know what to do they
don't have the information they know
that it's broken
the incentives are completely an odd
yeah and it's like we could do something
but like no no no no no they need to do
it it's like we need our governments to
give us like permission to start
citizens assemblies I'm like or we could
just start citizen assembly it's like no
not that this and it's like for someone
else to solve the problem instead of
like how do we come together to solve it
well extinction rebellion the the top
brass uses holacracy mmm-hmm I was I was
shocked to learn that testing like so
you understand holacracy you clearly at
some level get what it means to
self-organize and you're obliged
this completely corporate captured
hierarchical system in Britain and
wherever else to make changes according
to your demands you think that's gonna
work like it's just if you understand
incentives and institutions enough to
adopt Halak recei then you ought to know
that that you're beating your head
against the wall showing up at
Parliament making demands or clogging up
the tube and pissing people off yeah
so I had a question about the thing
you're working on that you said hollow
chain are not hollow chain block chain
is illegal in the States actually
totally didn't know and what I am
attempting to create going to create or
some iteration of it as it evolves is a
global technology cooperative it's a
user slash platform cooperative right
it's for the consumers like when we had
the conversation about uber right and I
was like oh we actually couldn't have
created that so we weren't in that gray
area right now it's more black white
part of why I want it to be global is
because we can I think
fix that problem right like you're an
American in America you can't create
blockchain but you can use uber and you
can use Bitcoin you can use your enemy
like there's a certain amount where you
can use what isn't in the United States
you can't necessarily create it and so
fully openly transparently be like hey
we'll create it for you in Canada right
like we all and you know I don't know if
you get arrested it's like you were
working on it right like working on it
under a different now you're you're
talking about the utopian fires of my
imagination right now you're getting to
what what makes my soul sing you talking
about right now which is extra
jurisdictional jurisdictions human
beings in a cosmopolitan way
collaborating across borders to create
value in the world their cooperation in
exchange and my damn like yeah you're
singing my song right now and it's
frustrating that so many of these kinds
of things are being suppressed right now
yeah yeah and I mean there are downsides
to it too right you know there are
people who use in and it's not to say
that blockchain is illegal in the United
States but
the kind of the umbrella of things that
you can do with pain is very small it's
it's very corporate you know I think
they have grandfathered in the SEC is
grandfathered in Bitcoin and aetherium
but you know maybe some of the other
ones that are just crypto currencies but
like money transmitter lols each each of
the 50 states has a money transmitter
law you have to comply with so that
that's going to take 250 thousand
dollars right there just to be able to
do that and I'm you know the question of
whether something is a security token
versus a utility token and utility
tokens are now illegal I mean there's
about five different regulatory agencies
at the state and federal level that in
order to do what I wanted to do I would
have had to comply with all of them and
that would have taken a million dollars
I mean yeah yeah that is also jeez I
just did a video series in my non tech
way but I don't edit things um on they
take the closest thing I've gotten to a
nutshell of what I'm trying to create
like technology's powerful we can use it
every day it clearly has given us stuff
that we haven't had before it's also
risky right you'd have to put in a
million dollars to create that thing and
it might never go anywhere um you create
goober and it might not go anywhere like
the Unicorn exists for a reason it's
like a lot of risk that 9 out of 10 fail
and the more that fail the more the fail
in the future in my opinion that's part
of the risky part is that if I put my
data on something and it goes away I'm
less likely to trust the next one and
the next one and the next one right it's
been done and tried can't be done again
it's like right but why did they fail we
don't know why they failed um I think a
cooperative together makes it more
powerful because there's things we can
do together that Facebook will never be
able to do then a tiny group of people
can't do a for-profit company working in
isolation I you not transparent can't do
because we're not they have to trick us
into doing it instead of asking us to do
it right like hey want to tell us what
you buy for groceries so we can
coordinate make that cheaper for
everyone right versus like a Facebook
asks you for that they can trick you
into it give us the first letter will
give you everything you want will give
you your Game of Thrones character that
you are um but then it's like together
it's it's more powerful and it's also
less risky because if you're creating it
too
and some than like you have a million
people putting in a dollar or a hundred
thousand people putting in ten dollars
so no one's bankrupt and everyone's
choosy like is this nil I don't know
what you're crazy but is this million
dollars worth it to you probably not
that's a lot of money to risk when you
don't you know but like to a hundred
thousand people ten dollars yeah I'll
try that especially if it has this
potential to be huge
right and so to create things together
in a way that like spreads out the risk
because we're yes we trust you or we
trust your project or we trust the
vision here's ten dollars right and
Creina I think that's part of what
you're creating is something that is
people can put money in mark more skin
in the game and people don't realize the
importance of skin in the game right you
want to you want to first be able to
look I'm not trying to discourage poor
people I'm kind of I'm not one of them
but like you know I'm not not a part of
the 1% but you also don't you also want
it no matter how much you want to give
people some skin in the game some sense
that that there is something that they
can lose in the investment in the
community and also a sense that they
have been a contributor so they have a
psychological stake in it if you like
and this is what's important about it
you know
it's like if if you're cooperative or
whatever your group if maybe it's a
mutual aid group like you know I started
off trying to develop a year ago or a
year and a half ago is you know it's
gonna have a distribution of people and
a different income levels or an ordinate
or net worth if you like and so the
people in the long term you know the
people out on the part of the
distribution who are or don't have much
money even if they can contribute a
little something that is that is
important and if they can't that there's
a that they're included with a view to a
view to the idea that someday they can
contribute you know cuz that skin in the
game aspect
it's just so important absolutely right
now like it's it's so I have this vision
of this technological cooperative that
like I created the structure of the
board how we fund it everything and
because I can't communicate it in a
nutshell
how do you get anyone on board for that
plus it's not even how it's supposed to
be I'm like now I'm coming back to the
base and recreating it like like we need
to have the conversations on how to fund
it how to have the governance structure
and do that and do so openly
transparently we actually have our board
meetings live on YouTube and we're
creating it in that way now that being
said nobody has skin in the game that's
watching the free people that show up
every week right and so but they're
showing up every week so they kind of do
have skin in the game but a new person
popping in and vote like the issue is
they can't get both but we want their
opinion right like until we have a way
to say you're a member there isn't
really a vote because you don't have
skin in the game
not like Bentley and I do right like
you're not showing up every every
on-camera the stewards of the mission
like have you saw me rich in and it's
crystal clear not a bit crystal clear
because it's evolving right it's like
well creating a collaboration platform
um right now I have the idea Cafe which
was our first project it might be in
still our first project which is modeled
after the World Cafe it's a way to have
a conversation with at least a dozen but
generally dozens hundreds even thousands
of people in real world so you show up
you are round tables of four you're
having a 20-minute conversation around a
question and then you switch tables and
then you're having that same
conversation or a built on question with
other people right so like the bigger
groups having a conversation but you're
having an intimate conversation where
everyone's heard and everyone's listened
to and it's you know like collective
intelligence and so I was like yes I
want that I want the technology for that
so the idea cafe right now because it's
within my technological technique skills
is a YouTube channel we have them for
game B on Tuesdays like 11:30 my time
and we wrote on the question and we need
to take five turn in five minutes
answering the question then we talk for
the rest of the hour because it's game
so I get good boss like emits twenty
minutes
the idea is that eventually it's a half
an hour time mark on the platform and
you can come on an end for just
as many as you want right so every week
let's say there's an umbrella platfor
like for the world or your your circle
right your circle if you're talking
about food what's your question that
week and anyone can participate in that
and then there's you have to harvest
that conversation so there's anyway so
that's what we were creating and we're
doing it openly and transparently I
don't know skin in the game that yes
having people who like right now they
don't but eventually they will like my
funding model my funding model not ours
that we're gonna create it was like a
Netflix about so the idea is everyone's
putting in $10 a month and you're voting
on what your what our next project is
right now if you have a project that you
think it's really important but you we
haven't voted on it you're welcome to
fund it with a bunch of people right and
work through the process and own it in a
different way than what we would own
together right like these are like we
own them together we're recreating them
so we don't all have to spend $10 a
month on each individual thing that's
going to be used together including food
apps financial apps health apps that are
things that we already use in the real
world what are the features and benefits
they have that we like and how can we
incorporate those into one model right
like none of the food apps work for me
because I am one of those poor people
and they don't allow you to go to the
store and be like this is what's on sale
give me five recipes for it right it
doesn't allow me to coordinate with my
neighbors to bulk I doesn't allow me to
do all of the things I'm like why can't
it be like this right I mean doesn't
even allow me to give that option it's
just like which one do you want to use
and they're all $10 a month we'll give
you a food budget right like a shopping
list if they're good with your neighbors
to get to get good stuff is pretty neat
mm-hmm absolutely I mean I'm involved in
a a lot of my inspiration comes from my
community that I'm part of where we have
collective meals together and every time
I show up for a collective meal which is
like every adult cooks and cleans once a
cycle which is roughly once a month and
we eat together four times a week so
every other time you can show up and eat
at cost right you don't cook you don't
have to do the labor and you don't have
to do the labor for cooking or cleaning
or shopping and but when
on a team you decide on it decide want
to make you do the grocery shopping and
you divvy it amongst you know how many
people signed up for that meal and and
you're confident that sounds like with
your with your you're wanting to scale
that to the level of hey maybe I don't
know well also it's also like any I
because its antivirus and yet its right
like it's like not everyone can
participate in this cohousing meal plan
right we can't have a thousand people
showing up in that dinner table but with
all the churches and community centers
around one there could be a community
kitchen in every neighborhood and it
could be designed if you want to right
no one's in this community are a little
bit forced to just because that's part
of the like protocol of living there
right like you agree to participate in
that I don't actually live there I just
drive because I've been part of a
community since the beginning before it
was built but I wasn't able to afford to
move into it but even the meals like
there's none of the meals what I'd be
able to cook for me and my kid at that
cost especially with the labor like I
got meal kits in the last few months and
I was like this is a lot of work a lot
of waste and the only reason I can
afford it as I got it on the discount
right it was like 50% off for the first
six and I wanted to try a bunch of them
like this is not better than cohousing
like I would rather drive to cohousing
and eat the meal that like do this and
yet this is such a step up for other
people that there's so many exploding
I'm like first of all that's a problem
because the efficiency of it is like
you're all accountable izing off of each
other like literally I signed up for one
I get all the facebook pads for the
other ones right like we could come
together and create one for like all the
socioeconomic status Co housings could
come together in bulk by food because
they don't they're just like yes I'm
going to save on food which is pretty
expensive and sometimes it's Whole Foods
and it's like or Costco like it's it's
not it's somewhat buying in bulk right
you're gonna buy for rice for forty
people is gonna be fresher and cheaper
and buying it for two people but it's
not buying it for ten thousand people
it's not buying it for like the entire
city and then there's three issues than
it solves
like those vegans and gluten-free people
and if you had a citywide program I
wouldn't need to figure out how to make
this meal
and you watch as I do to a lot of a lot
of times with the collective
decision-making there can come still you
have to ward off the tragedies of the
Commons problems if you like which you
know very much if everybody owns this
stuff either has to be locally managed
in though in in the way that Elinor
Ostrom would have you know no Nobel
laureate in economics Elinor Ostrom
would have would have said you know that
there that that management of the
Commons needs to be local needs to be
transparent and she has all these other
criteria for how it works because
Commons management at scale is sucks
it's terrible there's no way to do it
basically and that's what she won the
Nobel Prize for that message and I think
she's right or you have to have an end
you have to have a market and take it
out of the Commons and just make it
private property and it allocated
however it's allocated by the owner but
in there's so many opportunities for to
have interesting commons models
you just have govern those commons in a
way that reflects the pluralism in your
population the different taste
preferences and so on absolutely you
know and that's where like my vision of
one that i'm never gonna be able to do
anywhere near by myself like it's like
getting 10,000 people together and
asking like what do you eat how do we
make it cheaper how do we do that and
then eventually getting a system where
it is you know like that we can enough
that it's the mission but bankrupts all
of the grocery stores overnight because
grocery stores are really like an if you
could get your groceries delivered to
you at this way cheaper it's more
environmentally friendly it's more the
issue is of course is logistics right
someone has to pack them someone has to
the warehouse all that well that's part
of the system it has to be transported
so instead of paying someone a living
wage which is important you divvy that
amongst yourselves right now not
everyone can drive a truck so like you
don't like your cooking you're cleaning
you're you're driving in your packaging
whatever it is it's if there's 10,000
people and it's a hundred thousand hours
everyone's putting in ten hours
and as long as you can transparently see
that it can be cohousing doesn't work
that way right it's like you cook and
clean your meal perfect doesn't matter
whether your meal takes eight hours or
two hours you've chosen your meal for
complexity I like that also but in that
system
maybe cohousing is part of the bigger
group and so they to collectively
together need to put in ten hours a
month to the system of going to
packaging and doing whatever so maybe
that's my role in that right I go do
that and that's my part of being part of
the cohousing piece right like maybe
that's my cooking and cleaning that
cycle but there's ways to organize it at
a larger scale that is just kind of like
transparent of what resources were used
how do we divvy it up who's doing what
what's getting done what's not getting
done and then the more local level of
like right I don't want it dictated to
me with my meal is except I kind of do
you want to dictate it to my meal is not
getting a high article down you have to
make this that doesn't seem fun but I do
want someone else to be like these are
the three meals that are available you
can make a different one and do what we
do which is go grocery shopping and plan
the whole thing or tell us how many
people and it will be delivered for you
and we bulk buy it in an even bigger
amounts and here's the gluten options
they can that will also be delivered to
you right that are like maybe not those
are versions of those and there's just
like more efficiency that can happen on
a larger scale if you're not being the
government's right if you're not making
bureaucracy and like everyone has to
like there's power down then I hate I
rebel I am like anti like if you tell me
to do something I will not do it to the
point of like I feel like I'm a toddler
I'm realizing this about myself and now
it's like if I won't do something if
someone tells me to that's just as
stupid as doing it do I want to do the
thing but there's like that's just part
of autism that there's like that that
oppositional defiance I think it's like
I knew and feeding into that I'm like
right so I've created the system of like
there is no hi I don't want to have
power over anyone else and I want anyone
to have power over me how do we create a
system where that's actually possible
it's like from the ground up right like
with like five of us how do we figure
out how to make decisions without one
person being in charge without it coming
down to a power struggle and it's owning
the emotions it's owning all the
that
gonna come up and then like fixing it on
camera or like everyone can see you know
I think you know and I'm not telling you
what to do because I don't want you to
jail
yeah but uh but I think you know a lot
of these things are um we have to just
keep it simple we shouldn't let the
perfect be the enemy the good and I and
I'm a victim of this by the way and I
speak from bitter experience because I
tend to want to go directly to the ideal
and not to the compromise but but
sometimes it's about iteratively getting
something pragmatic that serves your
highest values not all your values but
your highest values first focus on that
get something as an MVP that you're
using and it's adaptable at the
periphery or even at the center but
certainly at the periphery so that you
can continue that you can continue on
without idealizing every single aspect
of it you know for example sometimes a
community meal might just fail might
just it might just be that something
that no one turns up to if if they're
gonna make lasagna and it's got a bunch
of gluten in it well I'm just gonna go
to another restaurant tonight I'm just
gonna or I'm just gonna eat peanut
butter sandwich at home or whatever
that's okay
like sometimes I think creating systems
of interdependency are healthy but there
we have to preserve autonomy and we have
to preserve the certain aspects of the
collective good and in our efforts to do
those things are always going to be
trade-offs for any given instantiation
of the system so you might another way
of putting that might be like it's we're
passing from game a to game B and I
don't think anybody in game and game B
has a really really rigorous definition
of what these things are including
myself so I'm not criticizing it I'm
saying this is hard stuff and it's still
nervous but in that in the but we do
have an instinct for what gang main game
B is as we transition and as you
you start to develop your collaborative
projects recognizing that there are
trade-offs is okay having to accept some
short-term pain or unidentified to make
these trade-offs that so so much that
and I'm and I really do like the system
we've developed but it is a compromise
it's a compromise with the rest of the
world and that and it's a competent in
some situations to compromise with the
state of the art with the technology the
legal reality and the lack of resources
that I have to bring to bear to build
the damn thing right so there are all
kinds of trade-offs we have to make and
in some times when we think about
architecting these systems if we think
of internally as iterations iterations
and constant improvement may be using
holacracy we process the tensions it
allow us to improve it at the margins or
being okay with competition you know
being okay not you know if we if we say
no that's just game a come any kind of
competition is game a or any and and you
know the it's interesting that he uses a
term I think I'm thinking of Daniel
Marton Berger uses a term rival risk
because when he first used that term I
was interpreting it in the economic
sense of scarcity rivalry if I have a if
I'm sitting on a chair you can't sit on
it that kind of rivalry not as
competition and I think both senses of
the word or what he's what he's looking
for now as that's been unpacked but um
sometimes acknowledging rivalries Goods
as being private property you know is
okay like my meal and I want it to be
gluten-free is okay and yeah
but as we as we start to develop these
systems we're gonna have to parse which
aspects of our
grunty and/or of our autonomy which you
which you clearly like and guard as a
vow for yourself which you don't like
people telling you what to do yeah
that's gonna be a piece of it but uh but
also what things that we know we need to
cede to the community into the
collective decision-making processes are
also going to be a factor in this but I
think as we move along and move forward
asymptotically towards game B it won't
be perfect but man it'll be a hell of a
lot better than we're sitting now yeah
and that's all of the things like I can
find fault and in anything that's not
mine but let me find fault in mine too
which is why it got to where it is or it
got to the point where I was like oh my
god this is a solution to everything
yeah it's not that it's the solution
because other people have to clearly get
on board for it and everyone's not me
like every time I present something and
I think it's a no-brainer people like
but I'm not like that I'm like really oh
okay I'll feed that back into the model
but it does feed back into the model and
that's where to me there's things that
I'm willing to compromise on the coming
group willing to literally work with
anyone who wants to work together to
create something from the ground up but
am I because it's like it needs to be
democratic or better transparent and
diverse those are like the three that
are my highest values they're like what
I need it to be but like right now it's
live on YouTube and we're trying to get
more people so that we can have like a
five or six person team to work through
things live on on YouTube and that's
what I want I want it to be live because
then even when it breaks down even when
we get emotionally charged and those
things happen it's showcasing what that
looks like like the behind the scenes of
creating any project or business right
like the emotional work all of it partly
so that the people can have skin in the
game and help us solve it as well right
like Oh including like what like we're
kind of the board of directors until we
can figure out something better maybe a
glass frog is that already but figuring
out how do you make decisions in a
smaller group because we can meet make
decisions for the larger group in a way
that's effective and part of that is if
we're showing you our finances and we go
bankrupt um did you tell us that these
were bad finances right like if you
didn't see the error neither did we
who's at fault right it's like if
everyone kind of has equal authority as
in like you could have looked at the
finances and could have found the same
errors could have offered ways to make
that network and you didn't so it's not
like passing off your power and
obligation to its central authority and
we're not taking on that central
authority but it's working for the
collective betterment and personally
figuring out what part if six people
were like we want to do this but we
don't want to be on camera on YouTube
and I was like okay can we do it on Zoom
and record it so we can have it
available for members later I'd be
willing to do that but it's like what
iteration meets my values and then also
because there's still a million ways to
have transparency right and it's like
which one which one
ah sure I love listening you talk about
this because it is really it's it really
goes to the heart of the kind of
questions we have to face as we approach
game be all of these clips so for
example going back to very quickly to
holacracy remember I'd said earlier and
you agreed with this there's a there's a
book actually it's really good on this
subject because it's a it's easy to
consume Daniel Pink's Drive really takes
the research on what motivates people as
employees and finds that specific
targeted incentives for like you know if
you get targeted and incentives like
what do you call it when you when you
take a cut of the transaction what is
that called
um I know what you mean it's on Dragon's
Den and Shark Tank right there laughs
anyway it's just getting someone a good
solid salary royalty oh yeah not a
royalty royalty okay when you're a
salesperson you can get a commission
permission thank you Commission based
work can if you find that you start to
in chase chase those near-term
incentives of commission then you it
distracts you from the overall set of
responsibilities you have and what
people prize as much as they like just
getting a normal page
that you know gives them a healthy life
with their family or whatever is
autonomy connection with a team and one
other dimension that's really important
I think there's like three or four
dimensions in in the book that he really
goes into depth on but and I actually
agree with that um you know don't tell
me okay I know we have a we have a
mission and this is what's great about
Holika see don't don't tell me what to
do to get to it just let me know when
he's done and I'll find the best way
there for me based on my talents and
relationships with other people and I
can be judged on whether or not I was
successful at executing against you know
the furthering the mission and in in so
doing we can process that as the tension
as a community right so this a very
different way of looking at it in
holacracy but they don't like those
Commission kind of things because that
can incentives can pull you away from
the holistic set of responsibilities
that you know what I mean
however I don't want to say that token
systems like you know token
architectures for big populations are
bad is that for local comprehensive
roles in the context of a whole chronic
organization you might not want to have
incentives pulling you away from all of
your other roles yeah you want to have a
but in a tokenized environment it's like
a giant skinner box it's shaping
people's behavior with incentives and
designing the incentive architectures to
positive effect which i think is a great
thing to do I think yeah like taking the
world and being like we have to
incentivize people it's the only way no
one's gonna create no one's gonna invent
unless they're given a paycheck I'm like
did you look at history that's not to
invented a lot of the stuff right it's
people who had time and money to do it
and so if we give people time and money
they will invent some people won't
some people are over competitive and
they will only do it if they get the win
and the wind to them is money right the
wind to them is that that's fine they
exist they're in game a they can keep
playing that game
but creating a different sense of
structure here for everything and people
learned that they volunteer for
everything so they're always asking them
to volunteer and it's a bad cycle it's
like no no no no no eventually you guys
start charging and yeah no it's it's
true but like that the one that I showed
you that's now covered in notes the like
wants aware skills and it like that
that's how they they do it it's like
that's how a thing gets done in the
sweet spot where you don't have to pay
them and it's its own reward to do it
all right some things aren't gonna get
done right and so part of it is looking
at what's not getting done and then
start and sensitizing it right like in
the utopian future where this is all
just exists on a grand scale
a pothole doesn't get filled right it's
like well who has do we have the system
the Pete's all the people who have the
skills that the pothole needs get built
but it's still not getting it done
that's because they don't want to what
would get them to want to write and
beyond money like what would make it fun
what would make it enjoyable to build
upon are there people out there who
don't have the skill and would like to
do it and can learn it right like it's
fixing that model including incentives
right in my world we don't have money
because it's a resource more of a
resource based economy because I like
that model better but that's I like that
right that's not necessarily what we get
to from here right we don't necessarily
get there because there has to be a road
to get there and there's all these Forks
along the way but that does it like if
somebody was going to come and play life
music if you've got to have a concert
like a concert to get to Beyonce cuz
she's gonna get all the potholes filled
in the world right you get a ticket by
filling one of them there's ways to
incentivize that are that's so money
asked right it's still reward but it's
not putting that back into the system
but I don't think ever do we get to the
point where we make it illegal or wrong
to trade things or not like if you have
a table and I have something we want to
exchange it to make that in the legal
process is ridiculous
but when we get to such a high degree of
like wait you have tables you love
making tables and you want to give them
out you get to decide who to give them
to and I love making art and I do the
same thing and maybe I really like your
table and you really like my art and we
decide to do a change right like mm-hmm
it's not breaking it just to break it
say no one gets to have competition
because I don't like competition doesn't
work if people thrive under competition
they need to be able to have a
competition I just think cooperation
outcompetes competition on a grand scale
where the
I think we get to a point where there is
no competition in the grand scale of how
we have it now in the marketplace left
because a cooperative is always going to
out-compete it so well you can also have
weird hybrids like we compete to
cooperate right yeah and that's and
that's a that to me is it's like to what
end I always ask to what end right
because it's always got a that question
has to be answered at some level unless
you believe in some sort of magical
transcendence which I don't and I'm not
I'm not totally being utilitarian or
consequentialist in my thinking that's
just it's just a little bit of
means-ends thinking right so it's like
okay I want to you know well anyway I
lost that one I had too many trails and
I didn't follow any one of them but
coming up to the two-hour mark I think
we should probably keep it to two to two
hours or under by the conversation no no
I can't think enough for inviting me on
amazing and I've really enjoyed it yeah
me too um yeah the means and stuff I'll
just put it this way if it's sort of
like there's this they're very very okay
there's this old thinker old neoliberal
god forbid thinker named Friedrich Hayek
God you know I said God for because
people don't like me or liberals but
Hayek was particularly interesting
thinker and he has this distinction
cosmos in taxes right where cosmos is
the extended order and it's in it's
enabled by rules or protocols that are
non teleological which is to say there
is no mission right and then there's and
that's a certain kind of order and then
there's another kind of order he calls
toxis spelled like taxis likes that you
drive in a ride in but taxes is a
planned order that has a mission has a
cific thing that you're trying to
achieve and that order can be planned
right it can be planned more locally by
and usually that is carried out in
hierarchical fashion and I think this
was an important distinction he made in
in in seeing the different ways that
society gets organized he where he
thought it was problematic was when you
people took the plant the planning
mentality of a an organization and tried
to to apply it to society writ large
which he said is too complicated too
complex actually for any person or group
it would fry the neural circuitry of the
the committee or the person in charge
and simply can't be done and he was
talking specifically about central
planning societies because he was
writing this in the 40s and there was a
lot of central planning going on the
point is though we you and I and the
game B folks are very very interested in
emergent systems and we know that
emergent systems have rules but they
don't have plans the rules are a
coordinating mechanism for the actors in
a network right in their emergent
phenomena that come out come out of this
what's interesting though is I think
that there's a hybrid and holacracy I
think demonstrates very well it this
could be hybrid is that you can have a
mission you can have teleological a Tia
Telos a goal or a mission and have the
benefits of emergence right so Hayek
says these are separate phenomena but I
think there's a third one in there with
stick merge accustoms
Paul Hughes is in the game view group
talks about stick merging systems a lot
which are like you know you see the the
murmuration of starlings or you see the
fish swimming and synchrony in the
oceans to get away from the tuna or to
to combat the tuna and keep them away or
you know so that the whole population
doesn't die that how are they
coordinating they're not there's no one
saying everybody turned left everybody
turned left
it's not happening it's just it's a it's
an internal set of protocols
that they've evolved with yeah fashion
those protocols but we might share a
mission and that what I think you're
looking for in what you're developing
and I'm really excited to see that
you're headed in that direction I know
that's what I've been working on
I think game B is very much
acknowledging that we have a diversity
of different missions but that it is
possible to self-organize to a variable
degree in realism in realizing those
missions yeah absolutely like part of
what I'm working on for 2020 by which I
mean like internally working on how do I
work with other people now that I've
saved the world in my head how do I work
other people and in-game be is a great
space and having a lot of amazing
conversations but like my process is
very alone
right like it's very sitting in my room
figuring this thing out because I like
that process it's and I think a lot of
people do a lot of people like tiny
group or single individual processes but
how do we have those feedback into a way
that that is safe enough to fail where I
don't need to get it right to show it
and you know what I mean like how does
that process then we can come together
and have parts of it and go away and
have parts of it what does it look like
to have autonomous individuals with full
sovereignty come together and create
something that is in service to all of
our missions right - like everyone's
individual project my project's very
meta it's very like we're gonna create
everything and own everything together I
get that that's not what's going to
emerge what's gonna merge is like
everyone has individual projects what
kind of platform could help you find
people could a project help like create
that from the ground up and so that's
gonna look like a lot of emergent idea
Cafe is around that right what could a
platform look like what could a
conversation look like that is that is
iterative that isn't I'm trying to not
try to do the utopian big vision because
I already have it and instead like hold
that for me and then like from this
space what am i capable of ie the idea
cafe on YouTube because I can go live
and do that no problem and what would be
the most service to my mission and
everyone else is right like how do we
find all new in solutions now right that
isn't like as much as my egos like
mine's the best like this one is
but I get that that's ego but that's
like the reason I think it's because one
I know the intricate parts of it and
also I see how everything else builds
off of it and so does everyone else
right everyone else has their platforms
like yes all the other platforms can
come on here like which is different
than us creating one that meets all of
our needs but figuring out the like
little pieces that are able to be grown
an idea cafe the like how do we bring a
dozen people together it's brainstorm
what a technology work looks like in the
new world right especially in what I'm
talking about there's a woman's tech not
women in technology group on Facebook
that I'm part of but I've never posted
in and I want to be like hey I'm not
offering you a workplace but I'm
offering you a conversation on what a
workplace could look like for women in
technology right like what does that
look like with childcare and misogyny
and the stuff that they've experienced
in that place right um like instead of
needing to solve it just do the
discussion part and that's what I'm
gonna be working on into the audience
facilitating that process and having the
board of directors meetings live so that
every time you make a mistake personally
collectively we can learn from it
together like yep we did that that
happens well let's move on let's learn
from it and grow yeah I mean it sounds
like you're I'm curious and we have only
like two minutes to come up on the you
know that we actually have one minute
coming up on the two-hour mark but if
you'll indulge me a final question for
you what's the what's the flame that the
mods are drawn to for this project cuz
it sounds like you've got a lot of
people interested now what it what are
they drawn to um I don't have a lot of
people interested so I'm figuring out
the opposite part like what is the
attractor because I can see the big
mission I can see how it gives everyone
everything they want but that's a not an
attractor right it needs to be like you
need this resource so L can't let you
know how this is this resource the I'm
hoping the attractor the attractor for
the right people is that they want to
create this from the ground up they want
to do it openly and transparently so
that we can learn and everyone else can
learn through that process and Phi
those people and that's also what I'm
coming to is like right if it takes a
thousand people to talk to you to get
those people that's totally fine it's
not a percentage right it's not fifty
percent of the people are gonna be into
this it might be one percent of people
but I the whole point of the vision is
that if we find five people that are
that one percent
it grows in its own way it's emergent
that like we figure out how to work with
five people but also with the idea we
want to work with hundreds and we want
to work with thousands but like we can't
do that we can come up with a protocol
to work with a hundred people and then
bring a hundred people on board and see
if that works and have them be Prince
baited it and so maybe your your core
team can get together and and really
work on that mission a mission language
because and it's just a suggestion it
may not be ready for it yet but when you
when you get to that point and you want
to start attracting people that's gonna
do it it's it's gonna you got to get to
the head through the heart for most
people and you know sitting around and
talking with geeks like me it only goes
so far then it'll have to be what are
people connecting with here and
crystallizing that in mission language
that resonates yeah and I'm also like
also in a way that's generative instead
of like I'm like we're gonna do snaps of
capitalism people don't they're like and
what's left it's like the world you yet
is opposed to the world we're taking
away right like what does as opposed to
I would love to just pour into that as a
next conversation with you at some point
and maybe six months from now but um it
sounds like we're so close to each other
on our dreams and aspirations and our
utopian visions and yet that's one area
where I'm like yeah what is she talking
about why does she want to get rid of it
but I think the Devils in the in the
definitions probably yeah absolutely and
it's more the effects that I want to get
rid of like I have tons of people I know
much better capitalistic there are
conscious capitalists and they're like
this is how we solve it my brother who I
talk to every Saturday life on YouTube
if I his own project wiki elections he's
like I'm a capitalist I'm like I get it
I get you can't see why I think that
we're serving profit we're not serving
her best but using purpose and profit
language I was thinking about John
Mackey I mean that's his shtick John
Mack founder of Whole Foods Market he
you know he says perfect purp
you know purpose and profit are two
sides of the same coin that you can get
rid of one or the other they're both
inextricably bound and that's so he
can't he you know that's part and parcel
to this whole theory that he's
architected called conscious capitalism
so I'm sounds like here is your brother
you say yeah
your brother is interested in that that
dimension of things and I'm currently
where you depart from him but I've
definitely taken up more than two hours
of your time and I love all these game
be conversations that is my current
project just like these are amazing and
then I want to extrapolate that to the
rest of the world like how does everyone
participate in these kind of
conversations that our hierarchy down
that aren't like we all listen to the
professor it's like how do you actually
because I've gotten so much out of this
it's not about someone else watching
this like it's about I've learnt a lot
and grown and have new things to
research right like that is the essence
that I'm trying to create with the idea
Cafe strangely live on YouTube where
people like I don't want to do it there
at scary I'm like I get it but like come
be part of it it's fun like no one has
gone through it and been like I wish I
didn't do that everyone's like this was
a fun process to be part of well and
what you know at we've we've gone over
to ours and I'm thinking I've just
you've left me mourning more so so that
that says a lot about how much we have
to learn from each other just to people
and if she's willing that up it's
amazing absolutely maybe we can schedule
a new conversation in a month or so and
continue on all right it was great
meeting you max I'm just gonna end the
YouTube broadcast so bye YouTube
bye YouTube