hello everybody thanks for tuning in
you're about to witness and listen to
conversation with Joan Bordeaux and I
this is our second video together there
will be a third it's a continuation of
the conversation that of our first
conversation and then some you could say
musings that just seemed to come up
around got everything from around
authenticity and we're
like where you are in terms of like
where is authenticity located and what
is it oriented to pretty also to
relationships and being authentic in
relationships and also we talked to a
lot towards the end about the dynamic of
victimhood right as a is not like a not
like a report a factual report on the
state of affair but the that sense of
being a victim and what that is and some
of the plumbing underneath it is really
good it was really great conversation
I love Joan a lot much much wisdom there
okay some announcements before before we
begin the conversation with her so
biggest one is the circling Institute my
company has officially announced and it
is open for registration the art of
circling course which is the first time
we're gonna have the the main course
that that I teach we teaches if the
circle Institute on how to be a
circulant practice practitioner and how
to lead circles is open and it's gonna
be online so we are going to launch the
date for it once we have a certain
number of people registered for it and
we just opened up and about we got about
half it's a half full already so link
for that is below and the other thing is
yes if you're if you're interested in in
working with me one on one um email me
and we'll make arrangements to talk
about that okay enjoy
okay we're recording sweet hello Jones
hey welcome back
welcome back to my screen oh it's so
nice to be back
yes absolutely I so we were just talking
about this before him but I just so
enjoyed the conversation with you last
time like I've known you for a while now
and I've known you
I mean you shared with me so much of
your life and with each other but I but
going through actually going through
your whole life in in you know in a
relative order had just things do you
shared some things with me that just as
we were talking about which is just
interesting because just I mean even
that just this is interesting is that as
I was saying the Joan that I walk around
with right like like oh I have my
parents and I walk around with I have my
wife that I walk around with there's
life out there there's the parents out
there there's a Joan out there but then
there's like on some level the Joan that
I reference and I think about that is
somehow Orient's me with myself in the
world like like she after that last
conversation and she got updated ray she
got more dimensional or something right
which is was really interesting and
exciting and I so I just really
appreciate our last conversation how was
it for you
it was wonderful it was like um I was
gonna say it was like cleaning out of
closet but which I like I love I love
that action of cleaning out closets and
but more
[Music]
I don't know was looking through all
that stuff with an updated lens somehow
yeah like it and telling you about
things it made
contexts that I've lived inside of made
more sense to me hey totally that makes
so it was kind of like being circled
mm-hmm
interesting it was kind of like having
this really big big circling session
about you know that it went very deep
and what I so much appreciate about you
always always even when we're having
interactions that last three minutes
sometimes they do I'll call you and is
is that it's
one for you mm-hmm an exploration of my
life yeah is anything but wrote yeah for
you and that is what I find ah so
amazing about you so amazing that you
are one of the very few people I know
that's genuinely curious mm-hmm
without an in order to about it like
well I'm gonna find this out and so I
can use it for my own ends yeah yeah I
genuinely curious for the sake of
curiosity the sake of learning new
things and the sake of fun and adventure
that's yeah it's so rare right right
yeah I I would say it's like thank you
first of all thank you i feei you are
touching into wonder for me yes and oh
god I have a present for you
are you do its if we ever see each other
in person again yeah because some in the
wisdom area we once did a vacation
course called the way of wonder way of
wonder and so I found as I was cleaning
out closets officially I found a
baseball hat that says on the front way
of wonder big bad her parents that that
says the way of wonder which I I put
aside to yeah thank to you yeah awesome
present for you awesome I
there's something about yeah there is
something about wonder Joe that's um
that I think is one of the ways that I
feel pretty connected with you his
whatever that spark is and it's
interesting to think about wonder cuz
I've thought a lot about wonder I'm
inside wonder quite wondrous it's a
wonder
yeah yeah is it it's there's something
deeply encouraging when things occur
wondrous and it's in that wonder has its
quality for be anyways of this it's like
there's there's one experience where you
know you see something that's so
fantastical that you're in wonder of it
right um but then the deeper wonder is
the experience of when what is most near
right reveals itself in a way that you
hadn't seen and it been there the whole
time so when you were talking about like
when you're talking about going through
your your history from where you are now
on some level it's not it's not like
what happened was different but like
what it what it spoke to you your life
revealed more of itself to you yes that
experience of revealing on some level in
something that was already kind of there
but unda stinked that moment of Alethea
of truthful and concealment I I think it
also has something to do with meaning
yeah yeah so you could say more about
that well that those things and you know
who knows if they happened as I said
they happened I certainly don't I just
have these broad outlines of things that
may have even been stuff other people
told me about their lives yeah but those
things meant something at that time and
through time they've meant different
things and as I've developed or my sense
of what itself is or isn't has developed
there's different meanings that the same
or similar things
[Music]
are totally different than they were no
one ziget dad yeah
sorry buddy putting people I have this
thing where my iTunes just go on mm-hmm
and I'll be in the middle of June yeah
that's exactly what happened yeah and
it'll gone I won't know whatever I'm
doing with the and the other person's
like mm-hmm
so so that that kind of just what you're
talking about like it's just interesting
that well you know what one of the
things that we were talking about before
before we pressed record was just about
like you know writing and you know
working with editors and stuff like that
and and that you that one of the things
that you're writing was about about like
about your life but also what your life
revealed to you about life
yeah and you know there's stuff with the
editors they wanted to be more about the
life part and less about the other thing
and you know we had a conversation about
that but I just thought I think that's
just really telling about you Joan right
is that is that there's there's like
what happened
and there's the chronology of your life
and we can tell it like a story but then
there's what that chronology reveals
about life about being that is something
in which you have been paying attention
to yeah right and been tracking and been
having conversations like these which
are it's not just about like there's a
frame and life happens inside of and we
just talk about the content we don't
talk about the frame right but then
there's a way of being in life where
it's like you're in life and then in
such a way that it reveals more of the
frame and the frame is the interesting
piece that is the interesting piece
isn't it yes and the frame is the
malleable piece
and that changes everything right well
even in even in just that statement that
you had which is like oh yeah going
through my life with you I got in some
sense a new history yeah right at least
how my history my history occurred for
me yeah it was really different yeah
like that but like the stick the move I
talked about this a lot but like the
movie The Sixth Sense Wilson is a good
example he's dead the whole movie no one
knows it and then he awakens to it and
then the thing like that all the people
watching the movie awaken to it and then
it tracks back to the first scene and
scene by scene it goes through it and
then it was obvious the whole time yes
but not to us
yes that to me is wonder that revealing
is wonder that's what yes
meaning significance and that seems to
be available you know on one level like
we haven't really talked about this yet
but like I one level that's you and
leading in the wisdom course and all
that kind of stuff on some level that
has been at the heart that conversation
right that way of looking at things to
reveal the frame right the the thing
that's most malleable gray is has been
at the heart of your life that's what
you've been teaching yeah what you've
been a part of yeah yeah man it just
kind of soaks in like it's always been
that way but of course it hasn't yeah
oh and one of the things too that one of
the somebody commented in from from the
video the last one they said something
like yeah I like being like you and
history from the inside of it mm-hmm and
that was another thing I really got from
our conversation just even I knew this
but I like what
really got it beforehand was you were
really were on the inside of the the
human potential movement from it's very
beginning like with the with like for
the first you basically wrote the first
half a yoga book no there were actually
a couple of them but one of the first
yeah one of the first right happy table
woods well and yoga at that time which
is ubiquitous now anywhere at any time
yeah and and dozens of different forms
of it was so outside of the mainstream
it was so weird people right yeah
because what was what was it what was
life before the event potential motorist
unconscious them but I don't think I can
say anything useful about it I was so
yeah uninformed and uninformed and
didn't even care about being informed so
mmm-hmm I think so I'm gonna say things
that probably people who have done some
thinking about this if they're still
alive and at that point they were doing
some thinking about this would say it's
not that what is she talking about but
I'll tell you how it was for me there
was a way things were there was a way
one did things there was a way one's
community did things and all of that
went unquestioned there was
time I like to with for example sex
which I've been looking at and writing a
lot about lately yeah you could have sex
before you were married but nobody if
you were a woman nobody better
know about that and it was fraught with
peril
like it was fraught with peril because
there was birth control was done
reliable information was scarce it was
you know if you reach you know I read
things about Howard how things are
currently in other places in the world
where it's still like that and we now as
people living in a current paradigm are
like horrified yeah yeah nobody was
horrified about it except the fringe
right who were weird yeah yeah only on
the fringes was there any you know like
to do about how things were right which
is always the way it is it's the fringe
that's and sometimes as the friends just
the lunatic fringe and the conspiracy
the kind of conspiracy theory fringe and
sometimes the fringe has a more
scientific bed but they're very close
it's all the fringe yeah yeah fringe
there's the fringe and then there is the
mainstream right yeah there where you
know everyone agrees about things
mm-hmm yeah and so yeah
as far as I can tell to alter anything
you've got to be on the front you have
to stop giving a about belonging to
make any real difference or you have to
say belonging for what it is rather than
he compelled by it and have your mousse
be in accord with it right right
cuz yeah so it's like if you so if you
want to make a difference right which is
if we say that what you're inside of is
the thing that's the same yeah right the
current yeah the things that are like
easy to easy to comprehend that everyone
can talk about like that everyone can
adjust you and orient and make judgments
about and is if we say that's the norm
and there then there's on the margins of
the norm as you get on the margin the
norm you'll have less and you'll make
less and less sense you'll be probably
more and more threatening if if they can
even perceive what's happening right
right I could receive what's happening
it doesn't belong here yeah so if you
want to make a difference almost bought
by structural definition right what I'm
hearing you say is I have to tolerate
I need to be able to tolerate not
belonging right you have the price for
speaking to the mainstream is the strong
possibility that you will be derided or
ignored or thought of as weird all the
stuff we do to deal with threat
interesting interesting yeah when people
think you're weird yeah you know that's
an easy because you're such AM
you're quite inexplicable your capacity
for just getting inside with people and
and kind of roaming around inside other
people's bodies and heads and looking at
through their eyes right right you all
be explanation for you is that you're
weird right right totally so it's I mean
I don't have that capacity and and that
other person that other person that all
these other people don't have that
capacity you are weird right
and there's a it's also that I'm
oriented that way and interested in that
way and then go that way is that is is
like it's yeah it's interesting cuz it's
like that there's
so it's all I've been one of the things
about when I think about the work of and
in philosophy let's say there's Sartre
Sartre who was kind of like the one who
you could say I don't know if he started
existential somebody but he basically
was he was a philosopher that became
popular while he would read books and
they actually people would buy them and
and it became it was in the it became
popular and a lot of starches work was a
genius misunderstanding of Heidegger
that was basically existentialism I mean
there's a lot more to it than that but
what's interesting is as time goes on
Sartre is becoming less and less
significant yeah and it in it kind of I
think I thought about that I was like
wow interesting because I really like
Sartre in his is some people would even
say that he was less than they consider
him less and less a philosopher as time
goes on and Heidegger is who was you
know who's famous relatively speaking
during his time but now people are just
really being able to actually comprehend
or comprehended they don't totally
comprehend what he was saying and I and
I think I think about like well maybe
what that is is because he was so tuned
in to what didn't have quite to a level
that wasn't brought into language yet
yes so what the periphery that what when
he started to speak literally it was the
unintelligible to people to even notice
right in threatening and all those kinds
of things and now people are just
starting to be able to like metabolize
the work and you're hearing of him more
and then people are getting like oh my
god he was speaking what we're now
inside of right yeah so like that's to
me to me the connection between that and
authenticity
yeah it is it seems to be really wedded
right - yeah right this sense of being
authentic isn't just about just being
yourself for being different but it's
actually tuning into an intelligibility
that's that the that isn't it isn't what
people can get together and idly talk
about right yeah and just idle together
as just as I did you would say yeah I
think there's gotta be enough dialogue
it's like the number of people in the
dialogue have to grow and grow and grow
and and that to me is a process of being
able to translate something that's
ephemeral I don't know if I want to use
that word here but something that's
difficult to grasp and putting like you
said enough language around it and then
the language gets more commonplace I
think what also happens though is that
as the language gets more commonplace
you get a little bit further away from
the initial impulse yep right yep
totally yeah because it's being
explained it's being explained rather
than like a blinding lightning flash of
illumination right totally where in
order to attempt to explain it the nd
you stumble upon your words and you
start mumbling things that no one makes
sense you have to be looking at the
thing that's intelligible that's
speaking to you right yeah yeah once it
becomes it's interesting once it becomes
you know a lingo or becomes has more
language around it that and becomes more
intelligible to what's ordinary right
people start to speak it then they could
just repeat it without having to point
look at the thing to try to try to
articulate some time what he called
Heidegger called tranquilized obvious
Ness yeah yep
yeah the mode of authenticity I think is
speech and it's in its inauthentic code
right which is most most speech right
well which is interesting idle talk was
the word and it's a great word because
it's got that sense of like I'm doing
something to keep keep something not
going somewhere but just running the
engine keeping it going around and
around and around it around it around it
around and and I know you know it's not
um from his view I don't talk I'll talk
you know in authenticity what didn't
have a moral edge to it it was it was it
was a way of talking about how culture
maintains itself right so like your
aspiration is the interpretation to the
culture how do they keep going and I and
I thought thought about it is more like
um a foliage on the you know on the
ground like a foliage and then
authenticity is something like you know
like this bursts of intelligibility that
comes up like a plant right that kind of
blossoms out and then comes back down
and alters the culture that becomes idle
talk right yeah so it's it's interesting
kind of thinking about that and can I
say one thing
Oakley's at that you you said which
struck a chord with me it's interesting
that when you use the term in
authenticity it has such a moral cast to
it like what that's bad right and it's
good to be authentic yeah yeah it's
interesting today if you take that moral
part of it right and just look at what
it is it's and I've actually as I've
gotten older I have come to it I have
just genuinely come to appreciate like
customs
Nik marriage is just I mean being the
secular humanist that I was born thrown
into as right like I I have that's kind
of like suspicious of any kind of
normativity right um I've just bitch
Willie I'm just like that's that's my
that's kind of like the way my being
bees right that's what I was born into
and so being married and what like
feeling the wisdom of that Union be
something that substantiating me like
altered me changed me in ways that are
hard to talk about like too hard to
really articulate and I know for me
that's an example of oh there is so much
wisdom in these cultural structures that
have gone on for a long time right in
this kind of connection between wisdom
and age wisdom and and in time and
duration significance so and since is
that that has really impacted me
personally because I've I've been a lot
more like when people are go to the
coffee shop and they're talking about
this that may have shake their hands and
all of these I can start to see like
know if it's in existence and it's
repeatable it means that there's wisdom
in it right of generation after
generation and I've just come to start
to appreciate that for me personally
well can you imagine and sometimes I
think about everything it seems to me
and it might not work this way but it
seems to me that everything that is said
plus said
initially like somebody said it nobody
had said it before yeah and somebody
said it yeah and now all the things and
all the language that's used you can say
that but it was all invented and there's
a time before it wasn't yeah yeah that's
crazy
totally and and what's interesting is
that you were you know I know that
Herbert Dreyfus talks a lot about this
about you know looking at the history
and the understanding of being you know
he's a Haida garyun philosopher who he's
I think he's dead now but he was a
professor at you know University of
California in Berkeley here famous
professor amazing man but he he he did a
whole series on seeing if he can
distinguish and articulate all the
changing all the change makers to change
the understanding of being through
history in II and he says that in and he
was able to break it down into yeah
there's the person that first says it
but then there's the people who
translate what he says and then there's
the people that actually then translate
the translator as it integrates into the
foliage right and by the time it
integrates into the foliage the written
remembers the person who originally said
it other than great and
and it's interesting to think about that
and to think about your role if we say
that like the human potential movement
whatever it was that me made it make
sense for a yogi to come to New York
right and then hug you and you have that
experience and you'll be drawn to it
right and then write a book and you were
right in that time where the fringe was
becoming a lot closer together it's
interesting to think about your role in
that in that wave happening yeah right
yeah yeah yes she does it was just I was
just thinking back when he said that
about Swami Satchidananda we
we presented him at Carnegie Hall we did
this presentation and we made these
flyers they had a picture of him and he
was very he looked like a Swami he
looked like a yogi ridiculously well
again then refined and handsome and like
a lion like with this graying hair and
this mustache and the beard and the
smile and made these flyers and I wrote
the copy for the floor iris and the copy
said Yoga is 5000 years old but it may
be new to you hmm
Swami Satchidananda at Carnegie Hall we
might even have said I think we even
said Swami Satchidananda plays Carnegie
Hall and we went around New York went
around the city and we just made
hundreds and hundreds of fires and run
around and we posted them all over the
city and we filled Carnegie Hall and you
know I mean and some of the people who
came to Carnegie Hall have heard about
yoga and some of them were kind of old
hippy old like Bohemians
and knew about yoga knew about different
Eastern forms of spirituality but most
people didn't
another time I did the flyering thing
was I worked for this artist Peter Max
and he was actually the person who met
Swami Satchidananda in Paris through
this filmmaker named Conrad rook who
brought him from India to Paris
from Sri Lanka to Paris and Peter
brought him to New York to meet his
friends anyway
this guy named Jim for at this must have
been the winter of 1967 maybe January or
February or March and Jim for ad came to
Peter and said would you do these make
would you do the art for this fryer
we're having this event called the
Central Park be in and Peter did this
beautiful design and did the copy and it
was said be in Central Park and the date
and I think it was Easter Easter be in
which was and that we went around all
around the city and we posted the Flyers
at night and and then we came to Central
Park and all of these counterculture
people well we're just streaming in from
all I mean you know we knew our people I
mean I lived in Fleury side the East
Village and you know I knew people from
there but then all these people it was
just wow it was yeah it was so
validating huh right it was validating
you know you hear the term now oh I
found my tribe and it's Oprah I think
it's such a cliche but really we looked
around it was like holy there's a
lot of us it doesn't seem like there's a
lot of us but yeah yeah yeah and
encouraging it was so encouraging and it
was similar at one of the there's a
march from Central Park to the UN and
Martin Luther King's was one of the
speakers it was an anti-war March and
there was like a hippie contingent at
the very end of the March because I know
a lot of people who I would consider
straight yeah we're in that March guess
the anti-war movement was much more much
bigger movement than the hippie movement
you know it contains all lots of
different people and it was amazing we
chanted Hari Krishna all the way from
Central Park to well to the UN and I was
wearing okay this'll say something about
me I was wearing this dress which is
transparent yeah it was black yeah but
it was transparently
it had little Swiss white Swiss dots on
it and I was only wearing underpants
under it and it was just completely
see-through and an orange fluorescent
they grow tights and fluorescent dayglo
high heels sandals mm-hmm and I was
walking my friends dog which was a
Newfoundland have you ever seen a
Newfoundland I think so I have some big
ginormous this was like like bigger than
a st. Bernard and Shaggy and
[Music]
and I have this Sun Hat and I had this
dog this naked dress and this big dog on
a leash that was and it was fun yeah so
what do you think at that time it's so
interesting like from inside of this I
mean it'd be really interesting to look
at this what were you going to when you
went to Central Park for that thing like
was it was it clear in your mind exactly
what you were doing and why you were
doing it or was it just something like
something glowed and you were just
you're you're being just kind of felt
called to it well I resonated with the
anti-war movement I wasn't a great
thinker but anything my parents
supported I'd ought to be on the other
side of that was pretty clear to me yeah
totally and you know I've never come to
a point in my life where go oh you know
they were really right about us getting
involved in Vietnam yeah I was young and
I didn't see no they were it was like
tranquilised obvious this yeah yes so
it's interested in the anti-war movement
so interested in the civil rights
movement but I was really interested in
celebration and fun right
yeah well it makes sense too because I
get this I get the sense of that what
you were what you were pushing off of
right seem to suck the fun out a lot of
things
it's just dead right in such a way that
had this like the word tranquilized
obvious nests right destruct like the
structures of society like the the
government at that time right like was
doing this thing going to war and no one
knew quite why but the majority of the
people in the world could just go along
with that
well not the majority of people in the
world the majority of people in the US
states yeah yeah
and that tranquilised so the people
would say stuff them like well he's the
president he knows what he's doing
there are elected officials they know
what's up they know what they're doing
yeah so assuming assuming Authority
based on based on who was elected a role
and not questioning that role NIEM
question authority
hey mattered those times yeah cuz I
authority was pretty unquestioned by
most people yeah is basically the image
was the Norman Rockwell painting of the
50s yeah right because it was like World
War two we had a huge response and we
unified as a country coming together
around that and then post-world War two
in the 50s what yet it's it's considered
I know historically it's considered an
extremely conservative time and then the
60s were breaking out of that yeah well
when I think about that time I think
about my parents were second generation
Americans their parents had come over
his children and
you know what their parents had the
intimation of the you know of fascism
which is rumbling you know not on the
horizon yet the barrel rumbles
and they were all in Eastern Europe
where where the Czarist works completely
oppressive to Jews with Jews Jewish men
Jewish boys were conscripted you know
the Cossacks would come to your village
and press Jewish boys into service and
the Russian army for 15 years yeah that
was the term right they will press them
to service for so a lot of Jews coming
over from Eastern Europe you know have
it taken whatever they took with them
establishing themselves mostly in the
eastern part of the US yeah and you know
that they could be established in a
place where the army wasn't gonna can
script their kids hmm fast like well
that must have been yeah enormous and
then you know came my parents both of
whom were born into fairly successful
middle-class families so there was
enough money even though you know they
went through the depression and had that
depression mindset and then there is
World War 2 and the u.s. got very
prosperous for
white people hmm for many white people
and grew this middle class which is a
great thing and then my generation was
born into that mindset of can do and
we're great and prosperity yeah and so
my parents had certain values like you
know being comfortable being financially
comfortable was like one of their main
values but I was born into plenty yeah I
mean I was glad that was their value but
I could I had the luxury right making
other choices yeah yeah I mean they
would have had to be so rebellious to
make other choices then right totally
and so so so basically you know at that
time there's the the what people were
elite like yeah I can I could just get
it it's it's kind of like this unified
Allegiance and prosperity and right
standing on top of like that what do you
get patriotism right the u.s. it just
like you know defeated Germany and like
World War two and all those kinds of
things and then and then and then the
economic prosperity that was like the
that's when suburbs right the middle
class automobile yeah I guess it had
been around but consumerism the economy
like the progress all those things
started to become solidified and created
and
so we interesting to think about that
right but then but then the government
starts like pulling stuff right was
always pulling stuff I think we think
people bother me you know media start
what you know it hasn't been that long
that the telephone was invented I mean
really it seems like oh that was a
million years ago but no yeah it was an
television I was the first we were the
first family on my block to have a
television
and all the kids on the block would come
to my house to watch things like the
Howdy Doody show though yeah yeah right
that's interesting
so things that were hidden before you
could easily hide yeah
like nobody cared that FDR had a
mistress nobody knew that FDR had a
 mistress and everybody began to
know about JFK's stuff interesting
interesting
can you hold on a minute
you bet you got okay one second back so
so you know the thing I think I'm as
you're talking I'm and I'm not that
versed on history but the it seems like
this is where in the 50s was where the
the notion of really trusting and
institution right in that wasn't the
church seemed to like wear a lot of it
seemed like we're like a lot of coming
out of the Middle Ages was very much
Catholic Church right and that that that
you know the the classic medieval town
being being you know the church is at
the center and everything and that's the
center of the hierarchy right or mandala
and then everything out there mirrors
and there's I think there's just really
this sense in in the Industrial
Revolution right and then you know the
breaking of upload the Catholic Church
and and took you know Luther and all of
that it's almost like the the center if
you will seem to start to get
redistributed in like corporations
coca-cola right these these symbols that
became almost almost religious symbols
like when they look at night like in the
50s when I sometimes when I look at like
coca-cola signs it they have this air
about them
that like they it seems to kind of
gather the world in this particular it's
a really do it has this kind of I can
see it like you're a Cubs fan and your
kid and there's a whole there's a whole
thing that's good and it's like the
coca-cola is a good thing and you can
kind of get this sense of of this slice
of life that's very idealized well it
was called still called the
military-industrial complex yeah yeah
and yeah and I think well the whole idea
of consumerism right it became possible
for people to just consume consume
consume and buy things that advertised
and created a need for no real need but
that the psychology behind advertising
creates all these needs for stuff you
don't really want and in the meantime in
the meantime there's the dispersal of
communities because you can drive your
car now and live in the suburbs so you
don't have to be a farmer anymore to
live out and where there's trees and
stuff you just drive your car
and and families become nucleoli Yeah
right there are no longer there no
longer
multi-generational there's no longer
community around you yeah which people
go oh that's a loss know what kind of
him evolved you know now there was no
choice about that stuff
yes when people idealize all that
community and multi generations I
wouldn't have wanted to live in a house
with my parents and grandparents right I
did it was suppressive yeah yeah I I
mean now you know people create families
of choice right there's some choice
there yeah yeah yeah in the the yeah so
you make I want to I want to make sure I
get the thing that he said is like you
know people talk about that that's a
loss and he said anything he said like
no it's it's just evolved right I think
what I'm here is that I hear and I hear
a sensibility in that perspective that
you just took and highlighted there
which is something like it's not like
there is some bad actor right
that was doing something to somebody
right in fact if we kind of look at
history from that standpoint I basically
have heard you a couple of times in the
last in a lot in our last conversation
to talk about that as well as like no
we're not a victim here yeah of things
we were were we were born into a
situation and a circumstance and things
were the way that they were right but
it's not like somebody was doing
something yeah and I think in a lot and
this is great that you said that because
it has me see something about the
proliferation of all these conspiracy
theories or
yeah over 19 people assume I think
people go for an easy explanation and
the easy explanation is yeah there are
these bad people the Illuminati
perhaps or the one-percenters or you
know like an easy explanation rather
than it's random right right
and then we make meaning right and we
choose who you know and with them we get
to be four things so we get to be
against things like virtue of that yeah
yeah it would be easy if it were Trump
you see right now I could just get rid
of him and then we could all go back to
the happy days of Obama no it's like
yeah it's so much there's so much more
than that and like I'll listen to these
people because I'm perverted that way
I'll listen to these like spiritual
people who like say yes and the Age of
Aquarius and you know we're gonna expose
the bad people and good luck yeah we are
them yeah like there used to be this
cartoon strip which is brilliant called
Pogo years ago yeah and one of the
things Pogo said was we have met the
enemy and they are us yes yes a very
subversive thing to say mmm-hmm I didn't
understand it when I first read it yeah
totally
yeah so that's the thing about about and
I just wanna I want to highlight that
because that's a way that's a you know a
one level one of the things I'm present
to in our in our conversation right when
I when I get present to like it's not
just you and I talking but we're up
we're actually there's gonna be people
listening to this conversation right and
which has me aware of what like who you
are and who I am and what we're doing on
some level that the listening kind of
draws out into my awareness right like
right now it's so fun isn't it it's
fascinating right but there's there's a
way in which I'm realizing one of the
things I'm excited about about having
you on is I think there's a sense of
wisdom of what is it to be a elder in
the culture and specifically a woman
elder in this culture that actually kind
of takes up being one on sometimes right
it takes up what is that what what is
that right now to be a woman your age
having had the history watching what's
happening now um because it seems to me
that one of the things that's changed is
it's just it used to be it used to be
that the older like the older generation
in most cultures anyways right the older
generations were the people who were had
the wisdom you know and like the there
was a shaman and there were the Chiefs
and there are the people that kind of
like had the wisdom because they had
gone through so many things they knew
the right things to be afraid of and the
right things to pay attention to and how
to deal with that and what not to take
care about wisdom and that with the
wisdom institutions right in the place
that has is cultivates wisdom to hold
wisdom traditionally has been with the
elders on Sanibel right yeah and I
actually when I when you look at like
what old people are to us now is there
senior citizens right oh yeah yeah yes
they're weak and stupid and I mean my
generation help make that yes oh yeah
because my generation was the one that
said don't trust anyone over 30
anything yeah yes a right so it was like
a gestalt suspicion of any kind of
authority and the authority to some
version was all of it right love it
so they're like no there's something
emergent that's new like the new becomes
the thing that's the most interesting or
the or the most outside of the tradition
is the thing that is not the glows you
think about what's that yeah so when
people say oh well we have to you know
what we lost was like reverence for
wisdom tradition for the elders and yeah
yeah totally so from that perspective so
part of actually part of what I'm
excited about is just the fact that
you're 76 right and there's people
listening to this that as they told me
last time I discovered this they have
like for YouTube they have like ass of
your you know all these statistics of
your views and all this kind of stuff
that you can click this button is this
what I was like oh well and my
viewership is between I think age 25 and
35 most of them and so just being aware
of the viewers listening in about that's
part of actually I think I'm realizing
is the is what's guiding my inquiry
right is like Oh wasn't like what do we
have them now that like from your
vantage point is just just seems like
unwise
right just having that horizons of
background making it I don't I I mean
there's a lot sure there's plenty of
stuff I don't like yeah yeah and
probably if I thought about it I could
come up with things that I think are
unwise I think I think being present is
everything yeah I mean I don't have any
solid worldview about this is unwise and
that's unwise I really don't I don't
have prescriptions
yeah there's it in ever and I think I
think that's quite wise right there you
you exude your exemplifying a particular
wisdom in you in the intelligibility
right of some of your responses and the
ways that you say things that I'm just
noticing I'm I'm I want to celebrate oh
well I I just thought of one thing to so
good and that is what will continue what
continues to be revealed to me as my own
stupidity and then I can deal with
something about it so let me give you an
example because I can't quite articulate
it yet so I'm reading Facebook and a
friend of mine posts some supposed of
already who she considers an authority
who was saying things about the
coronavirus over 19 of people's behavior
that I don't agree with and she's very
my friend is very verbal about it she's
very loquacious of
about it she sometimes rabid about it
and a lot of her posts have this tone
she's being victimized that's where that
just draws me like a fly - humming right
stop it
like stop it yeah no I I don't say
anything I don't say anything because I
know that you know Facebook it's just
such a dumb way to have any discourse
but I'm angry then and I want to make a
statement and I want her to look bad
yeah yeah and I know I shouldn't go in
that direction and I but I'm holding
myself back I'm holding and then finally
finally I post something and what I
posted yeah can we just give it a rest
yeah which is the most nonviolent thing
I can think of saying hey it's not that
bad
yeah not that bad yeah I could just stop
with this dumb right so I
don't yeah yes I love her
mm-hmm right but on the other hand I'm
angry yeah and I do that and I feel like
a sense of release and I go
my merry way and that's two hours later
she texts me
mmm and I can tell she's hurt hmm she
says you know because people listen to
you hmm
yeah exactly that's why I posted that
hmm because I have this really mean
streak right right about yes yes I feel
terrible
and I go to my spouse and I tell Robin
and Robin's like just kind of shakes her
head right at me and well you're just
irresponsible yeah this won't be
responsible for how your your respond to
things you think it's out there right
right
and I'm like mad right because I want
her to be on my side you know realize I
don't have to take the low road all the
time and I text back and I apologize and
ask for my friends forgiveness and she
forgives me she says I love you I
forgive you mm-hmm I just
hmm made me feel so good
it just made me feel like life was in
balance again right right Thomas fury I
had this theory which has the right what
I think is wrong has to be right right
that me Mom you know accusing the other
person yes you have to be right right
I'm so right right you become a little
tyrant
yeah I am the tyrant of righteousness
absolutely and there's a there's and
there's something there's something
though that I I actually kind of like
what you're irritated by though there's
a III think that there's there's an
intelligence in in the irritation and I
get what you're saying it'd probably be
a good idea if I didn't like hurt my
friend's feelings as possible right I
mean I mean the meta stuff I don't mean
the situation or not like like she's
victimizing me though I have to set that
right yeah
by making this public statement on
Facebook yeah yeah like oh and Friends
of course immediately like attacked me
which I that was fun but you know the
moment it's fun but really yeah really
and what I think though right here's the
thing is that the additional sense of
like so even in yourself right the thing
that you're kind of copping to and
yourself there is like well I'm doing
the thing that and I'm apparently mad at
right so I'm being at effect right as
you would say an effect of her situation
as if I didn't have anything to do do
about it and therefore I'm justified in
correcting the proper way justified
however the the attunement
to what I'm hearing is victimhood right
the thing that catches your eye as
something like as a dissonance with it
ya know I'm not saying that people do
not use force on others and
Oh could be a good idea to you know try
other things out yeah I'm talking about
when children are called victims yeah
yes I can grant that yeah there are
other people who won't even grant that
you know who won't like no no one there
is no such thing congrat that my mama
I'm on the side of people treating
children well right right but you know
when you're when you're an adult and
you've had certain privileges and
opportunities for critical thinking and
[Music]
you go that route I find it annoying
right yes yes and what's what's annoying
about it like so what is it about being
a victim right that or because what I'm
hearing you say is that you're not
talking about literally like literally
you know people can be victims of other
things of war you're not talking about
like this situation talking about a
victimized mentality yeah the mentality
of the whole sucking you right when I'm
talking about
and in that there's a couple of things
in that that I seen with myself when I
feel something somebody's done something
to me I
my say-so there's a couple parts to it I
give up my say in the matter I give up
my agency and the other part of it is
then it allows me to do anything to you
to right that wrong
I'm victimized therefore I can then
therefore you become fair game for me I
can do anything to you because you have
done something bad to me and you deserve
it
 you deserve anything I mean
it's just like mm-hmm
this dynamic yes so there's being a
victim and then and then then I'm
justified to do harm to you but I don't
get it I don't have to take
responsibility for it because none
because I'm not I don't look like my
aggressive nature which wants you to be
harm now yeah I can be excused because
it's fair yeah yeah yeah so that so the
thing about being a victim is it's a
loss of responsibility and of power
right except you get to be aggressive
and use force and and and that did not
be have to be responsible for that the
impact of that force right not at all
yeah kind of like yummy so I mean I've
seen in myself the yumminess of being
victimized like taking that position
like oh oh you are fair game now
great great that that about that about
defines every protect like pretty much
toxic
historical conflict I think imaginable
that's the architecture of isn't it
something like that yeah yeah that's
woven in there I think right and so what
happens so what's the alternative to
that right
what's the whatever tentative it's not
easy yeah because we're so thrown yeah
unless erection the alternative is
growing the up
the alternative is sometimes eating crow
I'm liking it yeah like the alternative
is giving it up the alternative is
letting it go the alternative is stop
 blocking the flow with your big
 identity yeah totally so this is
really this is this is a deep this is a
deep thing so it's I think that's the
one of the things about victimhood is it
it comes one of the things that's so
important you know when they talk about
it like I learned it with it's like
there's the victory where there's a
victim there's always a villain wow
there's a villain there's always there's
always somebody there's always somebody
who's going to side with the victim
right what do they call that Theon the
sympathizer right uh and and that the
that it's almost impossible like in the
thing that gets that whole cycle going
is some all somebody has to do to get
that all three of those in place is to
blame someone yes right the moment I
blame you is the moment there's a like
there's a this is what where it makes it
really kind of linguistic in a certain
sense is kind of almost a linguistic
semantic structure right if I go you
were wrong right and like I'm and
you did it right the moment I do that
now there's now I'm
about who you are in who I am in
relationship to you and then I can start
vying and people can pick sides and that
venomous seething justified thing that
people can kick completely lost in right
yeah it leads to for me the thing that I
have had a had to deal with still
sometimes deal with it myself is being
undermining oh it's like a way to kind
of secretly get back great gossip and
undermining yeah and then you know it's
so bad it's so irresponsible that's
right
yeah well it's kind of like but at the
same time I think that's the thing
that's just I want to highlight in it
which is which is the the compelling
part of be of that structure is that it
gives you an identity right like and if
you have an identity like you know who I
am and I know who you are and then I
know the world and I know what to do and
if you add it it gives you certainty
yeah and in a completely uncertain right
world right always uncertain so if you
structure some boundaries and yeah and
then you forget that you just made it
all up right right and so when you call
yourself on it right and you cop to it
and you apologize and yeah and you take
responsibility and you with weight
basically what I'm hearing you say is
you withdrawal blame yeah right
[Music]
then there's
freedom that happens tremendous freedom
right right right
just a tremendous freedom
yeah and and it's visceral for me always
yeah like it's like it's physical also
like I just feel Center like I have a
place to stand again yeah because it's
literally it's it's just really
interesting that they have this
conversation with you again right and
because I what I really got is like
there's the agent part right the agency
part right the sovereignty part right
we're in this difference between
something like an identity versus
something like this is what it's coming
to me now is like something like agency
or sovereignty right yeah it's like the
idea like a space than an identity yeah
yeah and it is the way that I think for
baekje talks about sovereignty is like
it's the it's the agent arena
relationship right where there's no Sun
like sovereignty so it only makes sense
in an environment in a world right so
it's like I am the am and the I right
are they coexist mutually inform each
other and I think one of the things
about the more the more sovereign you
are right the more agentic you are it it
has to do with your ability to it's like
the sweet spot or your ability to lean
into novelty in such a way that the
novelty or the intelligibility of the
arena of your world actually comes back
to you in such a way that has you learn
more it has you understand more as you
orient it more and as you are oriented
more you open up to that novelty and
more of its intelligibility comes into
it and so there's like there's this it's
world forming right it's a yeah it's
quite a deep thing in
what I'm getting is that with the moment
I go oh you you shouldn't did it
right I start blaming somebody is the
moment something else happens right
I guess you come you come into being in
a certain way right right
totally we should end this in a couple
of minutes yeah you have another we well
we have more history to cover so Allah I
know this is yes this is beautiful and
was what just such a so fun
yes I mean I I consider I have a
particular place in your pantheon of of
interviewees and so I kind of like
though I'm like the plain English
well I mean I'd like it well yeah yeah
because I've been interviewing lots of
philosophers and stuff like however
however there's a there's a quality of
like I'm noticing in my in in my
disposition towards you in this
interview I'm discovering who you are
for me too but also who you are for the
world right in a certain sense and I I'm
like no there's some there is some
wisdom here that like I wanna i want to
unconcealed i want to make sure that
gets out right that's that's deep and
continues to deepen in my relationship
with you yeah thank you I love you I
love you too alright have a great day
all right