hello everybody so I'm gonna set context
in the video after I just give it a
couple of announcements so few things if
you're interested in working with me one
on one go ahead and email me
my emails below the circling Institute
my company who teaches and leads
[Music]
circling and circling method we have
with the corona virus is had us bring
everything online so all the courses
that I'm teaching right now are all
online and we'll probably be doing a lot
more online ongoingly in the future no
matter what happens with the corona
virus along with in person so that link
is below okay so this video I'm really
excited about and there's a number of
different context a--'s that you can be
listening to this video through so it's
a video with with John for Becky and I
and it's on one level I wanted to talk
with him too to start to really hone in
on these distinctions and these ideas
that we have been in many respects been
talking about for the last eight months
or so a lot of those you know a lot of
those conversations are are amongst my
videos and
operation for the the stoah circling
event that I'm doing on Peter Lim
Burke's
platform I will put a link on how to
RSVP to that that's gonna be happening
tomorrow Tuesday at I think it's 4 p.m.
for this 4 to 6 p.m. California time and
it was I think about 80 RSVP'd we're
gonna cap it at 101 it's gonna be is a
what it what is what is coming to me as
right is is really gathering the notion
of what I've been doing in developing
and circling first you know since the
early 90s and linking it to the the
notion of dialogue owes so John's gonna
be on that with me
Chris's could be on that with me I could
if hopefully if Jordan Jordan Hall was
available hopefully he'll attend to and
what we're gonna do is we're gonna it'll
be the first time of formally as an
experiment having all of us enact this
process and finding the right
constraints and the right way to
transition from one into the other and
back and forth so this dialogue that
we're having is really getting clear on
some of those notions and of course it
turned into dialogue us and have it led
to all these other things there's a
certain moment where John was like I got
it this is what I've been trying to say
exemplifying everything that we were
talking about so so beautiful I can't
believe my life I have to pinch myself
sometimes so so you can also watch this
as a preparation for that and to get
more of a conceptual sense of it because
this this this session is going to be
mostly very little lecture just enough
to get us oriented for us to experiment
and discover together so thank you for
joining
and
see you soon computer there we go
so here this is the first time just the
you and I have met in a few months yeah
we've always been meeting with either
with Chris or with with Jordan yeah yeah
that's true it's good to see you in it
and one like although you and I
personally haven't just the two of us
haven't met I mean I just see you on so
many different videos talking to so many
different people it's like there's just
a familiar yeah it's from from you know
being being in this face together but
but also just seeing your face just pop
up on my internet all the time and
watching these videos again but also you
tweet me about these amazing books like
you did this this morning and like thank
you buying all these books but you
tweeted me about that excellent book I'm
gonna probably track that down looks
fantastic you know so thank thank you
for that yeah I mean I'm doing lots of
videos because I've got doing the voices
with verve a key as well as still trying
to release sort of the lecture styles
when I can and also on doing the the
live streaming of the meditation class
every morning now too and so what's that
see what's that been like for you I've
been enjoying those a lot so it's been
very helpful to me because I'm getting a
lot of encouraging feedback from people
because it's giving me a sense doing a
lot of the videos especially around the
COBIT and sort of existential and
philosophical responses to them and then
doing the meditation videos with people
has really given me a sense of of trying
to do something to help and to intervene
I'm like obviously nothing comparable to
what the health care workers are doing
I'm not trying to make that comparison
but the fact that I can perhaps help
people address the meaning aspects of
this and the existential aspects of it
and the cognitive aspects that's been
helpful to me because it's reduced my
sense of
just sort of being just passively
suffering the crisis that's allowed me
to connect with people what's really
interesting is like there's a community
now forming all the people that come on
actually online and they're all there
and they're there often now talking to
each other way before the class starts
and things like that and so that's been
really really wonderful and I'm actually
happy to get the series out there
because if now it'll be a you know
long-standing and finally especially for
today for example although this has been
a pattern across so I was teaching about
meta contemplation today and it sort of
all came together in a powerful way and
I've taught this course many many many
times in person but there was something
about doing it in this context that made
me sharpen things up I think a little
bit more those are all the tremendous
positives and they keep me going the
negative has been that my it read sort
of Reaper off backup sort of you know
fears of social exposure and those were
exacerbated and it's hard to tell
chicken and egg kind of thing but the
fact that my ears been really bad on the
moon years and so it's actually making
it was making it so physically difficult
to set but so many people found it and
this again was I'm so grateful for this
so many people found it helpful to see
me doing what I can even in distress to
keep you know doing the practice where
you know and and trying to properly
defend myself
they found that very very helpful
and that and then that in turn was
encouraging and helpful to me to keep
going so in fact what we've done is
we've extended it we were doing two GU
teaching sessions per week and that
would have been a five-week course we
did I'd we decided to slow it down so
people could catch up and get more
practice in and we're doing one teaching
per week and now for a 10-week course so
that's where that's at but it's it's
been it's been it's been
very good it's I don't want to say fun
because it's been very challenging in a
lot of ways it's also been really good
really meaningful you know what you said
about you know it's interesting because
this is this video but I part of what I
want to do with just recording this just
offer it to the people that who are
gonna attend to the Stila to watch
before and after yeah yeah is that stoic
just this has some context for that it
this is it's funny because I'm watching
it come together in me right when I was
when we asked to do this and I Peter
Limburg you know said hey come and put
like a one sentence descriptor and I
said I said something about like I think
I said something about like yeah come
circle the meta-crisis where we we we
enter into authenticity into dialo goes
right in other words make this
transition right from what's
additionally what a lot of people
traditionally think about as circling
mm-hmm this is an inner subjective and
meditation into it going into dialogue
oh right yeah each other and so since I
wrote that it's almost been as if that
was like an attractor based and for all
the conversations that we've been having
oh very much and this is what I'm
imagining and this is often my
experience actually in teaching if you
think what you just mentioned about the
meditation mm-hmm they often find this
when I'm teaching course where what I've
been thinking about with the person or a
student or a lecture that I'm giving or
making a distinction where everything I
was thinking about just comes together
and yeah yeah really the dates in that
moment they're very much yeah that's
very much that's what said yeah that's
very much the case I would I noted that
to you how we're sort of happy with
carrying things around in our head and
it's somewhat fragmented make fashion
but well we have to enter into a genuine
discourse or dialogue or perhaps even
deal logos with people that is no longer
acceptable it it alters your
perspectival standard right and it
becomes much more demanding and I think
that's really really cool that's one of
the great pleasures of teaching yeah in
fact if that's happening for you and you
can share that moment of learning when
you're teaching that's better than just
the dissemination of information to
people I find yeah my wife just reminded
me to keep it down
I get excited and then the neighbors if
we just moved into it
we just bought in a new place and it has
a thin wall so oh I see I've been
getting complaints from the neighbors
and um I should just blame you instead
little right here the in so this is you
know in this you're gonna be there chris
is gonna be there I'm but I'm trying to
get Jordan there and what I the way I'm
picturing it and then I'm working this
out is doing a progressive series of
exercises that kind of get people into
that space and in some you know oak that
transition so transition points which I
think are gonna be essential and what's
really interesting is is that it's gonna
it's gonna really call on people's
agency and you know and their
sovereignty to really do this because a
lot of some of these things take a lot
of practice to learn right and a lot of
tolerance for what I'm gonna call fumble
fuckin right in a recommendation so I'm
really looking forward to setting the
context for that and design in the
middle of designing the exercises and I
was thinking it would be great if you
like the four of us could get together
and just do like a demo at different
things and go through all the exercises
and and then demo demo something and
have them go and break up into groups
and do it and come back together and
talk about it and yeah and they
explicate the very thing that we're
attempting to create yeah I'm very
interested in this I'm very capito and I
even work
Lindburgh and i have been working on
trying to figure out the right sort of
constellation the right what I call
pedagogical program right sequencing and
feedback relationships between these
various practices to try and you know
get the best pedagogical progression
through them so we need a lot more of
this online stuff where we're testing
things out as long as people understand
that this is very much a work in
progress in experimental I think it
should be very good yeah absolutely
so so I actually this this will be kind
of a little different we'll see right
but it'll be a little different of a
dialog for both of you and I cuz I have
some specific questions yes right that's
yeah totally that that are actually have
come out of our conversations and
they're deep end
as I've been taking lots of walks lately
to get out of the house you know they
come up to it while I'm walking and so I
did make a little note of them but one
of them that has been the very striking
to me and I should really share this
with you is this sense of what you
believe is it was actually in our last
one-on-one dialogue where you had said
something the likes of you know that
philosophy or the practice of philosophy
and dialogue owes isn't just a as you
see it I think you were referencing how
you've been observing and participating
in other practices like meditation and
circling and often authenticity
practices embodiment practice and you're
basically taking like yeah yeah one
thing is kind of missing for you and me
and these things was the was dialogue
owes and philosophy and in what struck
me is is is in that conversation where
you
it just felt deeply true which is
philosophy a--
or the practice of philosophy may not
just be a preferable adjunct right who
practices attempting to respond to the
meeting crisis but they
it may actually be something necessary
in the absence of which may actually be
the difference between it being a
genuine response to what's happening and
not and that just I noticed for me can
consolidated it for me and that's when I
was like okay Chris let's let's read the
dialogues let's yeah yeah good thing
you're doing that so I'm just curious
for you like I guess my first question
is you know what is what you know what
is the the practice of philosophy ax
right in dialogue OHS and what is it
about it that makes it something that
that actually is crucial or necessary
right along with these other practices
so that's a really excellent question I
want to go through this really slowly
and carefully because it's a question
that I am I'm thinking a lot about which
means it's very much a work in progress
for me because I'm trying as best I can
to do this double act of being deeply
responsible to a reconstruction as best
I can with all the help I can get of the
ancient practice well getting you know
staying true to these emerging existing
practices and so that's been its it
that's as a significant challenge so the
thing for me that what philosophy is and
I use that term because I'm not talking
about what's traditionally or sorry that
the tradition is the wrong word what's
currently for a long time since perhaps
the Enlightenment like understood by
philosophy with so let's call that
academic philosophy and I want to state
right up front that I believe in and I
think academic philosophy is important
it really is and I have a PhD in it and
stuff like that and so you know I'm not
but there's a sense in which I
understand how that specialists task
is not sought-after and may not even be
needed by most people but I think
philosophy ax is yeah because philosophy
ax is the task of bringing various
strategies of rational reflection and I
want to ask people to give me charity
here because I've done a lot of work
trying to expand the notion of
rationality and expand the notion of no
a beyond logical manipulation of
propositions and beyond just
propositional knowing so I'm using both
knowing and reflecting and understanding
and rationality and a much more
comprehensive sense so for me meditation
as you mentioned earlier is an
importantly rational activity because it
systematically and reliably reduces
self-deceptive self-destructive behavior
within our attentional processing yeah
yeah
so philosophy a-- is an attempt to bring
rational reflection and enhanced
understanding to write our processing in
a powerful way and so what I saw
happening was what I see happening in
these practices is there's a lot of what
I would call you know interactive
reflection people are reflecting on the
interaction and they were reflecting on
their sort of state of mind and and and
that's that's good right but it's not
put in the service of trying to bring
about a reflective enhancement of our
understanding of the processes of
meaning making so one of the things like
for example what's happening in the
four-way deal logos with you and I on
Chris and Jordan is we don't just circle
we that we also do something there's
enough others so we do this really
important move right there's there's a
phenomena that emerges let's call it in
the circling aspect this is collective
flow state and we know when we're in it
because we
feel the Jazz happening I'm gonna get
that collective flow state but then what
will happen is that phenomena instead of
being something that we're immersed in
in order to engender the flow one of us
will often step back and we will we will
question it now not in the not in the
canary ASSA t sense of well what's that
right this is more in the Wonder sense
it's like what is that what is that
disclosing what is that what is that
exemplifying about the this process that
I care so much about what way of life is
it portending what kind of person is it
affording me to aspire to becoming right
and this is what philosophy Oh was about
trying to get an understanding of what
possibilities are available to us
aspirational possibilities the wit
ontological possibilities of how we can
relate to ourselves to other people to
being in general and you don't have to
be like in order to be it helps it helps
you don't have to be like versed in
technical philosophy to do this if you
know because obviously it started with
people like Socrates who weren't that
technically worse because there just
wasn't that much around right and so the
idea here is can we can we get to a
place where and and this is this is this
really sweet spot where I'm staying in
touch with the online organic flow of
the phenomena of logos of meaning making
taking on a life of its own but can I
also let it tutor me can I let it
educate me can I can I hit it can I let
it draw out for me a reflective
understanding and we have to be and
notice what we do we we we sort of
challenge each other and we question and
we build and we elucidate and go back
right because we're not we're not being
satisfied now with any quick intuitive
oh well that's just that an intuitive
understanding right nor with some merely
technical labor
you see in the Socratic dialogues that
Socrates is always trying to steer
between these two options we have for
premature closure that's why I often say
the questioning that we're doing is more
like questing and we're not flying right
to close off the phenomena instead the
reflective understanding is trying to
correct ways we might be self deceptive
premature miss frame yet so that we can
actually open it up for more disclosure
so we're going back and forth between
the phenomena in flow right and then the
theoretical reflection and we're trying
to keep them really resonant in sync
with each other so that's what I mean by
you know it's not just argumentation
argumentation in all of its senses is
there but it's also exemplification
right right and and and so we're trying
in philosophy R to disclose not just
ways of thinking but ways of being and
make them aspirationally attractive to
people that's what I mean by philosophy
a-- and why is that needed well why is
that needed because this is the place
this this is the philosophy uh India
logos I think is what Jordan John Hall
and he seems to be an agreement with
this because he keeps meeting with us
right and keeps talking with me to what
said what was needed which is a meta
psychic technology in addition to all of
these practices we need a meta practice
that is designed to curate and that and
you know cultivate the occult the
individual colleagues practice this is
the place where we tap into the deepest
resources simultaneously of individual
cognition and distributed cognition and
we Ratchet it up as much as we can
individual rationality collective
rationality individual wisdom collective
wisdom so we get the best wisdom we can
have for the ecology of practices and I
think that's why it's indispensable
totally as you're talking about this I
was flashing too
so what so for example what one of the
things that has happened for me in
dialoguing with you is you know you
bring to bed if you ask a question for
example right year you've asked me
questions before in those dial up in
those dialogue OSA cysts that are that
that is a struggle for me to answer
right so you asked me a question and I
it's as if in answering it right I'm
walking towards the answer of it and at
the end of may or may not have answered
it but because you bring to bear all of
your um like the horizons of being a
scientist to philosopher of all the
different things that you're probably
that they're probably just implicit for
you in that point and I've never really
been around anybody with in that that
brings to bear all those things right in
answering those questions I'll I'll get
at the end and I may not may not have
had answered the question but then I'll
look up and what the horizons write is
like I'm in event you draw me into a
valley and then I look up and I'm now in
different meaning horizons and those
those horizons I look around at and
things occur the very same things occur
differently to me and I and there's that
sense in which there is really that
sense in which we're all kind of
traveling together and that there's
something guiding the inquiry yes
somehow does it because of the sense of
flow there's an absorption into it and
then at some point I think what you're
talking about somebody's just back and
goes what is this thing that's going on
right here how did you know that's than
that right so that yeah I mean that's
I'm sort of thinking about that is a
giving voice to the logos right rather
than right relying the logos is my name
for that that that way in which
something like a dynamical system takes
shape it takes on a life of its own and
it's it it's gathering right
it's gathering together so things come
to belong together which is one of the
original meanings of logos but it's it's
just it's disclosing new intelligibility
right but it's also a way of being you
know you know in Christianity made you
know a huge deal about this that Jesus
didn't just speak the logos he was the
logos right right um and so that logos
is the name that Chris and I give to
that phenomena and the thing is it's
it's it you know it it has connections
to logic but it's not reducible to logic
it also has you know potential
connections to how we organize and make
use of our resources in the best way so
logos are much more like it for me it's
it's a way of trying to point out a
dynamical system of emergent distributed
cognition and and its attendant emergent
intelligibility
that's what logo says it's it's it's
right it's it's it's that one that Chris
and I call it the third factor when it
comes up and then what what we need to
do right is and I see people wanting to
do this naturally encircling practices
other they sort of want to venerate this
this because they they they sense rather
directly I think that it's affording
them you know it's affording them an
access to a way of being that they
otherwise couldn't reach by themselves
so there's a often a sense of gratitude
and amazement and and Wonder and like I
eat it how did I get here and how did
what was doing this and right and that's
good that that veneration but I want to
I want to do something more and because
you you used this is what you see in the
dialogues of Plato right you see
Socrates is often the spokesperson for
some of the way things are turning he'll
often write remark and he'll often not
only will he remark on the turn he'll
try and afford the turn in various ways
yeah so that's stepping back and naming
not just naming the logos but
noticing it in a way that explicate its
call on us that like sort of brings out
how it's calling us and and and then
what we're trying to do is we're trying
to it's it sounds kind of pretentious
but we're trying to directly relate to
that logos so that it can infer it can
afford enhanced understanding know and
again you're not just intellectual
understanding in all the kinds of noise
yeah like it affords it affords insight
yeah yeah so Heraclitus famously said
don't listen to my words listen to the
logos that's speaking through them yes
right and so right and he's the great
godfather of the logos idea right in the
West in fact that a sense of logos that
as I'm using it is very close to her a
cletus's sense of it and so right
getting right sort of getting into a
resonant relationship not just with the
others which is what circling is
excellent for but with the emergent
logos that's where the logos comes in
right and then when that process is
turned towards trying to understand the
disclosure trying to afford enhance
understanding of how we could be I mean
that sounds like such an easy question
that it's an easy question to state but
it's one of the hardest questions to
live through right how we could be right
and since this is like almost like
revealing the divine double yes
revealing the divine double but not only
our divine double our individual divine
double that divine double potential for
the group the divine double potential
for the world
it's like Corbin's notion of the eight
how all beings have their eight angels
right it's right it's it's that sense of
it uh and so when we when we get a sense
uh you know like in our last dialogue we
started talking about well what's
drawing us like what's going on here and
we got this up and then we got this week
we turn to a philosophical not in the
not
so like in just the conceptual analysis
but in the way I'm talking about here we
turn to this discussion about beauty and
then what we were all doing it we're
trying to sense the beauty and keep it
like we're trying to keep coaxing the
beauty into presence while also getting
it but yet okay can i coax it into
presence and also let it shine into my
understanding and we're trying and where
we're trying to help each other do that
because we're trying to bring it more
and more to light right and that and so
what happens is if you notice will shift
from talking we're still talking to each
other but we shift from sort of you know
concentrating on the communing and we
all focus on the thing we focus on the
phenomena and how it's shining and they
were trying to get it to shine forth
more right and what and what we're doing
is we're doing it really because we
don't want to lose the logos right we
don't lose the logos and we don't want
to lose the circle and we write but we
don't we don't want to lose the
opportunity either because there's a
possibility here that you know is very
precious yeah and so there's there's
this very there's this grip there's this
almost musical finesse about that
dialectic is trying to get up a set of
practices and a pedagogical program so
that people learn the skills the
sensitivities and the sensibilities in
order to find and flow in to do logos
and into philosophy a-- in a more
readily reliable fashion so dialectic
has two aspects to it it has a personal
ontological aspect in which you're right
basically it interacting with the levels
of being because something about those
levels has been disclosed to you right
and you're also it has the interpersonal
aspect that we've been talking about so
you're trying I'm always an arena yeah
relations yep yep yeah yeah so there's
in a certain sense of looking at so I'm
looking at these transitions because
especially like part of my attention is
like okay in setting up the
the dialectic right the biological
practices right yeah it seems like
what's important is that is the
transition from one into the other right
in creating the right constraints right
yes the the in what's tricky about this
and I think what you're talking about is
it's there's a delicacy to it there's a
responsiveness to it there's a balance
it invokes all of this all of this cool
machinery right here yes that is very
involved yet like stands back and stands
forward and then names and is related
and up and there's all these processes
that are going on yes the but in there's
this element to which is where I think
the biological fire right the symbol of
the of the fire really comes back well
to by the way yeah absolutely that's why
I really want to good because they think
on some level that's that's been the
guiding symbol that has been speaking to
me in in all this coming together and
that there's this element about a fire
right which is similar to cut like like
at the garden metaphor right where where
you can you can get all the ingredients
in right you can you know you you can
get you can gather the right wood you
can you can you could stoke the flame
you can but there's this there's this
place where it's beyond you're doing
your direct doing yeah at the stage but
then it almost by grace by virtue of
itself it becomes more than very much
very much and I think and I think it's
also pertinent given the fact that the
fire were I was suggesting to you I
think in that last dialogue that you
know we're engaging in virtual campfires
now are staring at a fire that was
communal that we put together and that
we're now sharing and that is having an
impact on us drawing us out from
ourselves while also drawing us deeply
into ourselves like yeah so I think the
fire metaphor is also a wonderful symbol
precisely because of the way to evoke
the shared campfire which is I think
being involved
in some ways by the way this medium is
if is affecting us and so I think there
it I mean I was sort of hi to Gary in
here but I think maybe Tillich and
there's a there there there's a coming
together a Kairos between the
phenomenological affordances of this
medium what it exams and the symbols
that you're talking about here the fire
yeah yeah there's this thing that you
keep doing with their hands kind of
gathering it has this quality of the
gathering but also emergence yeah yeah
yes yes very much having a life of its
own and so you can't like if you
so you have to you have to accept the
fact that the fire is constantly
shifting constantly moving precisely
because it has a life of its own if it
has because it's a logos and and not
just a machine right you have to let it
let it have a life of its own this is
why Jordan and I've been talking a lot
about Socratic faith this sense of you
know being able to maintain a continuity
of contact and then flow and follow with
something rather than having any kind of
closure on to certainty yeah totally
yeah yeah faith in this very active way
yes I mean like when you think about the
letting it's not just a passivity it's a
proactive allowing letting it has me
think about glass tonight right letting
be yep let it be yet there's an energy
there's an energy of breakthrough
there's an energy of inspiration right
it's all for those one of the things
that you you talked about in one of our
conversations too that I've thought a
lot about like that what's what was
missing for you and some heidegger's
later work was it was like lots about
glass and height letting be but what was
missing was another German you were
doing right from meister eckhart
breakthrough breakthrough
yeah the breakthrough yeah so yeah you
need both believes and I didn't
breakthrough I like what you were saying
earlier like you you're trying to get
together they the right set of
constraints of virtual engine and and at
that overlaps with having cultivated the
resonant and appropriate virtues in
oneself might not just moral virtues but
cognitive virtues so that you know you
you are rezulin resonantly aligned with
the conditions all right because if
you're not properly aligned like so you
can get all the firewood together right
but if you're not properly following the
grain of the wood and paying attention
to the wind and noticing the lay of the
land and feeling the wetness of the wood
you can get it all together and you can
use your magic sort of formula and
nothing happens but right if right if
you're if you write if you
finessing and finding the balance of the
conditions oh no these conditions have
to be nudged this way this constraint
has to be nudged this way these have to
be nudged and now here now
this virtual engine is possible for me
and therefore a fire as possible that's
very much what it's like for deal logos
- I think if there's there's dialectic
therefore has two sets of practices two
kinds of practices
there's the practices that you're doing
to try and engender the do logos but
there's also all of the preparatory
practices the s thesis the spiritual
exercises that purify I don't like that
word but that's you know that's the
Neoplatonic tradition basically what
they do is I like Plutonians model of if
you're carving your inner statute they
shape you they shape you and make you
fossil make it possible for you to enter
into these kinds of practices so I think
of there being this really important
relationship
the ecologies of the ecology of
practices should shape you for via logos
alright and so part of what the part of
what the dialectic does is it help right
it helps draw from all the ecologies and
draw them up to shape you for Dia logos
but what dialectic does is also it takes
the do logos and then goes back and
shapes and Shepherds the ecology of
practices that's why it's indispensable
on an individual level and this is one
of the things that you know this is part
of one of the contentions around I would
even say a defense and a scorn for what
went what comes up for people oftentimes
with philosophy right yeah which is is
actually what we're this conversation is
really like in a certain sense
deconstructing or revealing is is not a
proper attitude right which is in a lot
of the and a lot of like the personal
growth world or like the stall
processing world and the the you know
that whole world there's almost like in
a sense of this that like the worst
thing that you could be told is that
you're in your head
right
there's this kind of quality where it's
almost like to be virtuous is to be
shunning of anything cognitive right
yeah because I think what what what what
we're addressing is that is that there's
been a split that's going on I think
there's I mean we could talk a lot about
the history of that but like I would say
in the in in the world of personal
growth today it's generally said that
like the whole thing is about getting
into your body and getting out of your
head yeah and and I think what we're
talking about is precisely the thing
that brings both of them together and
and then beyond themselves much very
much very much that's why I keep saying
you know I'm using rationality and
knowing in these much that involve being
embodied embedded enacted right all of
that for ease right so extend it to the
extended cognition is paramount
encircling indecision one of the things
that you said you said after one of our
diet our art our dialog assesses is is
you referred to what would happen after
a dialog with Socrates right where where
you start off with some that he starts
off with some question right like what
is some virtue and at the end of it like
no one there's no clear answer that
question nothing has been solved yet
people that they speak like their vision
is more clear and I want to travel
further with Socrates or at least they
want their kids to study with Socrates
that's how dialogues often end right yes
there's there's a sense of people well
getting this Socratic faith this sense
of coming into coming into immersion
with the logos and seeing that the logos
has a trajectory and it's offering you
the serious play and the way I use that
the serious play
of another way of being its so I talked
about the fact you know in other places
that you know and use people can
countering this and you know when they
when they're stuck and they in need of
therapy right they don't know how to get
from who I am now in this world to that
person there in that world because that
world is right it's not you can't sort
of infer your way to it it's not
inferential II accessible because you
don't know what it's gonna be like until
you're there if you don't know who
you're gonna be until you're there right
so how and what I say well you know and
you know le Paul and Agnes Keller talked
about this in various ways well what do
people do well what we've done is we try
to create symbolic places liminal places
where we can keep touch with who we are
now but we can come into contact with
who we could be and how the world could
be and and that's what i mean when i say
that de locas is very serious play it's
playing with the whole of our being
including our cognition because if our
cognition doesn't come with us along the
ride then and it's gonna stay back in
the world and themself that we are
trying to aspire from right like I I'm
I'm I'm perplexing it in a historical
sense but it's sort of like we keep
wanting to deify some aspect or some
faculty and demonize some other aspect
or faculty because that way we can just
we can just sort of trust it because
we've elevated it you know I'm thinking
well I think the thing that is most
deserving of your trust is your entire
this is plato's I think view what's most
deserving of your trust is your entire
psyche when it is properly engaged in
dialectic and finds the deal logos
because when you sense all of your
faculties coming together logos and then
falling into the logos you get a kind of
direct
anticipatory trust in the course that it
could take you on you get a taste of a
way of life and a way of being that's
what I keep saying what I'm saying these
things are not just about giving people
new beliefs or new ideas they're serious
plays in which we try to show people you
know all humility involved but we try to
show people this is how humans can be
this is how you can be right and so for
me trying to try to leave out any part
of human being is is to deeply miss
frame it it's I want to know who I can
be not you know well Wow your gut whoa I
don't want I don't want to rely on just
my gut I don't wanna live just a my I
want I want to be I don't want to just
have one particular thing you know
getting some unquestioned authority over
me right and so and so what's
interesting is it's interesting about
this or not
on the personal transformational end of
things right one of the reasons why
philosophy ax and dial logos is deeply
attractive is that it it is it what it
seems to do and I and I've had some
recent examples of working with people
of watching this happen in a very
concrete way it's very needing to unpack
with them
what afforded that right and it's very
much what we're talking about here
there's a sense of where you know we may
start off like oftentimes people come to
me in my personal practice right in my
my my one-on-one working with people
they're very specific problems right
that they want to solve right and so
we'll start entering into that proc but
that yep that problem but that problem
opens up to all these things where we
actually spend most of our time
dialoguing around all the things that
open up and then somewhere along the
line they show up and they don't have
that problem anymore but they haven't
it's not like that they've ya don't like
I solved the problem right
in fact the way that they what they in
fact the way that they organized the
problem when they first came right it
doesn't even look like the same thing no
exactly
what's interesting is I was somebody
recently I was like okay so what was the
difference that made that difference cuz
we awoke inside of it right but not
being able to get out of bed to like
running groups with people and taking
the leadership in her community and and
like she's no longer depressed and
sleeping and and she got we kind of woke
up to that and I was like what she's
like what was it she's like well you
like I think what it was is you in this
experience I got deeply seen and I was
like okay so let's pause there cuz I've
heard that a lot this experience of
being deeply seen but when we looked
into it was fascinating she's like yeah
you know when I think about our
conversations when I picture you you're
right here like I don't picture you over
there I picture you right here and I was
like so let's picture that and I'm like
is it that like I'm are we face to face
she's like no actually it's not here
it's here and I'm like am I looking am i
looking at you or am like no we're
actually looking somewhere here now is
and what was interesting to me is I
think that this is kind of getting I
think that exemplifies a bit of what
we're talking about very much I think
that's brilliant I think that's it that
that you know it's not it it's yeah it's
it's about so almost like a stereoscopic
thing between people you know how the
two of eyes right they learn how to
integrate so you get a depth of vision
that you didn't have before
I think what happens in this process is
that I think one of the things the logos
does is it gathers perspectives so that
they do that you know and the tightness
even has this metaphor of of all these
faces that come to be inward facing to
the same center and we're back to the
campfire again and then you get that
fusion you get that fusion you get to
sort of sense of multi-dimensional depth
I think
that's exactly right I think what
happens but I think what happens when
we're doing it via logos as opposed to
what you're doing which is a more I
guess therapeutic context if that's
something adjectives right I think
what's happening is the thing that's
coming beside each of us is not you or
me
it's the logos yeah right yeah yeah well
we're starting to we're starting to take
the perspective of logos as opposed to
John's perspective or guy's perspective
or Jordans perspective we're doing that
when the circling we're taking each
other's perspectives I'm sure but what
happens when you get that next
transition when that third factor of
yours is your trunk you're starting to
see things from the perspective of the
logos and you're starting to internalize
it it's this way it's as we think is it
internalize it but it's coming from us
yeah
we're but well it's like that it's like
we put all the wood together it makes
the fire and then only then does the
heat and the light come back to us right
and then it changes us Foucault talks
about this rebound effect that we're
looking for and I think what what
happens is this is this is I'm starting
to internalize the logos perspective
right and and and and that is now
becoming internalized and I'm starting
to be able to see more deeply from from
that because it's now it's like it's
active with me it you know I think what
Cynthia is it at the end of the Phaedrus
I can't or which one is it where
Socrates is the the prayer to pan at the
end he said you know and in the idea is
the gods were always here they were
always here and they were always drawing
us through this dialogue and he asked
any a basically a span to make him only
desire you know that the good within is
equal to the good without or something
like that the beauty within the beauty
without and III think that that's very
much what's going on there is the
recognition of what has been with us all
the way through is that this logos that
and I like this like this idea where
we're crafting together if it comes
beside me so I start to get this new you
know stereoscope
ontological depth perception as opposed
to visual depth perception in what's
interesting is is this sense of you know
this sense of being peers yes when I
really thought there's that sense of
like where because there really is this
experience it's funny I guess there is a
therapeutic context but it that's not my
experience like it's literally like the
I feel we become peers and we stand in
the simplex in what in the way that she
described it it was she said it's a
combination of like you're looking at me
but then we look out together
yeah there's yeah and it really is that
experience of and I think this is one of
the things that circling in practicing
circling has drawn in so many senses
have showed me me like to gathered icing
stock on some level because that I've
always noticed that this experience of
deeply understanding somebody deeply
getting somebody deeply into their world
one it leads to these conversations that
go beyond just the did to determine
itself or something in it light
something up but I understand you and
then I walk away from that with knowing
myself somehow better more articulated
because we know ourselves in action we
know ourselves envisioning it's not what
it's not somewhat what we see I it's
it's it's how we're seeing yes right
yeah and that's that's that's the whole
Platonic vision right even use this word
still right it's right it's it's a
seeing that brings into remembrance our
kinship to the divine it's a way of
skiing it's not so much what we see is
that in as we see we realize oh there's
a deep participatory relationship
between me right and the divine and so
what I think that means within the deal
logos it's like you said we get we get
this sense of
when we get that turning and we're
getting the new way of seeing that's
afforded by the logos
we then sense our deep kinship to the
logos that's what I need that's it
that's the faith I'm talking about that
sense of affinity to the logos right so
we go wait wait that's the anamnesis
that's the remembering that's that's
what I really am I'm like the logos
I'm deeply akin to the logos and that
gives me the the true taste the serious
play of a way of being and I and it's
not a foreign abstract concept to me
it's a living challenge to me right now
because wait wait I'm akin to this I
participate in it I that's that's it
that's what I've been trying to get to
thank thank you that the sense at the
core of the Socratic faith is the
realizing envision not of but realizing
in the practice of envisioning together
utilizing our kinship with the logos it
comes to stand beside us and we see with
it and by seeing with it
we see a new way and we realize our
kinship to the logos and that's the
serious play of faith has serious
playing and sensing being a kid yes yes
he's funny I just want to be with them
we would that for a second especially I
think it's so can you went yes Danny
Gray's you just that's what I was trying
to get out with and in that sense of
that sense like right and that's why you
have the erotic in the Platonic sense
imagery and a beautification right of
this way of life because Plato
ultimately you know I'm reading cliff -
is Aeneid on beauty right now and about
this that at the core of beauty is this
deep sense of a kind of kinship not in
right in that there's a there's a weight
we somehow belong together
when we see the beautiful thing it it
calls us to a way of being that more
appropriately respond
to how we can belong with the beautiful
thing but we but it doesn't seem
something it doesn't seem it doesn't
seem what was the terms that that
Tillich used he it doesn't seem a hetero
hetero ominous - it doesn't seem like an
alien no mas an alien law or principle
that work in us right and it doesn't
seem to be just us it doesn't isn't
autumn no moss he says it's the animus
it's like there's the God it's it's it's
it's god-given right it's it's both
hours but it's beyond us that's that
that's the third factor so I don't make
it right but it's not also something
foreign to me because kinship is
something radically between right the
the affinity the sensing of the kinship
the the experience of the beauty of it
which these are all different ways of
trying to put and so part of what we're
doing in the argumentation part the way
we're seriously playing with the
concepts and the phenomenological
descriptions and the imaginal symbols
and images that Jordan for example is so
you know for conduit yeah is we're
trying to write with like we're trying
to get the catch the fire so that it's
beautiful in the sense of I get a sense
of right the logos and I write it's a
the logos is helping me to see my
kinship to the logos of course if there
isn't the logos in me there is no
kinship with the logos that's how it
does that yes yes and there's that
quality of of what Plato talks about
with with all genuine knowledge is
really remembering yes yes that sense of
there is that spent in that kinship of
that then in one level you may be seeing
it for the first time but the
experiences of like oh it's been present
the whole time in fact yes what's been
guiding the conversation it's what's
been in the background that just came
together yes any people who we are it's
full-time and we remember yes exactly
exactly and so the the practicable not
practical but the
practicable question is well what what
skills and virtues and sensibilities and
sensitivities and you know and virtue a
and and also you know shared virtues and
practices can we get four people so that
they can come and experience this it's I
mean I I was I was remembering is he the
because of my upbringing the Bible is in
me deeper then and maybe my language but
I was remembering there's a passage
where I can't remember I think it's Paul
he talks about you know when you're
praying it's ultimately the Spirit is
praying through you
so you're praying to God but God is in
you like right right and it reminds me
of Eckhart's thing you know the the same
eye by which we see God is the eye by
which he sees me there's there all I'm
now what I'm saying is I'm seeing all of
these traditions were trying to point to
this place where we get well the logos
is beside or even within me right and
yet it's affording me to see in a new
way
yeah which is a realization of my
kinship to the logos and where it's
going yeah that's a sense of faith I've
been trying to get my finger on ya the
kinship again goes and we're going then
that kinship that remembering that sense
of that that discovering what's been
we've been walking with the whole time
just kind of a friend that was there
that was dying yeah yeah it in glimpsing
it and then wanting it all becomes
present like is there's no if that's not
ecstatic temporality I don't know what
is yeah well it it definitely is and
it's interesting because I hadn't
thought about that that distinction
until it for a long time if he talks
about the problem with autonomy is it
closes you in that's the content
Cartesian problem and the problem with
heteronomy is its demonic its disruptive
its destructive of the person and what
you're trying to get is you're trying
get the fionna me right that is trans
jet it you you use and this is the thing
about the beautiful it's one Frankfurt
talks about its he calls it a voluntary
necessity kind of thing right with where
we like we're struck and recalled what
we go yeah but that's what that's that's
what I've always wanted I didn't know
right um kind of thing mmm-hmm I had you
thought about that but this is a crucial
feature of of the state of via logos
that place where people yeah are in that
they're either autonomous nor
heteronomous right it's the animus and
it's because they've got that they've
got that continuity of contact so that
that that sense of its within and it's
without they're calling to each other
but that's there's a deep affinity sorry
I keep repeating this because I'm trying
I'm trying to write I'm trying to do
what we're talking about it's calling
right yeah calling ended present at the
same time it's here yeah exactly
we're doing what we're taught it's here
and we're trying to we're trying to make
it shine forth so that we could actually
see more deeply into it right and what
we're doing the fear the furia
theorizing right and this is how it's
different from just theorizing yeah
right it isn't this is only theorizing
that is coupled to the ongoing
transformation of thoria now this brings
me back to the the last like towards the
end for the last question I think that I
I asked you about so there's something
and and I think this ties in and it dis
struck me I didn't quite exactly know
why it struck me but it is stuck in
there in the in reading alka by T's yeah
where Socrates just referenced
friendship as a god yes yes and I'm I'm
I'm getting this sense cuz they what I
keep thinking about is kind of like our
relationship right like the biggest
thing the biggest for me is like when I
think of you I think of friend yeah
there's always like a point that you it
seems that you seem to make in our
in our in our exchanges where you're
like how are you doing my friend right
yeah yes certain factors day yeah
there's a there's something that that
word holds that is is both that that
feels holding and disclosed --iv of what
is here and what could be here and what
will be here what has been here all at
once or something about that when you
say are you doing my friend yes in
something about what we're doing right
now that seems very very pertinent
something varied this whole thing about
being right here and here being peers
and a befriending and a kinship and one
of the things I kept thinking about it
is like and on some way how this
distributes in my life so on some level
you know I'll be reading fix it you know
and you know this intimately suited a
well I'll just be like oh this book okay
like as if you're right there right yes
like here's in other words on some level
I I saw that and it wasn't like I was
thinking about you in any particularly
before it wasn't like but you were in
some way our friendship was something I
was inside of that when that I saw that
it was just right here right sent you
that text so there's ways that were
these things kind of and I do feel like
all these people I've been dialoguing
with I feel like I walk with them and
I'm conversing with them all very much
yeah I think we there's the sense of you
know Kristen are talking about this the
way in which there's a kind of
distributed cognition we we carry around
people as exemplars of ways of seeing
and ways of being that are close to us I
want to I want to riff on this and I
wanna because there's three associations
came up right away with friendship one
is of course why Leah which is in five
Lia Sophia the kind of love we're
supposed to have for wisdom is that
friendship love the primary metaphor I
give people in the meditation
is that what you're trying to learn to
do is befriend yourself you're trying to
learn how to come into a relationship
with yourself that you that you try to
engender with a friend mmm and then also
it came to mind was Aristotle's notion
that you know friendship is when there's
one soul in two bodies if this deep does
deep affinity almost to the point of you
know interpenetration and sharing which
is why grief can be so powerful for us
because we carry the person around and
it's not like when somebody dies right
it's if there's also like there's a way
in which the world is disclosable that
dies with them and we we we we feel we
still feel that that world granting
access that is particular to that person
with us in us for quite a while and it's
it's it's an it's an it's it's a it's a
like a terrifyingly you know amazing
thing about how long it takes right how
long it takes us because of the way
friendship is not having just having
beliefs about the person because right
you know your beliefs are still he was a
great guy right right it's not just
having skills like there's something
else like what we're talking about here
you there's a kind of mutual inhabiting
of each other like what your purple your
your your client was talking about such
that people represent in friendship a
way of world disclosing that is
indispensably bound to that particular
person this is the difference between
having a buddy and to having a friend
right and people should have buddies the
buddies are people that we share
entertainment with we have fun with and
that's great right you know but a French
a friend is somebody where we're bound
like you said we're bound
together in this in this way yeah
because we see in that friendship an
affinity not only for who we are but for
who we could be and also a way of
disclosing the world that we find in
some way beautiful I like being with you
because you disclose the world in a way
that I find it beautiful that nobody
else can and I'm attracted to that and I
want to come to inhabit or live in that
as much as possible but that's
inextricably bound up with you right you
guys right okay you're a living symbol
if you'll allow if you'll take that word
as a complimentary since you're a living
symbol of that of that world disclosure
and of the also up of potential
disclosure of kinds of identity that I
find beautiful and therefore right there
and it's but it's inextricably bound up
with you right in this sense of just as
funny I just got this experience of like
when you brought a grief yes somebody
that when someone dies right like and
when a friend from this percent like a
world disclosing friend in which you
were on to in all the ways that you just
said would certainly they die what one
goes into grief and in Carragher talks
about this not directly but I think this
is what he's talking about right when he
talks about well what are what are
things that like can transform one's
identity through and through and and he
talks about unconditional commitment but
I think in a certain sense the
unconditional commitment is enacted at
friendship and so what will being a what
befriending you having a friend in this
sense means is that I'm opening myself
up to you die yes and I'm opening myself
up to you being a world disclosure in
which I grieve and if you let go into
that grief and go through it fully
I mean people experience that all the
time we're like then they lose a loved
one or a child or something
and it is it completely changes all
their meaning horizons
everything that he gave them meeting
right and then if they can go through it
right it's almost like going through the
eye the needle in a whole new world
opens up in an identity after that so
there's this kind of element where I
think this is one of the things is
vulnerable why the operability intimacy
friendship and all these things that
we're talking about it's basically if I
befriend you I basically am saying that
like if you die I will forever be
different yes you are doing that
together I mean I in fact in my
experience as a brief what's most
difficult about the grief is actually
feeling that world that was accessible
through that person slipping away you
know so I I find I grieve and I hope
this is understood as a compliment to
the but I grieve the the person's world
so much and that's why many people I
mean the some of the wisest advice I was
ever given in my being when I had
encountered grief for the very you know
the most profound initial time in my
life and he had said to me he said like
he said there's nothing you can do about
grief other than grow into a different
kind of person there's nothing else I'd
avoid it you try to drown it your
friends feed it there's nothing you can
do except you have to grow into another
kind of person because right that person
is so interwoven with your world you you
have to go through you have to change
the whole agent arena relationship that
is the only response and then he said
something right after that which was the
second most wisest thing you know he
said and he said I would I don't want to
be in relationship to somebody who's
never experienced grief because the
right and we're going through what some
people have described but we're going
through like grieving are layers of life
right now right because if you haven't
experienced that profound grief and this
is probably you know part of what Plato
talked about is all the philosophy as a
preparation for death right if you don't
go through that grief you're not and
that maybe this is Kirk regards point
about the sickness unto death yes right
is that you're not capable of a depth
yeah you're just not capable of a
certain kind of depth there's a story
it's a parable of the Buddha and and
this woman came to him and her son had
died and she's in deep grief and she she
heal resurrect him now of course the
Buddha always refused to perform
miracles in fact he said this is how you
know somebody's not one of my followers
they offered to perform a miracle right
he said that she was persistent and so
he says to her at some point he says
okay okay okay I'll resurrect your son
but there's one condition you must go
into the city and you must go to a
household and we'll come back and bring
a mustard seed from that household and
she goes oh that's easy
no no but that household has to never
have encountered death so she goes and
she knocks on the doors - do you have
mustard yes has anybody here died or or
you have you encounter yes and then she
goes to the next door and the next or
the next or the next door and then she
goes oh and then she goes back to the
Buddha and she says thank you
now I understand that's how he heals her
right and notice to bring this sort of
full circle notice how that's a
dialogical process like she goes and
talks to other people sees other
perspectives is led out and then
something starts to take hold of her and
take on a life of her own and it tracks
her attention right
it makes her aware and she realizes a
deep kinship with other people and with
her own mortality she remembers yes and
she remembers through encountering
everyone living being and being the face
that they are because they have
experienced death right
sense of that just that sense of just
like the Buddha you know because there's
unnecessary suffering right normal
neurologist yeah and and the Buddha did
a lot even he was even critical of
animal sacrifice because he saw that as
unnecessary suffering right he but but
but she right there's unnecessary
suffering and distress and disease and
we should of course do everything we can
and we should try um but there's also
there's also getting human beings to
there's certain you know Israel means to
wrestle with God there are certain
things that we always all of us have to
wrestle with and once again that's how
we're all have to be philosophical yes I
get it you don't want to read perhaps
you don't want to read kirkegaard you
don't want to read Heidegger right well
right or you don't want to read Tillich
but we're you all right we all need to
reflect on our mortality to reflect on
grief to reflect on beauty to reflect on
right being called to something other
than what we currently are these are all
things that bear they it's remember what
I was saying the way iris Murdoch's
talks about there's a virtue of
attention and there we come to realize
certain things are deserving of our
attention because of their beauty
because of their import because of their
realness because of the way in which
they especially disclosed what it is to
be a human being so it's like that that
sense of reflecting on what the
Philosopher's reflect on in coming to
philosophy yes yes is is in this story
this parable as she came to reflect on
the people and they've all died and she
became those things reflected her back
to her yes so it's like reflect on those
things that will reflect you back to you
right through other people to remember
in the symposium where I think it's with
Socrates is talking about also piety is
how the best way
to know yourself is through the image in
other people's eyes of you right that
that it's through people he doesn't just
mean their you know their impressions
he's very careful the term that's being
used here he means that you know like
this woman she gets an ability to
reflect on herself that's outside of her
egocentric sort of like fixation right
and notice that you know we should meet
we should be like it's not that her
egocentric fixation is something you
know ridiculous or vicious everybody
when they're in pain becomes extremely
egocentric mmm he takes the process of
dialogue with others and getting to see
through other people's eyes until
they're now all now I almost picture
like now they're all standing beside her
and they're all pointing to oh we all
are mortal and she has that sense right
of that Wow
so interesting and I just thinking about
that just that sense of and I thinking
about that that the that when you look
at someone's eyes right and we'll bring
this to your completion soon but when
you look at somebody's eyes there's one
point of view where I can look at your
eye and I can see my own reflection in
your eyeball it was actually looking at
of the suppose II am I believe and then
there's this other way which is and
there's another way in which I can kind
of see through the reflection and see to
the the the nothingness
you know people where it's like the in a
certain sense I'm looking at the
disclosure of myself because on so many
levels I think one of the things that
the people that I've called friends or
the people that have I kind of ripen in
of their gaze in their gaze here wait
like and is looking in stably troub like
being it's usually there's that sense of
being around somebody who's really wise
right when they could just look at you
and everything it's almost like you can
feel all of your potential being
animated and all the things that are
other than your potential making you
uncomfortable and hard to be with but
they see something through all of it
that that calls you yeah that's exactly
Alcibiades
Comfort in the in the symposium he's how
Socrates is adducing that's the original
core of Education
he's adducing from Alcibiades because of
good of the dialogo stright he's
adducing from Alcibiades what he could
be and a way of life that he could live
with it and he turning away from it
because he desires the fame and the
glory yeah this is so good John
yeah I don't know if we got to all your
questions but we touched on some of them
I think
absolutely absolutely just one one
practical thing just in terms of as we
go forward with this so I was thinking
that I'm gonna work out the outline I'll
send you the outline so we can get get
to the the flow of it but I was thinking
at certain points we can just do a demo
of these transitions right enacting a
kind of a transitional point in
different parts and I've been working
working out the outline with this but I
was thinking about just in terms of you
know if we say in the PostScript of our
last dialogue oh so Chris and I had just
a spontaneous conversation about this in
exemplified in like really drew out this
notion of the dialogical thought fire
and we kinda came to this point like
well oh yeah the logs are like the
propositions yes and and so in
philosophy there's the there's the
propositions that the philosophers make
the doctrines and all that kind of thing
and so dialogue owes dialogic my sense
was staying with this symbol like that
engaging in the like dialogue he's
beginning to bring these together which
is like starting to like spark it and at
some point when the one that when the
logos or the fire catches that's when it
goes into dialo goes right I agree I
like the metaphor especially when you
think about the fact that the wood is
actually stored and shaped sunshine yeah
Hermes I can't take it anymore
we have to if we can get back to the way
of thinking and being the envisioning
that then gets solidified in the
proposition if we can require if we can
recover the light that poured in that
will also help to catch the fire so my
thought was you know instead in looking
at like through this process right
through that symbol what occurred to me
is that the this the circling right the
the at this level the inner subjective
right of where we just have people talk
about their lives like we get each other
what we go back and forth we disclose
each other and get that going right and
at some point right we start to go okay
what are what are the emerging themes
that we're hearing right what's the
what's the thing what's the and in that
emerging things is the articulation of
the wood right so maybe what we're
hearing is something about crisis maybe
or about meaning or about some sense
that's been guiding the conversation is
weaving and then cut in that that that
the circling is in a certain sense
gathering the wood or creating the wood
did then we take that up right in right
yeah yeah okay good
as long as we keep as long as we keep
tending to the fire yeah right so and
that seems to be the tending the fire
seems to be this sense that I'm
imagining will happen naturally and we
can notice it happening now sure but we
can also evoke it which is this going up
and then noticing and this is often the
sense I get with an insight an insight
is that is that middle spot between
bottom-up and top-down it's like that
experience look like something comes
together it's a flashlight it's not like
a paragraph in fact you try to bring it
okay if you have to you clumsily come to
terms with that flash of light right so
that sense of going up and then noticing
how that if
that's assault personally right in
bringing attention to their and then
looking at that and going up and then
coming back down and getting I think
very much yeah that's that's the
Neoplatonic thing about right there the
return and then the progressed and so
right the back and forth yeah and notice
how the vertical dimension comes in
integrated with the horizontal exactly
exactly
this will be a lot of fun yeah I'm
looking forward to it
great thank you so much John thanks to
you for being my friend oh thank you for
being my friend yeah if you could send
me the file because I'd like to upload
this to my channel as well I think it's
a good way
I'd love this moment did that right
before you said it right I love that
yeah it's it's amazing how much is
carried in our gestures anyways I'll see
you tomorrow
you got it one might take take care