[Music]
hey folks welcome back to the QA section
of the Dark Horse podcast livestream we
are now going to address your questions
and by we I mean I okay so we're gonna
start with the questions that came in in
the initial stream first one is how does
evolution account for racism and
Prejudice now this is a interesting one
because in my opinion it accounts for
them very easily and also tells us a lot
about what we have to do in order to get
past them but I've had an ongoing battle
with some of my colleagues including
most prominently Richard Dawkins who
does not believe it is productive to
look at issues like lineage versus
lineage competition through an
evolutionary lens that is to say it
remains for me to compel my evolutionary
colleagues that lineage against lineage
competition is a meaningful level at
which to analyze evolution so I am
excited for that challenge I've thought
deeply about this and I'm quite
compelled that there's a great deal of
value to be had in thinking of evolution
in those terms and that it is not
metaphorical it is quite literally
something that selection sees in quotes
and acts upon lineages are real and they
line up quite well with things we tend
to see as races so anyway there's a lot
more to be said on that but yes it's a
an excellent question second question
what's worse media outlets financially
incentivize to keep us angry and
paranoid or happy and complacent um
that's a tough one I mean you know
you're talking about two different
failure modes and the truth is I guess I
would fear angry and paranoid more than
happy and complacent it's possible to
wake from happy and complacent and
recognize that something needs to be
done in fact in some sense that
that's the matrix so I guess I would
prefer the latter but I could be
compelled that actually that state is
more dangerous and you know maybe that's
the Huxley version okay
third question voting rights were about
representative democracy Minnesota and
Minneapolis are a hundred percent
progressive is this not proof that
Democrats actually don't have blacks
support beyond mere lip service well
again I would go back to this principle
that I'm quite a strong believer in
which is that you can't hold people
responsible for making bad choices when
they only have bad choices to choose
amongst so my point would be when that
is the case we all end up doing
something that we said we say to
ourselves make sense but to others may
look incoherent and if it was not clear
when I initially presented this my point
is that many of my friends on the Left
cannot fathom how anybody ends up voting
for a guy like Donald Trump to me
actually it's not so hard to understand
it's not a rational choice I don't like
it and I wouldn't have voted for him but
I can certainly understand a mentality
that is just simply fed up with the same
old corruption and eager for something
new and so in any case it's it's a
choice that I think looks very different
in light of the fact that no good
choices are provided as alternatives so
what that means in response to your
question is that I see a lot of people
acting incoherently and when I see that
rather than judge them for the
incoherence of their action I have to
ask myself did they have clearly better
choices and often the answer is no okay
ah interesting a pallet of bricks was
placed in the path of Dallas rioters
last night next to the courthouse where
there wasn't any construction you can
find the video on Reddit and Twitter I
saw this video I decided not to show it
because I cannot be sure of what it is
but it certainly was striking and there
is a long history of
agent provocateurs taking a protest and
making it look like something that it
isn't we saw this in the WTO protests
and elsewhere so if in fact that video
is what it appears to be it does look
like a stack of construction materials
placed near a building with large
vulnerable windows with no other reason
to be there but what I would have wanted
was somebody to tour me around and to
see what else might explain that stack
of materials I would like to know from
witnesses whether that stack of
materials really did show up in advance
of the protests or if it had been there
for a while basically I would like
somebody to do due diligence on that
clip and figure out whether somebody was
attempting to create violence to seed
violence by putting materials that would
cause people to innovate that strategy
or whether there was some innocent
explanation and that just the place
where it appeared something was up and
so people commented upon it anyway if
people do know if there is someone who's
done due diligence somebody on the
ground in that location I'd be very
interested to know about it but thanks
for the question okay could research
stations offer sanctuary in these times
of quarantine
how does someone set up these facilities
what services do they usually offer so I
assume we're talking about biological
research stations and you know I don't
know that Heather and I have actually
talked about it but of course we just
emerged from the tipitina biological
station in Ecuador at the point that
what was then called the novel
coronavirus was emerging and so anyway
the two things sit closely together in
our minds of course they've been great
referee refuges they're not cheap to be
at that's for sure just think about the
idea of having a station deep in in this
case the Amazon rainforest where the
forest is constantly trying to reclaim
all of the building materials and every
morsel of food have to be brought in by
boats and and the like so anyway it's
it's an expensive operation to run
they're not easy to set up and on top of
all of the practical details
if they're gonna be any good they have
to be somewhere with a diverse biota
which inevitably means a tremendous
amount of I don't want to call it red
tape because some of it's quite
necessary but a tremendous amount of
regulation surrounding what can be put
where and why and so in general the
field stations all have some origin
story in which some person went through
Herculean efforts to set the thing up
we know this was true in Madagascar back
when Heather was working there and we
were familiar with the place the mesh
wall peninsula had just had a new park
set up and research facilities would
arrive afterwards I assume actually we
didn't we never saw out research
facilities there but but in any case
it's an interesting question probably
somebody has documented the process and
done a bunch of work to compile the
various examples that might tell you but
I don't think setting up a station in
order to have a refuge makes much sense
it's there there are easier ways to do
it okay let's see is there some way we
can help the cops capture and charge the
white anarchists that would make a huge
difference in the community
well I don't know I mean and I'm not
even sure what the right thing to do is
at some level I want to grab the white
anarchist by the lapels and say you know
you're you're externalizing harm on
other people by living out your
fantasies in public this way you're
doing harm to the very communities you
claim to be helping and I am certain
it's not the same for all of the
anarchists some of them are just
confused some of them are looking for an
excuse to bash heads those are two
different phenomena so I don't know what
the right way to address it is and one
certainly has to create a situation
where people who break the law and
engage in wanton violence and
destruction are punished that's very
different than normal civil disobedience
and to the extent that the harm that
they do comes back to haunt them they'll
learn not to do it that's one of the
reasons that I was so angry at mayor
wheeler for coddling this behavior is
that he eventually he essentially
ensured that it would boil over in some
spectacular way which it now has okay
let's see
Minneapolis black man dies after police
confrontation the Mirage of no
consequences have you counted the
rocking-chair dead in your town yet I
don't know what this means
well I unfortunately I don't know what
it means I wish I did have you counted
the rocking chair rocking chair daddy in
quotes in your town yet don't know okay
someone has suggested Jordan Hall with
respect to a president or vice
presidential strategy Jordan's a good
friend I think a he has one of the
downsides of many of the candidates who
would be worth advancing in this which
is that very few people know who he is I
would certainly want to see him involved
in solution making and actually this is
something I didn't say the catastrophic
failure of our stream threw me a little
bit one of the things I would advocate
for the general election is that we stop
pestering candidates about the policies
that they would enact presidents don't
make policy they lead it affects policy
but what I would suggest would be an
appropriate substitute for the absurd
spectacle of asking presidential
candidates to be detailed about where
they would get the money to do this on
that and you know what I would advocate
is that instead we have them outline who
they would bring into an administration
and take advice from that that is
actually a basis on which we can judge
somebody if they're listening to the
right sort of folks and the
it is nobody can do it all a president
has to take a tremendous amount of input
from people who know what they're
talking about
and they have to delegate to other
people that's what they do they take
input from others and they delegate and
so the question of to whom they would
delegate and from whom would they
solicit information seems highly
relevant I would imagine
Jordan would be an excellent candidate
for supplying insight on many topics and
I would hope that where this where this
plan to work that he would be involved
that way okay most people have heard
about sexual dimorphism and
hermaphroditism but is there such a
thing as sexual polymorphism and if so
how would that arise evolutionarily
thank you for doing the podcast so often
well if I understand the question oh no
wait a second well the question could
mean one of two things either it could
mean sexual dimorphism as opposed to
polymorphism as in more sexist than two
and the interesting thing is that in
general that's not what we see that we
see asexual organisms and we see sexual
organisms in which there are two sexes
and then we see weird stuff and things
like fun G where sometimes there can be
many many many mating types which aren't
exactly sexes but nonetheless it's
something but maybe the question here is
actually asking about like size
dimorphism where there are more than two
sides where it's not like males are
large and females are small or sometimes
it's the reverse in some species but
there could be many sizes and in fact we
do see this in some places we see things
like female strategies yes that is the
actual term for it female strategies in
which males take on a female like form
often this is in the context of
something like a mating ball where I've
seen it in garter snakes for example
where garter snakes will come out of
hibernation and females will effectively
be mob
by males and they will be driven into
the center of a ball of males trying to
mate and one strategy for getting to the
female is not to be bigger but to be
small and female like and to be driven
by the group who are confused about the
sexual identity of the individual toward
the female so that can create a sort of
third form you know a male and female
like form I by the way I've also seen
that in newts in rough skin newts in the
Pacific Northwest where I do not believe
it was a known behavior but I've seen it
multiple times so anyway okay next
question if XY offspring is costly for
mammal females
I think if xwy offspring are costly from
mammal females that should read can they
meaning the female select against Y in
the womb in unsafe environments will
they tend to make xx in humans do more
dominant and healthy parents tend to
make to tend to make XY what are factors
okay I think I understand the question
the question is asking whether or not if
there are costs to having offspring of
one sex or another in this case the cost
is being attributed to the males and
this follows from something we talked
about last time where males could be
costly to a female because they would
have potentially an interest in draining
the female more than the female would
have an interest in being drained by the
pregnancy or by the the loading of the
actually it can't be in the egg case but
but in any case the point is do animals
do females have the ability to select
against something like male offspring in
the womb or select against male
y-bearing sperm before fertilization in
order to adjust the
sex of the offspring that they produce
now this actually follows quite well
from something called the Traverse
Willard hypothesis Bob Trivers
was an undergraduate mentor for Heather
and me he's still a good friend and he
is anyway one of the most important
evolutionary thinkers of certainly the
20 20th century and arguably the 21st as
well so what Traverse and Willard argued
was that we know from Fisheries work
that males and females are on average
equally valuable therefore there's no
inherent advantage to producing males or
females that that there is some
advantage to producing whichever one
might be scarce but that if a female
knows what quality of offspring she's
going to produce she might then have a
bias in one direction or another that is
to say because most males are losers
sorry guys most males are losers if you
were going to produce offspring without
enough resource so that they were likely
to end up not being highly competitive
you'd be better off producing female
offspring who would be almost guaranteed
to find a mate if you were gonna produce
really high-quality offspring let's say
you had a great year and your
competitors didn't then you might want
to produce male offspring because a male
who wins and many of these systems tends
to out reproduce even a highly
successful female so the question here
suggests an analog for this and really
the point is yes the logic works there's
some evidence for it
it is difficult mechanistically this is
difficult to arrange but it is not
impossible and therefore evolutionarily
we do expect to find solutions and let's
see what yeah and so you know healthy
parents healthy and maybe well-fed
parents might be more likely to produce
male offspring in this case so anyway
I'd like to see a really large study
that was able to demonstrate the
existence of this force or the lack of
existence
for it in humans but it's certainly been
seen in many other creatures okay um
let's see yeah Brett which hypotheses of
origin of life on earth do you lean
towards RNA genetics first metabolism
first chemical synthesis panspermia
thermo thermo synthesis do you I don't
know what that's supposed to read here's
the thing yeah do you have one yourself
is probably what that says this is one
of these questions which it would be
wonderful to know the answer it is
important to know that there are answers
that would suffice there are certain
things that we can see so we can I think
see enough to strongly suspect that the
RNA world pre-existed the DNA to RNA
world we can see that in for example the
ribosome which remains it functions like
a a protein enzyme but made from for RNA
nucleotides therefore it's much bigger
and clumsier and slower than a an RNA
and then a protein based enzyme would be
but as for all the way back at the
beginning what sparked it I don't see
anything to suggest panspermia yet
doesn't mean evidence couldn't emerge
but I haven't seen anything that would
lead us to hypothesize that extra step
was necessary
so anyway I feel about it a little bit
like you know the origin of the universe
it's important that something explained
it in other words it's important that it
be explicable there are people who might
specialize in figuring out what the
exact answer was but it's kind of not
the same type of question as how does
evolution work and so in some sense I
don't really feel like how did it start
is in my area of specialty
so in some sense I'm as excited to learn
what the answer might be has anybody
else
and no I don't have a personal pet
hypothesis okay within those species of
animals that past the mirror self
recognition test not all individuals
passed the test
what would a population of a species
that has more self-awareness be at an
evolution
would that population of a species that
has more self-awareness being an
evolutionary advantage it was self
recognition a case of convergent
evolution self recognition will
definitely be a case of convergent
evolution how do we know that because
the taxa that show it are widely
separated and their common ancestors we
can infer in many of these cases didn't
happen so for example elephants and
primates are distantly separated and
they both show it and so their common
ancestor would be a creature for which
we have no reason to think that it had
this capacity so I think this is
incredibly fascinating you know and
there are lots of things that work like
this grief also seems to be convergently
evolved so next part of the question is
is there an advantage to this
self-awareness undoubtedly there's an
advantage to it it has a cost and it
emerges multiple times on the
evolutionary tree and persists where it
does emerge and that says it has a
benefit does it have a cost of course it
has a cost is it a net benefit obviously
in some places it is would it be a net
benefit to everybody here's what I
suspect is at the heart of your question
no I don't think it would be a net
benefit to every creature to have it and
so there's every reason to think that
for some kinds of problem solving it
would have an advantage probably places
where theory of mind was important in
other words creatures where one
individual needed to figure out what
strategy another individual was likely
to deploy and so you would expect the
cost to be worth paying in those cases
thanks for your voice of sanity question
from six from six-year-olds son
Rafferty why do humans grow two sets of
teeth why not ten awesome Rafferty
that's a great question so the thing is
we humans have a lifecycle that was
fairly consistent until relatively
recently consistent enough that this
solution evolved to match the set of
problems that needed to be solved now I
still think there's lots of mystery here
I'm waiting for somebody to deliver a
proper evolutionary explanation for many
dental phenomena like wisdom teeth for
example makes no sense for you to have
teeth that don't fit into your jaw now
there are some very interesting
perspectives on this and in fact I'm in
conversation with one gentleman who has
quite a lot to say about this but what
we really need is Darwinian dentistry
just the same way Darwinian psychology
has begun to explore the apparatus of
the mind and do so in a in a rigorous
evolutionary way we need this for
dentistry sorry Radford that might be a
bit beyond the questions you're asking
but let's just say some creatures do
have an essentially infinite number of
teeth sharks have effectively a conveyor
belt of teeth that just kind of puts new
teeth forward as necessary and you will
note that sharks sometimes live a very
very long time some of the longest lived
vertebrates that is to say the longest
living individual vertebrates that we
know of on earth are sharks how would
you build a creature whose teeth were
gonna wear down if it could live
hundreds of years you know up under the
Arctic ice for example well if you build
it to grow new teeth and to be
constantly pushing new ones forward then
it would always have sharp teeth even
when it was old so that's a great
solution for that we don't need that
because we don't live that long
live a period of time that actually two
sets of teeth pretty much gets us there
two sets of teeth also solves a problem
of growth where you're trying to do one
set of things while your head is still
relatively small and as your head
matures you need to start doing another
set of things and so it's a pretty
elegant solution that we've now made
inelegant by eating foods that our
ancestors wouldn't have eaten living
longer than our ancestors would have
tended to and lastly Rafferty I just
can't help but continue to go on in your
question I'm so tickled that you would
ask it think about the predicament of
elephants so elephants have a kind of
intermediate system between our system
and the shark system where you just keep
generating more teeth so what elephants
have is a set of teeth that moves
forward over a lifetime right and I sort
of get pushed off the front but there's
a limited number of them it's not like
sharks they can't just make more teeth
so when we take elephants into things
like zoos they tend to live longer than
their wild counterparts and they run out
of teeth which is a really serious
problem so anyway there's a lot to be
said about creatures living in novel
environments and those novel
environments creating problems that the
ancestors didn't have anyway
great question Rafferty keep it up
you're gonna be all right okay
Alena Chan tweeted no evidence supports
or rules out any of these options SARS
to cross into humans circulated
undetected while adapting to humans
maybe the virus originated outside Wuhan
should we be looking in places with the
most strain diversity well this is
wonderful first of all I'm very happy to
see Alena Chan's work very high quality
very careful and in my opinion quite
courageous as I tweeted about her work
when it emerged what she has said is
that we can't rule out all of these
hypotheses including laboratory origin
we now have a a very nice piece written
by Matt Ridley in today's Wall Street
Journal saying that the Wuhan fish
market hypothesis
nearly dead and that the laboratory
hypothesis is alive all of these things
do suggest that we should be vigorously
searching for the origin story if that
origin story is wild we need to know
where this thing circulated one of the
weirdest things about this virus is that
it showed up really well adapted right
that's not supposed to happen what
typically would happen is the virus
would emerge from a wild animal it would
make the jump into humans and then it
would spend a bunch of time evolving
before it took off and became a pandemic
that's not what happened here it got
into people well adapted to them and
boom it was off to the races so did it
go through that evolutionary step that
we expect in some other place if so it
would be excellent to know where it was
where it was and frankly in what
creature it was so yes I strongly
support a search for the actual origin
of this virus and we need to be
courageous and look wherever the
evidence takes us but I also think we
need to ask ourselves the question we
have been assured from moment one that
the laboratory hypothesis made no sense
this virus couldn't have come from the
lab and it very probably came from the
wuhan seafood market to the extent that
that is now reversing itself and we have
been told that that was the order of
things by virologists by the journal
Nature the journal science by all of
these reputable mainstream sources how
did they get it so wrong and if you're a
longtime watcher of our podcast how did
we know more than a month ago that that
story didn't add up how could we know
if the people of this hop of the field
were confused by it right the answer to
that question is a biggie so think
carefully about it alright where am I on
15
oh sorry what's your take on youtuber
Michael Brooks new anti IDW book against
the web a cosmopolitan the answer to the
new right Eric is even on the cover well
I have not read this book I did however
see Michael Brooks interviewed on rising
and I was shocked he went on for
something like 12 minutes and I did not
spot a single substantive point so my
sense is he had an idea that there was a
lot of hunger out there for some sort of
takedown of the IDW and he signed up for
the role and when he got right down to
it not a lot added up because really
what is there to complain about a bunch
of heterodox thinkers being civil to
each other so anyway I don't think very
highly of it and as much as I was
hopeful that Michael Brooks might mature
into a rational voice on the left my
hopes have dimmed on that front okay 16
um somebody is saying they have to
support rigorous public discourse yes
rigorous public discourse perfect let's
see listening from Yorkshire UK really
appreciate you guys thanks for all you
do excellent thank you 18 get well soon
Heather Heather isn't really sick she
just doesn't have her voice which is a
very uncomfortable thing she used to go
through this when she was teaching every
now and again where once the voice
starts to go hoarse you try to speak
louder in order to overcome the
quietness and the voice and it would
just go positive feedback to the point
that he would completely lose her voice
so we're trying to prevent that from
happening but no she's not she's not
sick but anyway get loud soon how about
that that seems closer okay would you
make a separate video with these things
in Portland people need to be able to
see the dynamic in a more shareable form
I love your family yeah it might be
worth doing something like that I will
say you know Andy know has done a great
job of documenting what's going on we
the anarchists in Portland and he's paid
a high price for it he's been very
courageous you know I don't love
everything Andy does or some stuff that
troubles me but the fact is he's young
he is highly capable he's been on the
story longer than anyone and you know in
some sense I think we owe him a debt of
gratitude he saw this coming to the
extent that there was mayhem last night
in the streets of Portland and he now is
in a position to say I told you so about
it okay let's see let's see is now a
good time to buy a gun if you haven't
already that seems like a loaded
question and that seems like a decent
pun is now a good time to buy a gun if
you haven't already know it's a terrible
time to buy a gun because the lines of
the gun store out the door as I in my
neighborhood at least when I pass the
gun store there are people literally
lined up outside or at least there were
right before lockdown so just
economically speaking I would say supply
appears to be low demand appears to be
high that suggests the price of guns
will be high so I'm just gonna take a
strictly economic stance and say nope
you should wait for demand to drop and
supply to increase okay look I've seen
two questions how would we deal with
Congress which has the same pressure
from the parties and what safeguards do
we institute to keep people from gaming
the system yang and McCreevy are yang
and McRaven unviable
I believe Yang and McRaven together
would be unviable maybe I'm naive but
that's what I think I actually think
there are more unbel people out there
than you would imagine
but to the extent that we have a duopoly
of influence peddlers they have an
interest in keeping the unenviable
people away that's what the primaries
are for so in any case what do we do at
the Congress well here's the thing if
you think really hard you'll realize
that there are bound
be three kinds of people okay you've got
people who will do the right thing no
matter what probably not a lot of those
in Congress maybe a few you got people
who will do the wrong thing no matter
what they're just committed to doing bad
stuff probably not a lot of those in
Congress either all right it's just not
a very good strategy so how would you
get to Congress if you were that dumb
and then there gonna be a lot of people
in the middle who will do the wrong
thing if they're not left with better
choices but might rather not live in a
corrupt system and so I think if you
gave the Congress an opportunity to do
the right thing to feel good about it
you know to be able to look their kids
in the eye all that sort of thing I
think you'd find a good number of them
were up to the challenge not all of them
the ones who aren't I say we I say we
throw those bums out I mean like
yesterday so anyway what would that look
like if we actually put this plan into
motion and it worked and you had
president and vice president governing
together as a team with no affiliation
to either of the parties Wow would they
have a tremendous amount of power behind
them that came from the actual people
and Wow would that create a large
incentive for people in the Congress who
were capable of doing the right thing to
come on over to the right side so let's
do it let's just get rid of those two
parties they're so god-awful okay hmm
Brett this one is for me awesome go buy
the ingredients to make egg-drop soup
for Heather for her voice it works like
a charm in this person's experience I
recommend those free-range eggs that
have the hens backstories included
inside the cartons and cost like $5.99
can I ask you a question it's not
exactly an answer to what you've said
here I may try that could well could be
the thing free-range eggs how far could
they possibly get
all right next question
how could a critical mass of people be
convinced to vote for a ticket that's
only half from their side over the one
that's all from their side here's the
thing people are sick of this crap they
are sick to death of it if you provided
them something that looked honorable and
patriotic and where they didn't know how
it ended where there was some reason to
get up and be hopeful in the morning
lots and lots of people would be there
the thing that prevents a plan like this
from coming into play is that people
imagine from the get-go that because it
doesn't come through the door that
they've been told is the only possible
way to get to the White House that it's
a non-starter but you have to think
beyond that the parties have by by
advancing these two corrupt dimwits they
have announced to us that they are not
interested in leadership at a moment
when absent leadership we could very
well drive ourselves extinct we could
have a civil war so at you know at what
point do your parties announce they're
not interested in leadership and you
don't listen to them I say it's time we
listen let's do it
all right great proposal Brett what are
ways to spread these ideas to a large
audience Joe Rogan has the platform and
certainly wants to improve America thank
you sir
thank you I don't know obviously I mean
Joe Rogan is maybe the most important
person in media today and for good
reason I have to say Joe is exactly who
he seems to be and so his success it
couldn't happen to a better guy would he
be interested in this I think he'd only
be interested in it if he thought there
was a real chance but but yeah that'd be
the obvious way how do you reach more
people than have a chitchat with Joe
Rogan about it or frankly Joe you could
talk about it with anybody I've put it
on the table I'd be happy to tell you
what I forgot to say here that might be
worth this guy
but yeah wonderful um the idea is now
public domain let's spread it far and
wide okay
uh somebody just wants to thank me for
our content great you're very welcome
all right the anarchists are being
organized and exploited by the globalist
you know I see this allegation a lot and
I have no idea if it's accurate it's one
of those rabbit holes that I haven't
gone down maybe just because I haven't
had time or maybe because I secretly
suspect it doesn't much matter I mean to
the same extent that there's some web of
corruption that advances lackluster
presidential candidates whose main
purpose is to prevent real change from
happening the extent that that's the
thing it's not all that important that
we figure out the details of the
corruption what's really important is
that we figure our way out of it okay
did I check the generational hormone
theory yet its main premise is that the
population cycles are driven by
generationally fluctuating hormone
levels and human populations are
included here's the thing I think
there's something to this but I think
the hormone bit is a red herring there
is a way in which generations follow
some sort of pattern and many people
have spotted it whether that has a
molecular explanation I don't see any
reason that it needs to the fact is each
generation provides the developmental
environment for the next generation and
because of that you would expect certain
kinds of parents to produce certain
kinds of offspring and you would get
this kind of repeating cycle so I think
there is something to the cycle I remain
to be convinced that it has anything to
do with hormones or more likely
pheromones or whatever I think it's
basically just a developmental
environment and exposure
okay what about tulsi gabbard
mixed ethnicity a desire to end wars
could be a good path going forward and
the fact that the Dems turned on her at
the point she got 60%
disapproval speaks volumes okay and
quite follow the end of that but here's
thing I actually like the idea of Tulsi
and I considered her for the second spot
problem if she has some serious
negatives which I'm not sure she
deserves but nonetheless the most
important thing about this proposal is
that it works well enough to get two
patriots into the White House to govern
as a team what I am not convinced of is
that Tulsi Gabbard is not too divisive
to make that happen I wish she wasn't
but in particular she has a major
stumbling block when it comes to Jews on
the basis that she is perceived to be
anti-israel now I don't think that's
what I see but let's just say the most
important thing is that we get Patriots
into the White House
I personally believe Tulsi is a patriot
and I believe she is all of the things
that would be prerequisites for this the
question is really how electable would
she be and I don't know the answer I'm
open to being convinced that she's the
right person okay
my president proposal doesn't address
elections Congress or lobbyists to name
only three major issues how does putting
a new head on it cure a body politic
that is diseased as deeply as ours seems
to be great question
totally agree except that it does
address it in a way which is if I mean
just for a second write the script from
inauguration day never mind how we get
there what it looks like I believe those
questions are answerable too but let's
just say we did okay now you have two
people walking in as potentially the
heroes that have freed us from this
corrupt fog that we've lived under most
of us for most of our lives so what kind
of power do they have to confront the
corrupting influences I would say
tremendous
and as I said prerequisite to be in
those spots from my perspective would be
highly competent patriot and courageous
you'd have to be courageous to go up
against those forces but what better
than people who are highly creative and
motivated to make America function to
figure out what the solution to the
corruption problem is and I would love
to see what they come up with I'd love
to be involved in helping come up with
something and I've done a lot of
thinking on that front too but thanks
for the question it's an excellent one
okay you mentioned that Trump was a
separate family do you think the GOP
will drop Trump post Trump and do you
think he will haunt all future GOP
candidates it's a very interesting
question I don't think so at this point
I think he is you know in narrative
terms he effectively decapitated the GOP
and I think there was a time early on
where if they could have figured out how
to rid themselves of him they would have
but I think at some level it's a brutal
political game and he is the master of
it and so they have they have
reluctantly agreed to share the spoils
in order not to have to confront him and
I would expect that to be durable but
anyway time will tell I guess any books
exercises practices you suggest a recent
college grad graduate use to help in
their development into a good
experimentalist research scientist
hoping to enroll in a bio med ph.d
program next fall thanks so much
great question the there are really two
parts to the answer one is the best
thing you can do I think to become a
great experimentalist research scientist
is put yourself through the mental
exercise of generating hypotheses
generating useful predictions good ones
and then figuring out what experiment
would would actually successfully test
for them so you can do that a lot of
times and
if I can give you one a slightly bizarre
piece of advice I got very good at
reinventing the wheel which reinventing
the wheel has a very bad name right
people think reinventing the wheel is
wasting your time reinventing the wheel
in science can mean generating a
hypothesis not knowing whether anybody
has come up with it before coming up
with the predictions that follow from it
the experiments you would run all of
those things and then you go to the
library very frequently you'll find
somebody did have the hypothesis before
and they went through the work of
testing it and what you get to do then
is check how good you were at figuring
out a what they would find be how you
would test it all of the things that
you're going to need to know so it might
take you years to generate a good
hypothesis the experiments that follow
from it and then run the experiments
where it would take you hours to do it
mentally and then check how you did
relative to the people who did the
relevant work so you can train yourself
by checking against what's already been
done and I think that that's a very
useful technique we don't teach people
enough of we tend to teach them the
results of experiments as if that's the
key thing rather than put them through
the exercise of generating them
themselves good luck by the way ok if
the virus was lab generated and
therefore highly exploratory is it more
likely that the virus would take an
increasingly volatile and harmful
trajectory or to attenuate more rapidly
versus the trajectory of viruses in
general great question I don't think we
know I think in general my concern is
that we not give the virus more room in
which to evolve that the the thing
becomes more frightening the more
instances of it exists in the world
because each of those instances is an
opportunity for innovations and so even
if it evolves in the direction of being
more benign I don't want it to be more
persistent and since what it is trying
to do is persist I'd like to give it as
few opportunities to discover new ways
of persisting as possible and so that
means effectively blocking access to new
people not only people anything it can
infect but prime
Merilee people and that if we were to do
that the chances of us stamping it out
the way the original Tsar's Cove
disappeared are increased and that's
really what we should be hoping for is
to drive it to zero and the more
innovation room it has the less likely
we are to succeed at that all right next
question
hello hello back let's see next question
recently there's been wide interest in
scientific evidence for benefits of
meditation especially that of Zen
Buddhism what's your opinion funny you
should ask
I suck at meditating I'm really almost
impossibly bad at it I do other things
that I think have some of the benefits
of it but I just really don't have very
much hope of getting good I did I was on
a panel with Sam Harris in Australia
year ago year and a half ago something
and he gave a workshop and anyway I
enjoyed it but I still don't feel like I
was any good at it
that said scientifically speaking I
frequently find that when I follow my
own understanding of biology and I carry
it through to its logical conclusion I
land somewhere that sounds to me a lot
like what I understand Buddhism to to
believe so I think there's a lot to
Buddhism there's probably a lot to
meditation and so anyway if it works for
you I think do it it sure isn't gonna be
harmful to you and to the extent that
it's philosophically deep you know by
virtue of being connected to Buddhism
all the better okay can leftists reclaim
free thinking and labor reform yeah this
is a tough one I think we need to be
broader minded about what leftists are
you know and I said and it resonated for
some people on a past podcast that what
makes me a progressive is the fact that
I know that we absolutely need progress
of a major form or we're gonna go
extinct and so therefore I have to be a
progressive but
doesn't mean I'm signed up for the
things that progressives tend to
advocate for I think this is the same
question
in some sense we need an enlightened
left to figure out what progress looks
like and at the point that we have an
enlightened left doing that then all the
other things will follow naturally can
we reclaim the left from the numskulls
who are in charge of it at the moment I
don't think that should be our objective
I think we should make them obsolete
that's the better plan okay Brett please
take a moment to read this when you have
an opportunity and it comes with a URL
that I do not recognize Oh looks like
the hunt for patient zero I think I know
who patient zero would be in such a URL
but I will look at it anyway it's an
interesting story okay what do you think
about the sentiment my voice won't be
heard unless I smash bricks into the
store windows I don't like that
sentiment I don't think it works and
frankly I think it's typically a
rationalization by people who want to
smash bricks into windows because it's
fun so anyway yeah I don't think very
much of it hmm chickens walk in a big
circle ending up back at their roost
just in time every night so they don't
get very far no no no no no no you think
I'm asking how far free-range chickens
could go I was asking about free-range
eggs which if they can get anywhere at
all it's basically just downhill okay
love you Brett
but the center-right candidate will
quickly be labeled a Nazi and the
center-left candidate a socialist the
idea is DOA I am oh well I disagree and
I would spell that out if I was more
confident of my spelling yeah look
they're gonna get labeled all kinds of
things and in fact we've got to have a
talk about there's not much we can do
about this nopsi thing except recognize
that the term is being
used so frequently in such a stupid
context that it's losing its meaning and
frankly I'm angry at everybody who's
doing that because if there's one term
you don't want to screw up it's not see
you're gonna need that one at some point
and you don't want to have ruined it so
cut it out guys but as far as Socialists
go we have badly misunderstood this one
and you know there will be those who
look at my kovat haircut and hear me
saying things that aren't completely
derisive about socialism they'll think
AHA we got him this time but no it's not
like that
okay socialism doesn't work I think the
reason that socialism doesn't work is
crystal clear that does not cause me to
fear all socialists it causes me to fear
socialists who wish to impose socialism
but that's not what most socialists are
doing it's not what Bernie Sanders is
doing so anyway I don't fear socialists
even though I know socialism is a dead
end and often a dangerous one but we
should have that conversation so that
everybody is armed with the same model
or if the model is wrong somebody can
tell me what's wrong with it and I can
fix mine but anyway for another day okay
Frederick Vaughn if you are wrong that
is not what the back stories indicate
the chickens live a brave life of
adventure I don't know what conflict
I've walked into here but it's
fascinating and chickens are central
that much I can tell the generational
hormone hypothesis is an evolutionary
hypothesis and there's a lot of
statistics from both the human and
animal populations to support it okay so
somebody really wants me to check into
this I guess I should check into all
right you got my attention
hello Brett do you attempt to position
yourself as a scholar on this program
from an Objectivist a political
standpoint in other words please talk
about how your worldview informs your
role as a scholar podcaster yeah this is
simple this is simple I have a rule it's
explicit sometimes I put it on the board
for students so that they can formalize
it in their own minds and adopt it
because I think it's the right one it's
like this it is natural for your
scientific perspective to influence your
political perspective and your ideology
totally normal it is completely
unacceptable for your political beliefs
or ideology to influence your science
what you're getting here on this podcast
is me as I actually am right the only
thing that's different on this podcast
from who I actually am is that I curse
more in real life and I don't do it on
this podcast when I can avoid it because
I don't want to get demonetised for no
reason but if we put that aside in
general you're getting me as I am you
getting me as my students saw me and the
point is look I'm being honest with you
about the relationship between these two
things what I think is true
scientifically influences what I want
politically and I'm not embarrassed
about that it doesn't go the other way
and that's important any scientist who
doesn't maintain that border is suspect
and so anyway you're not getting one or
the other you're getting both if it's
not clear to you
that one that's something I say is on
one of those channels and not the other
you could ask but I will try to make it
clear and probably should just trust
your gut about which part of my my
worldview you're hearing at that given
moment okay let's see hello Brett do you
attempt to visit oh that's the same one
okay I think employees of prisons
nursing homes and meatpacking plants get
little or no paid time off and they are
paid very little is just mandating paid
time off going to help a lot well look I
think a lot of people are underpaid and
to the extent that important functions
like nursing homes and prisons and
meatpacking plants
are essentially taking advantage of
their workers in a way that has
externalized costs in the form of
presumably brutality in prisons and
neglect in nursing homes and pathogens
spreading and packing plants you know it
comes back to haunt us in other forms so
yeah we should we should build a system
that doesn't do that we should price
everything much better than we do in
most cases okay
I have reached the end of the questions
this has been very interesting I am
looking forward to having Heather back
to make the sound of my voice less
dominant and to increase the richness of
the conversation but in any case
interesting experiment all right
please like subscribe comment spread the
word about how we're going to roust
these decrepit clowns from their
position in our would-be Democratic
Republic and I will see you all next
time
you