good how are you I'm doing well you said
you wanted to record do you want me to
enable recording on your site - or shall
I just send you the file or are you just
gonna just sending me the follows fun
okay okay well what's what's like what's
life for you been in this strange thing
are you doing online classes so what is
what does that look like yep so there
was the huge transition to doing
everything online I was helped by the
fact that I always already had a lot of
material recorded online yeah ready to
go and a lot more experience than some
of my colleagues with using these media
so yeah that's that's been pretty sort
of hectic but it's stabilizing now and
we'll see what's going to emerge out of
it III the university is kind of
optimistic I think naively so that there
will be holding in-person classes in
September and I I doubt that I think
we'll be doing virtual classrooms until
2021
so we'll see what how that falls out I
understand why the university is being
optimistic because you know they depend
on international students and their
funding yeah and so but on the other
hand if you know if they dragged a lot
of people here and those people get
really sick they're gonna get sued for
the ground so they're just like and I I
don't envy being in the position of the
administrators trying to weigh these
decisions out this is what I'm glad to
be a minyan doing and doing my work so I
mean other things the the weather here
has exacerbated the condition because
it's what it's May 12th and normally by
that time Canada is in the midst of a
lovely spring and we had snow and ice
yesterday kind of thing all right right
and so that's that's adding to the
grimness the instability
the weather is also really affecting the
manures in my ear so that has been
particularly particularly difficult for
me in fact
yeah I might warn you that at one point
you'll see me freeze because it means
I'm restabilizing my vision okay just
take that into account but I you know
I've had to decide that I have to keep
doing what I do I mean I paced things
and I do the exercises and the
interventions but I can't I can't stop
doing things because I might have an
attack it's I just can't decide I can't
live that way I got to keep going
forward so and you know I was before I
was being very private about it so the
alternative is I have to just basically
tell everybody about it and it means I'm
not having an epileptic seizure I'm not
taking drugs I'm not drunk right right
I'm not having some weird affective
response to what you said just give me a
moment or two and and then we'll get
back to it
so that's been that then the other thing
which is I don't know how to what the
correct attitude is for this to
representing it in a way that I find
morally appropriate but I'll just say it
and I'll depend on your good charity
um the Colgate crisis that has increased
the relevancy of my work considerably
and so more and more people are
interested in it and contacting me and
inviting me to projects and to
conferences virtual ones of course you
know and doing more stuff about the
intersection between the coab aid crisis
and the meeting crisis we perhaps talked
about this the way it exacerbates a lot
of the conditions of the meeting crisis
so I mean what is what what should be my
response there I shouldn't be happy that
my work is more relevant because the
proximate cause of that is well a
worldwide disaster but I'm appreciative
of the fact that that's the case
and I'm also encouraged by the fact that
a lot of people are from my work helpful
during this time and I mean I've been
supplementing that awakening from the
meeting crisis with the voices with
verve a key
series and also with the I've been I've
been live-streaming my meditation course
for free um and that's also been having
like a very terrific response so I guess
what I would say is the relevancy of my
work in the sense that it's mattering
and helping is giving me sort of
strengthened meaning in life during
what's in some ways a really really
challenging time I mean I'm like don't
get me wrong
compared to many people first of all I'm
in Canada in Toronto which is great
right um and I have a privileged
position my income is secure because I
can do it virtually right and I have
permanent status and all that sort of
thing so I'm not saying woe is me come
right many people are much worse off
than I am that's why I'm really hesitant
about trying to express this in a
morally appropriate way but you know I
do
I am grateful I guess for the fact that
my work matters and is helping and that
helps me that helps me yeah yeah yeah I
can I can very much understand that you
very much understand that how what what
are the things that going so is a pastor
of a small church of course you always
want your church almost every pastor I
know wants their church to be a little
bit bigger a little bit you know more
successful and all of that and then you
go online and then you have a youtube
channel and then you gain more attention
and then you get more invitations and
requests for interviews and things like
that and then suddenly you have the
opposite problem of filtering okay lose
what I say yes to who do I say no to and
in many ways your I would imagine your
situation is quite parallel to mine
because you do have your day job that
you are you know in a university but at
the same time now you have these things
and they do sort of go together but
they're not exactly the same so yeah
that's true
it's it's a difficult it's a difficult
and tricky balance in some ways yeah
because I think and I think I should
think I have responsibilities beyond now
just about my responsibilities to my
students I'm talking about my
professional responsibilities not my
personal ones but now I think I have
equally a professional responsibility to
other people who studied my work even if
they are not officially my students and
and trying to balance that out and
trying to figure out you know who to
talk to it's like you said you can't
talk to everybody but the problem is I'm
getting because of what I mentioned
about the relevancy sort of increasing
I'm getting both more requests and
higher-quality requests to write so it's
it's it's it's truly well you know it's
a it's the Chinese curse may you live in
interesting times right and so that's
how it's going for me how is it going
for you it's it's going it's strange you
know one of the things I've actually
again through this this pandemic thought
a lot about your work and different
different points that you made in in
awakening from the meaning crisis have
have come to relevance for me through
this process which has been very
interesting one of one of which was
immediately I saw this pandemic as a
disruption in everybody's sort of a
shamanic a shamanic episode that
everybody's patterns were disrupted
which suddenly affords all sorts of new
opportunities and challenges for people
and as you know for churches this this
was very much the case because suddenly
well the first week of the crisis it was
shall we open or shall we closed and
then very quickly County of Sacramento
came and said you're all closed and then
churches which as we're now
contemplating okay when we have the
green light to open how can we do so
safely we begin to appreciate that even
just common aspects of worship and I
mean most of my work is face to face
large groups that involve worship which
is singing which is you know
spelling all sorts of droplets all over
the room that we never thought of small
groups and so all of this is
tremendously disrupted and so in my
congregation I have as many
congregations a high percentage of
individuals who would be at high risk
from this this same group of people
especially in my church has near zero
capacity for managing all of the tools
like zoom that could mediate this and so
you meet the one thing that everyone in
the church knows how to use which is the
telephone that suddenly becomes plan a
and so we have we we immediately created
with my church council my governing
board a system so that everyone in the
church would be contacted every week by
somebody and leadership of the church so
so we can keep tabs of an on each other
and we're very grateful for the fact
that no one in the church has come down
with the virus and Sacramento has in
many ways done very well in this
pandemic our rates are very low but very
quickly you begin to recognize how
dependent especially many of our seniors
many of our widows have been emotionally
on their their weekly rhythms love life
within the church right
the you know the as a pastor women's
Bible studies are a daughter Church of
ours bought a building from a church
that was close at closing and the church
gave them a tremendous price on it which
afforded that new church to be able to
occupy the building and purchase it but
one of their requests was can our
women's Bible study keep meeting in
other words the church had closed but
the level of community that that many of
these women's Bible studies have is you
know is really that they are they're
tremendously dependent upon their well
being
in these Bible studies and so and so a
lot of this has been you know okay how
can we continue to support and encourage
I have a number of people in my
congregation who struggle with various
degrees of mental illness right right
and and some of them don't understand
what's going on and then you know now
it's been months and it might be months
still before we can even have any
getting together much less any sense of
normalcy and even when that happens we
recognize that many of the people will
just you know social distancing masks
they're not gonna want to do any of this
and so so we're we're dealing with all
of that but at the same time I think
there as with all of these things there
are almost always upsides and
opportunities that develop and just as
sort of this shamanic disruption breaks
up and troubles people in terms of their
normal patterns of well-being it also
affords new opportunities for new
discover discoveries and new patterns of
well-being and I think I think it will
be very interesting to see how this
changes people for the long term and we
don't know but will people have
discovered new things for me personally
you know a lot of the work that I did I
did by myself in my little office in my
chair
and I go on so a lot of my colleagues
kind of laughed at me because they're
like oh you were making videos before
now you just keep doing it now so it's
good and bad I have two so I have two of
I have five children one lives in an
apartment in another area of town
another lives on the East Coast
but three of those adult children are
now living at home and they they started
their academic careers home schooling
and now they're going to college at home
and so you know my daughter
who is you just today finished her last
exam for her college work and I really
feel for her because you know no
graduation and so that's that's not the
way I would have liked to have seen her
and her four years of college but that's
that's where things are well I'd like to
pick up on what you just said there
because I think it's very relevant to
some of the things I've been thinking
about because I've been thinking about
how the kovat crisis let's talk about
the the what you call the downside first
I knowledge is an upside we'll return to
it I want to focus on the downside right
now there's a sense of which and Chris
and I Christopher master Pietro and I've
been doing a lot of work on this how you
know the Cole big crisis is causing a
kind of domicile you're describing it
there people are losing home and if you
remember in the corporation in the in
the series and in the book we talked
about an important aspect of the meaning
crisis being you know a sense of Dom
aside at least you know cosmological Dom
aside and certain degrees of cultural
Nam aside people feel sort of cultural
shock within their own worldview and of
course people are like quite literally
losing the places where they feel safe
and at home even in you know the routine
patterns of their life and there's like
there's ecology there's a deep
reciprocal narrowing going on the
options in the world and the options for
who they can be are narrowing um and as
you said relationships connectedness is
being severed the religio is being
undermined the shamanic disruption as
you said and this is exacerbating
existing mental health difficulties in
fact I think we should be talking now in
preparing for sort of mental health
tsunami once we're out of you know being
fixated not inappropriately so but we're
fixated on you know the biological and
economic aspects of this but the mental
health aspects are going to be Titanic
yeah like you take a look at people that
went through
periods of the Great Depression or
things like that you can see them
psychologically altered for the rest of
their life by this kind of phenomena so
I think a lot of the mechanisms that we
talked about in them you know in the
meeting crisis are are being accelerated
and then the people if you know the
background meeting crisis means that for
many people there's an there isn't a
bigger thing that they can relate to to
offer as a counterbalance a counter
attraction to this narrowing there isn't
there isn't the something greater that
they matter to and participate in that
acts as a counterbalance to this
shrinking that and so you know you
you've probably heard the stats are
going up about suicide and domestic
violence and substance abuse and all
kinds of things and this is I think also
you know in the indicative and I talked
with Johannes NIDA hoser about this
about how we got into this Cartesian
framework where you know everything was
centered upon our subjectivity and
everything was relative to our
subjectivity now the thing is when
people are actually thrown back on to
their subjectivity like they are now
they often find that it is not very deep
it doesn't have very powerful resources
available to them and the idea that we
are self sufficient self defining beings
is being seriously called into question
so I think that is that's part of why
it's exacerbating the mean crisis I also
find another symptom that's really
interesting and I think you might be
interested in I'm interested in how
spontaneously because you know
mythological thinking is emerging around
this but you know I talked to Zach Stein
and he got he you know he is
mythological language to talk about this
he talked about the war in heaven in his
famous essay on medium and it was really
really interesting when you hear people
talk like people that are otherwise self
declared secular will say things like
feel like we're under judgment and it's
of course interesting that the word
crisis originally means judgment and and
then and I think about sort of the
barely implicit narrative that people
have I mean it's kind of like being in
the Old Testament if right because
there's this there's this almost demonic
invisible ubiquitous presence out there
that can strike you undeservedly
independent of the moral quality of your
life strike you down and it's demanding
purity codes from us really harsh and
drastic purity codes so you sort of in
this like you're sort of in this like
you know like I don't mean any insult to
the Old Testament you know what I'm
trying to invoke is an S yeah right and
so and so you know archetypal
mythopoetic stuff is coming up well and
of course those two factors are
interacting with each other because if
you're starving for meaning and
mythopoetic stuff is coming up well
you're gonna latch onto that I mean I
think that's one of the points that
Jordan Pederson
his rise to fame just demonstrates over
and over again when people are starving
for meaning and you offer them some
mythopoetic stuff man they'll come
running right so those two factors in my
mind are really feeding on each other
and then and I get a thing with David
fuller and rebel wisdom and I've been
thinking a lot about this and then you
get sort of attendant upon that weird
mythopoetic space you're getting the
generation of all kinds of crazy
conspiracy theories as people are
desperately trying to find the narrative
order behind all the chaos and then that
act that exacerbates all the other
things right because if you're into
conspiracy theories that tends to be a
nice place for a myth or poetic imagery
but you know conspiracy theories also
feed on a hunger for meaning and all of
these things are really spinning around
each other in a really powerful and
accelerating way and so that's that's my
sort of I mean I have more but that's
sort of my you know gist analysis of why
this crisis is really you know really
amping up the meaning crisis for people
in powerful and dramatic ways sorry that
was a bit of a speech but there was a
lot that was good and I saw I saw
I really appreciated
you know what you said with wit and
rebel wisdom about the about this
especially about the conspiracy theories
and in fact I I included a slide of you
and my Sunday sermon on this because
part of what I think I mean I agree with
everything that you've just said and I
see this happening and I you know almost
think you could you could rephrase you
could rephrase the psalmist who says you
know the fool says in his heart there is
no God well the fool says in his heart
there is no covin and so you have two
groups of people running around out
there some for whom I mean you have two
and I've been thinking a lot about this
you have to in a sense engage our
mythopoetic capacities to manage a virus
that you know we're not even sure if
viruses are alive they're these weird
you know yes and and so for example and
I watch people with this where some
individuals because again I try to keep
in contact with all of these regular
people completely outside of my internet
people who would never watch any of my
videos and and some of whom you know ah
they don't they don't have any patience
for this they're just gonna go out there
and they're gonna do whatever they want
and they're annoyed by the government
shutdowns and all of this stuff and then
you've got other people who are you know
they're everything I mean like you said
the purity rights everything has to be
cleaned everything has to be washed and
then you try to engage people say well
you know you're gonna have to somehow
balance these two things because you
can't live on one side or the other but
you watch as people sort of naturally
default to you know their personalities
their upbringing all of this but again
it requires a it requires this really
this mythopoetic capacity that we have
to imagine the virus on everything and
and then that of course factors into all
sorts of very natural triggers that
people have for safety and security yes
and also for scapegoating right yep
and all kinds of things well that sort
of brings me to a point that and I
mentioned it in preparatory email I mean
so a bunch of us people I'm talking to
you know like Jordan Hall and Zachary
Stein and Andrew Sweeney and Christopher
Metro they're it's a bunch of these
conversations swirling around each other
also the ones I've had with guy since
talked and johannes mitä Hauser you know
but exact Zach Stein is like he's really
he's been really articulate about this
but he and I had a really good
conversation about this about you know
part of what we're discovering is I'm
gonna use these terms very carefully and
I I would hesitate to use them normally
but I might rust it I can use them
around you it's it's our religious
illiteracy and that is really
exacerbating this he he argues that we
have so lost and we have so lost and I
think he means this both inside and
outside the church and I think that's a
fair thing to say we have so lost the
capacity for a in you know a literate
and wise response to the mythopoetic
machinery I mean Jordan Hall makes a
good point this machine who's going to
come up when we're in really novel
circumstances that's the shamanic
disruption that you point out because
we're try we're grasping on the deepest
kinds of information processing that
have survived the widest possible number
of contexts and we're tapping into that
when trying to exact it and bring it out
and see if that because you know these
things have survived the longest so era
though right you so you're gonna you're
gonna fall back on those now there's all
kinds of problems with that though
there's all kinds of problems and we've
been talking about it and so because
people and this is a part of Jung's
critique right because people have not
been educated they did they have not
gotten a sappy antral education in this
imaginal machinery we we are largely
suffering it rather than making use of
it that's sort of the core of his
argument and he says what this should be
he argues I think quite eloquently there
should be a clarion call to us that we
need to reconsider what it
is that our education is in the service
of that you know and this is where I
agree with Thomas Bjorkman you know our
culture sort of collapsed the to the
de-facto normativity being the market
and you know and he's a financial banker
he's not some crypto Marxist or anything
right
and and the problem is what we're seeing
it's the market person have doesn't have
what we need right now it's not the
right machine in fact the market has
been behaving very poorly in all of this
right and so he says we need to
understand that we should be educating
for normativity
other than the normativity of the market
not excluding those of course people
have to be prepared for making a living
your sector et cetera
but we used to have I mean I grew up as
you know I went to Sunday school which
was a school other than the state school
and what was supposed to happen there
whether or not it did happen for me is
something we can talk about in another
time but was supposed to happen there
was I was supposed to be given education
right in how to deal with this kind of
mythopoetic processing so that I could
use it wisely and not and then you know
it was very clear about this people talk
about archetypes as if they're wonderful
things like you know jewels that they
can put on their shelves and I said no
no architects are really really
dangerous things right they're really
really do anything that's really
powerful and has capacity for tremendous
transformation both of your agency and
of your arena is a very dangerous thing
and if it comes up and you are not
educated in how it can slam you you're
gonna get slammed right you're gonna get
slammed and I think this is really
really important now that wasn't all a
very long preamble like something out of
Hegel for this point which is I've
noticed like I said that the emergence
the spontaneous emergence of a lot of
mythopoetic and religious terminology
and I've noticed that that's weirdly
convergent and there's probably this is
probably not completely unlike
unconfoundedness already independently
before the crisis hit as I was working
on the dialectic yellow ghost project
and I
mentioned this to you before I was
noticing you know how much the language
that people were bringing to this both
in their experience of it and their
theorizing about it was trying to bring
back is that the right word I don't know
what the right verb is but it was they
were using but also trying to renew the
use or change them but they were using a
lot of religious terms right and I
noticed that I was starting to think
about this too and you know just as the
crisis where it was hitting Jordan on
Paul and I have gotten into this
discussion that has unfolded across
several discussions and conversations
about you know the how faith is needed
and what does faith mean in this kind of
context and and then you know these
discussions about if we need to get they
cut did something with this notion of
subjectivity that I think has added deep
religious import that hasn't been
explored enough it needs to be unpacked
and it goes towards that point they made
earlier about people are in their
subjectivity they're finding it's
shallow it's not deep right so Descartes
basically reduces the soul to mind
equates them your soul is just your mind
and just your conscious mom all right
because that's all they cared for
understood and then what it really is is
that moment of where consciousness
touches itself that sort of center of
your subjectivity and so you see the
these identifications take place and
then you know the sense of soul as as as
what it is in Plato and perhaps I don't
know if it's in the Christian tradition
but maybe it is because of its you know
the soul as something as intermediary
between well I'll use the old language
and then I'll use the new language and
then I'll shut up so that you can talk
the old language was the soul the soul
is an intermediary it's the faculty that
mediates between the mysteries of
transcendence and the mysteries of
imminence it's that capacity in you that
puts those two together and it's
something therefore other than just
your mind or even your spirit if your
spirit means your capacity for
aspirational self transcendence or
something like that and that's why the
you know the notion of soul was bound up
with worship because I take worship was
a set of practices that try to relate
the mysteries of transcendence and the
mysteries of imminence now what's the
new language that I found myself using
and I've seen other people using and so
it's not idiosyncratic to me I think
that's a fair thing to say and you
notice that some of this language
precedes the crisis one is the sense
that people are talking about how
there's more Ness that there's an
inexhaustible Ness and man I started
using that term enough everywhere and
reading it I'm seeing this term the
inexhaustible how reality has an
inexhaustible literally that term that
adjective inexhaustible mortis and not
just quantitative qualitative mourners
right and then this is a little bit more
in Eastern philosophy in the kyoto
school but i'm also seeing it in some
continental philosophy the idea of such
nests
there is something about you there is
something about you that
Riz it and this goes to the being mode
there's something about you that is not
captured by any of your categorical
identities there is and I hate using
this word because it's so part of
narcissism but there's a uniqueness to
you there's a here now near suchness
it's irreplaceable that nothing else now
every everything has that but human
beings have that you know considerable
death and so if you'll allow me to licky
in terms to give you a bridge back why I
see this so religiously I think the
morning is a way of talking about you
know the mystery that we participate in
and write them the mysteries of
participation to use a platonic idea and
and the suchness is the mystery of
individuation and and Tillich sees those
always in a constant tension and the
soul is sort of the capacity that you
can't resolve the tension the soul is
the capacity that constantly mediates
between them now I'm attracted to that
because this is a non Cartesian and I
would say non supernatural istic way of
understanding soul and I'm seeing it
emerging in happy
they're trying to talk about these new
forms of dialogue and discourse and how
they're doing this not just to give
information or change people's minds
they're trying to get into right
relationship and think about faith and
right relationship they're trying to get
into right relationship with himself
with each other and reality and this
kind of thinking in this way of talking
is coming to the fore sorry I that was a
lot to say but I had to say a lot
because because I wanted to put it out
there I I think that was really very
helpful I took a lot of notes and
reported so I can watch it again
I've been so my last couple of videos I
had been reading Robert Putnam he wrote
Bowling Alone and then in the in 2010 he
put out American grace which so he's a
political scientist and he was working
on you know trying to figure out
politics and religion and some of that
and and he landed on you know he landed
on the term religiosity it has trying to
get out of that video okay as it's a
very long video as as trying to get a
handle on you know what happened because
we had the strangeness we had the
strangeness of when John FK ran for
president to the United States his
Catholicism was a very big deal yeah and
then when you had uh you know another
senator from Massachusetts John Kerry
running his Catholicism was no deal at
all right well the religiosity was a
question and now in fact in the next
election will likely have a German
Frisian who whatever Church background
he might claim comes from the Reformed
Church of America norman vincent peale
running against a Roman Catholic but the
you know Calvinist reformed all the way
through norman vincent peale
Christianity versus Roman Catholicism
has nothing to do with any of their
identities in terms of how they relate
to each other in public so I was digging
into this book and you know at the point
that I've made many times on my videos
that
church attendance in North America
reaches its peak during the Cold War of
course of course and and Putnam made the
observation in the book that women had
always already had high degrees of
religiosity almost always constantly
higher than men people of color almost
always higher degrees of religion well
African Americans and Hispanics Asians
less so but what really caused the huge
surge in religiosity that that held the
culture from the Cold War
up until the counterculture where it
started to wane in the 60s were
basically the men coming back from World
War two yeah yeah that that experience
of and you know I really recommend Ken
Burns documentary the Pacific was in
many ways captured the you know what
does war do to even those who survived
it mm-hmm
you know we're experiencing a we're
experiencing a dislocation we're
experiencing a disruption but war just
you know rips people open inside and
they came back from that I don't know if
you've read um I think it's unbroken I
very yeah don't don't watch the movie
the book is because the movie is that
the movie is a trashing of the book oh
that's too bad the the book so you have
so here you have this guy who was you
know he was Italian so wasn't you know
the churches were kind of over there has
this in survives this incredible thing
of being adrift at sea only to be
rescued by the Japanese to be just
horrendously abused in Japanese prison
camps and survives all of this comes
back to North America marries the woman
of his dreams only to become an
alcoholic
yeah and just trashes his life and then
he goes to a Billy Graham crusade goes
down the aisle and again I got I have to
be careful here because a lot of in the
church there's often a lot of problems
people think well if I become a
Christian you know I'll I'll get rid of
my alcohol of it alcohol issues no so
the story is exceptional but basically
becomes a Christian goes you know at a
Billy Graham crusade finds no no longer
has a trump problem with alcohol and
lives a remarkably different life that's
his story and and you look at how
religiosity this which which i think is
and something I was just working on for
my next video well okay what are we
talking about when we're talking about
religiosity um you know you and I spoke
about religio and that comes up in it
has to do in many ways with I think
you're exactly right we're the more
nests and the suchness yeah you
negotiate those two realms yeah and you
do so communally because obviously we're
we're deeply we're deeply woven into
each other and and part of the
disruption of this pandemic is that so
many people in North America people live
in smaller and smaller units than just
about anybody anyplace else in the world
yeah unlike you know not extended
families like in many other places in
the world so people are now divorced
from each other a lot of our contact is
mediated through these screens which are
which are false frankly and and now the
the studies about why zoom calls are so
exhausting are coming to the fore that
you know there's all this there's all
this bullshitting that the screens are
doing to us and and so I you know we'll
see
I at this point I think one thing we
should be able to say is that we really
have no idea how this how deeply this
pandemic will disrupt what we have taken
to be normal for a good
of years when I can oh go ahead oh and
and and that both both helpful
religiosity and religiosity
will and just and and that's manifest I
mean the conspiracy theories are just
sort of the are just sort of the
narrative cusp of that exactly exactly
exactly
um so I agree with everything you said
I guess what what I was trying to say is
that I think one of the things that it's
going to come out of this and I think
it's consistent with what you just said
because what I see people searching for
is they're searching for in their in
their search for meaning and a kind of
meaning in this homelessness you'll
allow me so metaphors they're searching
for lost faculties there are searching
for law machinery that has been largely
back rounded sometimes even you know
suppressed or marginalized they're
searching for lost faculties of meaning
cultivation and wisdom cultivation
that's what that's what I was trying to
uh that's what I'm trying to understand
with this notion of soul and its
capacity for faith let me just be
quickly that I understand faith as an
extension of what I was talking about in
awakening from the meaning crisis not as
the assertion of propositions but I try
to put it this way it's the wedding of
the emergence of mind to the emergence
of a world that affords right
relationship to himself to others and to
being right it's more of this continuity
of contact this this ongoing enhancement
preservation celebration enhancement of
religio and people are trying to figure
out and I think very fairly not as
explicitly as what we're talking about
it here because this is an analysis
right of course but I think they're
trying to figure out what is the faculty
that does that it's if you know it what
is it
and I was impressed by you making use
again of the the distinction between the
spirit of geometry in the spirit of
finesse but I wanted to add one thing to
it that I don't know you might well you
might want to push back on it a little
bit
should be fun which is that I mean it's
at least in how I read Pascal the spirit
of finesse is that aspect it would be
the three non prepositional kinds of
knowing that I talked about finesse is
obviously a procedural term right it's
doing things with finesse right timing
right placement but it also requires
respect Travel situational awareness and
it requires that you have that sort of
Co fitted nosov the agent and the arena
right that's you know the famous thing
the heart has reasons that reason knows
not of right and so I wanted to say that
I agree with you that trying to find
trying to find if you put it if you'll
allow me to play with the f's the
Faculty of and these are all
interpenetrating the Faculty of faith
and finesse because you were already
putting them together and I see them as
putting together but the thing I wanted
to say was you seem to be making an
argument and I participated in you
crafting that argument before and you
know I think it's a good argument so I
mean this is not some silly village
idiot atheist you know refutation of
your argument or something like that
because I'm trying to build on the
machinery that you're tapping into but
you seem to be arguing that that
requires that the finesse aligns us with
you know treating God conceiving I don't
know what the right word is all relating
to God as a person that seemed to be the
gist of your argument and while I
acknowledged I think that has clearly
you know clear evidence in many people's
lives I was thinking but if the finesse
is ultimately non propositional aren't
there deep ways of finesse that aren't
bound into the propositional structure
of narrative and the example that comes
to mind of course is for me being a Tai
Chi player Taoism a Tai Chi
I mean if thou ISM is anything it's a
religion of finesse and flow that's how
it works and it gives me very deep
finesse and flow and it puts me into I
think the right relationships I'm
talking about yet it doesn't seem to
have a narrative structure to it and
doesn't seem to involve me in personhood
now I'm gonna give you some information
to throw back at me or we're playing
catch not war you I'll throw the ball to
you then you throw it back to me that's
a better metaphor it's one of the things
you might say is it you could be sort of
a union al Jordan Peterson you could say
well yes I acknowledge that that you
know that's even possible and profound
but notice that what you said earlier
John that you have a lot of mythopoetic
stuff coming up and this tends to be
expressed you know in in a dreamlike
aspect of the mind and that seems to be
inherently narrative and what you know
so don't we need something in the mythos
that deals with that personalized
aspects of things so that's something
you can use so I'm sorry you can tell
I've been talking to you in my head
right you can tell that right so I may
get a chance I'm putting it out for you
so there's one part where you know I
think the you know faith as finesse is
really important but that seems deeply
you know a very viable and real option
in a non narrative framework I know it
personally
right but nevertheless I do take
seriously the concern that the
intermediary through which the
mythopoetic expresses itself is kind of
like a dreamlike aspect of the mind
which is very narrative ly woven I get
that so there I sort of set your problem
well I think and I very much take
seriously I mean when we've talked about
this before that the fact I mean when I
talked about what's AV the narrative
sort of being the machine code and and
you rightly noted that you know nerrit
narratives are learned or learn are
things that are things that we learn and
and then you know later with you know
with the you know with the wonderful
video that Sevilla made about one of my
videos you know where she really focused
in on on the sort of you know religion
being the the jpeg of being which is
this lossy compression scheme by which
we we take all of this and and I think
it's you know I think it's important I
mean my dog
my dog is at least to my knowledge
incapable of kinds of narrative yeah
capacities that we are yet my dog is a
has being and is relatable and is an
agent in this arena and all of those
things and so I I think I think
narrative is the kind of thing that will
likely be especially given certain
cultural parameters like my own
inescapable I almost can't think without
it
just like I almost can't think without
the English language and and ability and
and so and so just as just as we we
touched on in in our previous
conversation when I presented the
argument to you and and I think you
rightly countered me it's it's not
really an argument about ontology and
and I think that's correct okay but but
at this point you know when I even when
I look at sake Ovid you know we relate
to kovat personally and and if you just
it's it's so natural to us that we
personify this virus all over the place
and that's that's just such a handy tool
and we always have to catch ourselves
biessing it as I'll I'll remind
sometimes we're cleaning off our
groceries arm I remind my wife you know
this thing doesn't jump you know it hit
it isn't seeking us out we but we act as
if it is and so we we use this narrative
we use these narratives and and I think
you know I think that is part of the the
gift of narrative and the gift of
approaching approaching the universe as
if it is personalized and personified
but again I don't think that answers the
question but but this gets to the point
of whether we can't answer the question
and whether we need to answer the
question and right I'm happy about that
I'm so I yeah that's an excellent
response and I'm happy with you know if
you'll allow me your shifting it into
being pragmatic in the philosophical
stuff
every day sense but then and then like I
said so that's why I shifted it III
thought I don't think it was clear
enough I've shifted it to a pragmatic
arena I'm a chi Chi player and this puts
me in right relationship it enhances my
religio makes me more insightful makes
me more compassionate allows me to shift
perspective you know it makes me wiser
not wise but wiser right and in that and
that's taking place non-narrative lee
and it's making use of other powerful
mechanisms like our like our innate
capacity for getting into the flow state
which is also powerful and universal etc
etc so what I'm saying is um the the
pragmatism seems to if you're being
consistent with it as your criteria it
seems to commit you to a kind of
pluralism I think that there are many
wet I know I know deep deep guard I love
it I know I know I am your friend and if
you want to back out you know I John I'm
from New Jersey I love a good fight
[Laughter]
continue to discuss it seems to you have
no idea the lengths you would have to go
to to offend me and to have me what back
out of this relationship
I have no idea well I know and I want to
come back to that because I think
there's a connection between finesse and
faithfulness which isn't the same thing
as faith faith like when I'm faithful to
my partner and I want to be faithful to
her because she's just an amazing person
it doesn't mean that I have a fixed
knowledge or set of beliefs about her at
all right my beliefs about her will
change and some of the ones that I held
as most dear will even be abandoned they
are because she's not fixed right
faithfulness is that's what I mean it's
not closure it's not completeness its
continuity of contact it's maintaining
right relationship that's both right for
me and right for and I don't mean
morally right I mean in the sense of
right-handed X dexterous facilitate
adaptive you know things like that not
excluding moral rightness but I'm not
reducing it tomorrow right right right
so I appreciate the fact that
you you you like your faithful to the
conversation but I don't want this to
generate into defeat debate because I'm
not presenting this to you as here's my
position and now you must defend
yourself and saying it seems to me
because I've seen I saw Jordan making
this same kind of move right now and I
know you're influenced by him that's not
a criticism that's just an observation
right and and then when you go into the
guts of pragmatism which I have like
especially James like what does James
comes out of this like a
dyed-in-the-wool pluralist he says this
is the if your standard is how well
people's lives are being lived and how
how much finesse and faithfulness they
can bring to bear you have to conclude a
kind of parallelism I mean that's what I
see in in the saint of pragmatism James
right and so that's what I'm saying to
you
well I think I think that's very fair
and of course you know all of the
Christian traditions are have
Christianity in common but they all
accentuate different things and and so
and what's what's interesting to me
about what I'm about to say is that when
you when you are raised in a tradition
in the religio in the religiosity of it
you you are formed into certain aspects
of it that you are never conscious of
until far later there's opportunity to
become conscious of it and so for
example my particular brand of Calvinism
comes through the Dutch Calvinists and
through secessionists of the Dutch
Calvinists of the likes of herman bob
inc and abram kuiper and and kyeper
piper was us I don't know how much you
know about Abram kuiper I don't know
anything at all ignorant okay he wasn't
he was it was a it was a very
interesting guy bobbing could Kuiper
were in the latter half of the 19th
century and they were very much in a
time when the modernism theological
liberalism political liberalism the
Netherlands was you know no longer at
its peak as a as an empire anymore but
a thriving trading culture and both
kuiper and Bob Inc try to maintain their
religiosity in the face of modernity
mm-hmm and and so in in some ways what
that yielded for them and my reading of
it is kind of a proto neo-orthodoxy you
know they came to they had to deal with
some of the same things that Bart had to
deal with right but a generation earlier
and and kuiper so bobbing stayed he was
probably the better of the two
theologians but but kuiper was an
enormous lis productive man he
eventually became prime minister of the
Netherlands founded the Free University
of the Netherlands and then developed
this sort of pluralism for the
Netherlands that eventually of course
the Netherlands became quite a
pluralistic country so my roots my
Christian roots have a degree of
respecting pluralism within it and I
think that comes out of this the certain
element of Calvinism that that I don't
think you'll find alien that talks about
the the absolute strangeness of God yeah
and and so and so given that kind of
base assertion that affords a degree of
of freedom in terms of understanding the
non-essential 'ti of narrative because
narrative is something that we need and
you know Calvin and many others spoke a
lot about you know if there's anything
you understand about Calvin it's about
you know God's accommodating our needs
and so you know and one of the things
you know so it's really fun having
listened to your whole course when
you're presenting it and now having a
little bit of distance from it because I
find my thinking is very slow and and
I'm always curious about what bubbles up
and some of those latter lecture
you talked about you know you talked
about some of these issues of you know
nothing appears real to us if it's to
how could I say it um if it's too
perfect if it's too complete there
always needs to be that frontier between
for lack of a better word the infinite
and the finite and and I think you know
your language of both the both the
morning and the suchness gets at that
yes yeah and so and so for me and and
this gets borne out and this gets borne
out in in the most what has been the
most enduringly controversial aspect of
Calvinism which is which are God's
decrees and I remember when you're
treating Luther I thought well I think
you got some Calvin and your Luther
there well it's probably true given my
you know the my religious upbringing yes
yeah no but but there's this but there's
this sense of in that you know as is so
often the case in some of these in some
of these dogmas and doctrines that there
are beneath them there are observations
of reality that are trying to get
expressed by that dogma and that
doctrine and and almost always because
these are you know our dogmas and our
doctors and our institutions these are
all human these are all human inventions
and therefore all limited and imperfect
and that's another piece of the
Calvinism for so and so you know all of
these things are our attempts to try to
understand a world that is too big for
us and a world that is too complex for
us and and so where that leaves us is is
finally a Calvinist has to make his
peace with the pluralism of the world by
virtue of the fact that that the
Calvinist confesses that he doesn't know
it all he can't see it all and any
system he develops is
going to be too limited and will finally
fall short of the reality that that God
has created so and so the in that way
I'm not uncomfortable with you know it's
interesting to me that that the
pragmatists arose at the same time as as
kuiper and Bob Inc we're working because
even though you know some of the
pragmatists are often in America and you
know the Dutchman are over in the
Netherlands Netherlands has long been a
very porous place it's too small a place
to really have enough for itself and so
they reach into all other places to
figure things out so I don't know if any
of that makes any sensor as helpful it
was helpful and no that was very helpful
and I mean III take it that part of why
Cowen is the source of this is because
of Calvin's deep empathy towards
idolatry right and forth I mean you know
the human imagination is a permanent
factory for the production of idols and
that sort of thing but you know and so I
appreciate that and I appreciate you
saying that but notice part of the part
of the problem again and where I'm
trying to sort of let's let's agree that
you sort of agreed it's not
metaphysically necessary that seems to
be the case and and I've acknowledged
and I talked about it
I think it's indispensable and and that
does so we're not we're not self we're
not you know we're not cameras heroes
we're not completely self interpreting
self defining beings clearly okay that's
all good now I said if the function was
you know finesse and faithfulness I can
see like I said I you know there's other
things that have that and that don't use
a personalistic mythos but I'm also I'm
also thinking well but maybe they're you
know I'm gonna use this word I'm going
to use it in the ancient Greek sense we
you know that the demonic aspects of our
existence that we have these archetypal
patterns and things and we've been there
and there emerge it now and I take Zacks
point to be that you know we're deeply
illiterate in that and this is where you
know talking to Thomas chief Thurman
reading Corps bearers
so helpful you know we've lost how to
relate to the imaginal we've reduced it
again to this fairly subjective
imaginary and so I've been thinking
about this because this is really
relevant to dialectic because here's one
way in which I think personhood
talking someone just knocked on my door
I have to see who it is but keep talking
I'm listening okay so I'm gonna use the
word personhood not personality and
there might be something really
important about personhood is coming out
so when you're involved in these are
biological practices and I take I'm
trying to work out what dialectic is as
a psycho technology that transforms
dialogue into via logos right and so
something happens which is really
interesting you've got of course you've
got the interpersonal relationship
happening within the person and then
there's the interpersonal relationship
and then as I've mentioned to you before
you get this collective flow state and
you get what what Chris and I are
calling the third factor or the Geist
trying to pick up on the German sensors
because it hangs between mind and spirit
and right um and you get this you get
this phenomena and then what what what
I'm trying to do with Chris Smith guy
and these are the people's well in any
circling practices and guy is very
responsive to this criticism these
circling practices they're designed to
just maintain the interpersonal intimacy
in trying to just maintain the intimacy
with yourself and each other and then in
itself is a wonderful thing I love it I
mean it's I'm not disparaging it but
when I said to God but there's no
philosophy I in it right and so what
happens sometimes right in some of the
conversations I have when I'm trying to
reconstruct dialectic India logos is the
intimacy goes from being interpersonal
or interpersonal to being transpersonal
you start to feel an intimate connection
to the logos to the very process of
emerging intelligibility and the sense
that it's coming from some you know from
an inexhaustible aspect both of our own
cognition and of our mind if
it puts you into a soulful relationship
the suchness and the and the mortise are
just there and they're being mediated by
the logos and it's like it's like
there's a special power of internal
intrapersonal and interpersonal context
that I'm I'm trying to acknowledge it
right I'm trying to acknowledge and say
yes there's something there that needs
to be given respect I'm not backing away
from mine on theism or anything like
that I'm not saying them because but I
there's something there and maybe you'll
say well you know this is what Paul was
on Paul the Apostle not you uh but with
the body of Christ or something like
that and that's one you can talk about
that I am eager to hear if you see what
I'm trying to say there's a there's a
there's there's a special privileged
relationship between the logos of speech
and the logos of being and I can only
speak to other people even when I'm
speaking to myself I'm speaking as if
I'm speaking to another person speech
presupposes personhood and if the spoken
logos is one of the most appropriate
participatory symbols of the ontological
logos then the you know the
interpersonal relationship right the
relating a personhood to personhood has
a special kind of privilege did that
make sense as another that makes perfect
sense that makes perfect sense
I think that's I think that's right you
know I mean what do we what do we mean
what are we tricked one of the things
that I've been thinking about a lot and
so you know I looked at the you know
some of the Ryan holiday stoicism and
Peter Bogosian who of course has made a
name for himself of you know talking
parking religious people out of their
religiosity he posted a you know he
posted a a video ten you know from some
other guy ten keys to success and again
this this gets at you know Sevilla's
project of you know what are we looking
for really and and I've thought about
this a lot with you know the religion
that isn't a religion and you know I
eric Weinstein's
you know idea of what we kind of you
know we kind of we kind of tried to ring
all the Jesus smuggling out of
everything so we could get at the pure
you know the pure stuff but then we
realize you know we'd since we took the
1i out and we have to bring the
subjective and the objective back in and
again I like your I like your more
nasaan you're such Nasir slowest makes a
comment in there's this I don't know if
you've ever read Sheldon Ben Hawkins
book a severe mercy
it's a Sheldon Monacan was a student of
CS Lewis he was a he was a Brit and he
the book starts he starts writing about
this he falls in love with with this
with this woman and they become married
and I warn people not to read this book
if they're having trouble with their
relationship especially women because
you know this book is the first part of
this book is this is this story about
again my work of getting down into
sacraments in some ways you know the
intimacy of a other relationship of a
couple is a sacrament of you know what
you're talking about in terms of the all
of this all of this stuff coming
together yeah yeah and so so then Arkin
you know then Arkin begins this just
amazing relationship with this amazing
woman and you know you the way the way
he writes you would almost imagine that
there was there never has been in the
history of the world a relationship a
love better than between these two
individuals now what you once you get to
that kind of peak you know that it's
gonna be a crash and and of course you
know it does come it does come apart and
it's a tragic story and and so part of
why this book has been popular is
because this person was a friend of CS
Lewis and they wrote letters back and
forth Lewis was a great letter writer
and you loose loose talks about the fact
that you know there's it's a weird thing
that you know in a platonic sense that
the form of Apple is you know is the
ultimate Apple and then of course the
Aristotle
we'll come back and say that form of
Apple is somehow less than a real Apple
yeah so you have the more nests and the
suchness very much very much and and so
what are we trying to get at with with
addressing the meaning crisis um we have
at the we have at the we have at our
center a longing for everything and and
when we relate to individual human
beings we have a sense that I am if
we're paying attention at all and we
have any humility whatsoever
we have a sense that we are sitting that
we are sitting across the table from a
being that makes everything else in my
life clearly of lesser value than the
value of that other being yeah even if
they're even if they're the the
alcoholic that's sleeping outside my
door how and and and so we're almost
tantalized by you know and so then when
you get involved I haven't I haven't
visited guy in his circling he's he's
been very deeply connected with one of
our daughter meetups over in Alameda but
I you know having in Christian terms
been part of you know various retreats
communal settings worship practices all
these kinds of things you you get into
these moments where everything seems to
come together the personal the
impersonal and and there's all this
religious language that we have to to
try to you know to try to point to these
things because we always have the sense
that that we can ever get there the book
of ecclesiastes I you know which is just
a amazing book in the Bible which I
think in many ways so speaks to our
world because you know we chapter three
begins with this you know this song that
was was the the birds that you know
after there's a season for everything
and then a little bit later you
he says you know God has placed eternity
in our hearts yes and and I think that
gets into this we unlike my dog can see
and hunger for exactly what you're
talking about
yeah about where all of this comes
together and and Lewis talked about this
as a sin such which is this which is a
kind of a joyful longing that it's it's
it's the joy and the sorrow mixed
together because we we taste it enough
to to it to long for it then yet we we
know we can't grasp it enough so that
it's tainted by sorrow and you know part
of you know part of where I weaved some
of your thought into my sermon last week
is because the book of first Peter keeps
bringing up a very common New Testament
concept of epidemia which is this you
know through Mia which is desire epi is
an over desire and these over over
desires create this restaurant
reciprocal narrowing that I think you
are very well about but there's one use
of epi thermia that that Peter uses when
he and he addresses it to the Angels and
he talks about the gospel as this thing
that the Angels have epidemia for
because they can't taste it like we can
yeah and it's that it's that it's that
place that we sit where you know it
might be through all of these practices
that suddenly we we get this we get this
we see it we get a glimpse of it and our
hearts instantly longed for it and we
want more of it and we get a sense that
nothing short of everything will
actually satisfy it and I think you know
that sort of puts us in a gustin's lap
where are in love us at heart stuff
right
you know because the idea that we long
to consume the whole world yeah so maybe
I basically they were saying I hope now
but I you know
well no no there's just a young you I
was making an argument that there's I'm
not pointing to a doctrine I'm pointing
to a special functional place for
personhood in putting us into that
mediating role by the way it's all
through Plato it's the symposium is
dripping with that that the you
know finite transcendence we're always
we long for what the gods have but we'll
never have it that's why it's always fly
Lia Sophia
we never have Sophia but I was trying to
pick up on that you know that there's
this phenomena right which we're calling
the logos right um you know the
emergence of the the trans jet emergence
because it's between us in the world of
new intelligibility and it seems to
point to kind of you know more nests and
inexhaustible miss in both the the the
world and me and there that's all that's
happening um but that well I'll even use
this language semantic meaning the
meaning of speech is we even use it we
use this as the metaphor for meaning in
life for actually there's non-semantic
connectedness and and the connectedness
that affords the morning and the
suchness and so human speech is a and
the Greeks do this they were lucky the
word logos sort of equivocates between
the two of them not a face leer ight so
but human speech is is an F fining
symbol it participates but it's not
identical to the logo the autological
logos right and if that's true then
speech speech is dependent on personhood
and that means that personhood has a
special place in it's a special locus
for which we cultivate our ability to
come into faithful right relationship
with ourselves what and what I mean by
right relationship is you know the
relationships that reduce self-deception
and increase connectedness meaning in
life
that's my pragmatic right to you those
are my pragmatic criteria right and so
III think that's really really important
and then and so you acknowledge that so
I'm just pointing the points and then
you move over to the point of that that
that what I'm sort of trying to
reformulate the notion of soul around as
that toe nos that mediating tension
right and you were talking but you were
talking about the logo so every
gathering all the logos needs to gather
together so they belong together your
point you're pointing to these chaotic
moments in which all of this gathers
together until if Long's together and we
get a sense of right right but we can't
live there right right we because we
can't stay there you know and you and
you mentioned Agustin right and you know
he has the he has the Platonic mystical
experience and but when he takes away
from it isn't the Wonder of the
experience but his sense of depravity in
that he can't live there everything
about him is telling him that's his home
but he can't live there but he can't
live there yeah it did I get that
correct yes yes yes and and Lewis goes
exactly the same place and and so you
know I get a lot of this from Lewis
because Lewis makes this point and and
he's you know back to the pluralism
point you know you don't you know you
don't have to be a Christian you don't
have to be a Christian to to both get
these glimpses of of you know in
Christian language we call it the
consummation you know that word too just
goes all these different things but have
to be a Christian to both get the
glimpses of this and fear and feel the
longing and be and the and the angst of
it that you know and this isn't I mean
we don't have to use highfalutin
philosophical terms you know you got you
know if I could put time in a bottle I
mean that song I mean that's right I
think that is very good philosophy I
think that time I think what what he
what he's doing in time in a bottle is
actually very good philosophy I mean and
this goes to what I mean what we're
talking about because you know part of
what Zak and I got into was there like
if we're talking about philosophy are
not the academic discipline
philosophy order we're talking about the
right kind of education that deals with
the imaginal and tries to cultivate
wisdom within the imaginal and within
the special role that personal
relationships play for us right then
police' spoke in the broader sense not
just written poetry but enacted poetry
like Tai Chi Chuan is also going to be
central and important so yeah that
that's that's very very cool the way you
you brought those together I really like
that although and so and so then by just
one question this is this is this is an
aside but I remember reading it but I
can't find it so maybe it's my error a
reconstructed memory you know the moral
of Lewis but I read it a story where a
young girl comes to Louis and and she's
really guilty and she says that she
loves Aslan more than Jesus yeah and
then he says to her that's okay yeah he
says is that is that apocryphal or is
that no that's true that's true
that's true and and and I think that
gets into this this sacra you know this
sacra what it would I see I never
imagined I get here cuz you know Jordan
Peterson put a whole bunch of people on
a journey but you know we're at were
where I've sort of come down and been
you know the doors have been knocking on
lately Hans Bosma some of the work he's
been doing Jamie Smith some of the work
he's been doing really gets so basically
what CS Lewis is saying is that in some
ways for this girl Aslan is is a
sacramental portal to Jesus yep because
the may be the Jesus that she saw in
Sunday school was and Lewis could be
very frank about the poverty of the
church because he thought you know he
thought a lot of the worship service
were just horrible it was horrible
poetry put to terrible music and it was
only his attempt his his desire to be
faithful that that so often helped him
abide the church but you know so it's
it's this idea of that
what what what the creator has done is
and again that I'm just I'm self
consciously using Christian language and
what can translate as they will has
strewn throughout this creation glory
these these these you know basically the
Eric Weinstein recall them portals these
you know you might call them sacraments
ways in which we see through the thing
to the real thing yeah yeah yeah and
just on ik notion through and through
yes yeah it is it is and and of course
so much there's so much thing but then
but then Louis basically at the
beginning of at the beginning of mere
christianity louis lays out his argument
from desire which which i think in some
ways is is deeply tied to the
ontological argument the ontological
argument is just an interesting thing
because it seems to convince no one but
but it seems to still haunt
conversations because his argument is
basically it would be such a shame if
the glimpses we have now and the longing
we feel to put time in a bottle would
actually arise in consummation hmm and
and that's in many ways you know a lot
some of the arguments i put together in
my video that that's really just a
refabricate of of lewis's argument which
i think is sort of a refabricate of the
ontological argument that gosh what a
what a and I think it actually comes
from the Apostle Paul what a cruel what
a cruel joke to play on humanity hmm to
have this eternity in our hearts not
actually one day yield and point us to
the consummation of our longings
it's amazing I think that leads into a
meeting crisis I think that's well I'd
like to reserve meeting crisis as a term
for a particular historical development
that to me is I think that's that's a
perennial problem of human existence
yeah so what came to mind was a place
where that very longing and the sense
that of eternity is actually in the
hardest vanozza Spinoza makes an
argument right that there is something
eternal about the human mind and he
doesn't mean everlasting he's clear that
he doesn't mean immortality he in fact
he says that the wise man thinks of
nothing less than death so um
but but he still he and for me this was
the kind of argument so this is very
nascent but this is what I see going
through a lot of work there's there's
this fundamental trust I mean you know
this for many people may we have that we
have to believe at some point um that we
that absolute skepticism is not true
right and there's no and and and there's
no way there's no way of getting behind
that and by the way and absolute
skepticism doesn't ground itself and
undermines itself so there are both
equally bad positions where a James II
and decision comes in there is no
rational way to decide between them
because the way the problems are set up
they are deeper than any of our rational
faculties yep okay and then so the part
of it is okay well what what would it
mean to say that well you know this is
plato's question and patinas what would
it mean to say that you know we get
knowledge may be imperfect but it's not
it's not it's not that which is referred
to when we have absolute skepticism and
then what it what it came down to me for
what it came down to me for me was this
notion that is so central to you know
put Plato and even Aristotle and clearly
for patinas and
suta pro class and pseudo-dionysius and
then on and on right was this notion of
participatory knowing that if if there
is if there is nothing about us if we do
not instantiate within us that which is
in some way indicative of some of the
principles of being then we are forever
cut off there must be that well the
thing that makes up the thing if we take
if we say I reject absolute scepticism
right then what we believe what we're
committed to is that participatory
knowing it is the ground of that that
that that there's aspects of reality I
know not by representing them but by
instantiating them in the very guts and
fabric of my being participatory knowing
and so uh I take that to be sort of part
of what we're talking about here right
that that in the end right that
connectedness I keep coming back to it
you know that religio it is something
that is well I think it's it's
constitutively necessary of being a
cognitive agent not off not just for all
the reasons I give about relevance
realization and I'm not putting that
aside good grief for this deeper reason
that I mean I'm making I'm doing I'm
trying to do a secular version of the
ontological argument right or the
argument from desire if that if there
was not something of eternity in us
something that it read some of the
important properties that are
constitutive of you know the presencing
of of the world right the
intelligibility and presencing of the
world then we would be alienated from it
in our being and then absolute
skepticism would be the position so if
we reject absolute skepticism we then
get an argument a reverse modus tollens
it says participatory knowing must be
there and I take that to be if you'll
allow me and I'm not trying to be be in
any way insulting but I take that to be
sort of a secular version
that argument that right that there's
there there are principles and patterns
in me that are not represented by me
they constitute me and those patterns
are also constitutive in important ways
of the world
yeah well and I think and I think the
patterns in our speech and our cognition
and logos thereby we have a reason for
thinking they might participate in the
logos yes being well anything that gets
would I listen to you when I listen to
you lay that out you know I think of you
know the imago Dei yes the strange you
know and and this is this is where I
think that this is where I think certain
scientific narratives projected overly
projected fail is is that what a strange
thing that you know this crazy book of
the Bible would begin with this story
where you have this you have this
creator god because that's the best word
we have for it right that well you can't
even say it
I mean this is superb because language
betrays us we have this creator that you
know one of the biggest rules he gives
these this crazy little group of people
is don't represent me with anything that
you can see in my creation
that's a weird rule and then the same
book it says that well the man and the
woman are made in His image yeah and
it's like are you breaking your own rule
has its prerogatives but but no I and
you know I think in some ways you know
the the impasse
that some have come to in philosophy of
the objective and the subjective winds
up exactly what I think you've just
articulated that it has to they cannot
go here where else may it go here for us
it can't and this no of any location of
of that right what you just said and
then our previous thing about idolatry
right and what just happened to you
you know the spoken language is as a
special the spoke the enacted it's not
just spoken but the American right right
well goes right right has special
privilege for finding us and reminding
us deep remembering reminding us like in
Plato or in sati remembering deep
reminding us of our you know our
participation right the conformity
defining the participatory knowing but
notice how speech also failed to you
right
that's right what also failed you and so
I'm also reminded about this other
strand sorry Paul I'm using you to help
me weave because that's what that's one
I mean might one of my defining features
of dia logos as opposed to debate or
whatever passes for discourse on a lot
of these channels is that two people can
get to places that they couldn't get to
on their own right two or more people
right that's that's it for me a defining
feature that's that's for me the the
evidence of the presence of the logos
right so I'm throwing out another thing
so I've acknowledged you know I've
acknowledged the special placed miss
it's not metaphysical necessity it's
sort of hyper pragmatism right of of
spoken language and therefore the
necessity of personhood and distinct
minds right etc but then I'm reminded
that there's even problems around the
notion of person and let's play let's
play a little bit in historical theology
yeah because you know person is a really
bad translation of hypostasis right
which it's a really
translation of hypostasis it's it's it's
like it's it's like you know part of the
you know when when you get machine
learning and you you have you know you
know the Spirit is willing but the flesh
is weak and the machine learning
translates it as you know the you know
the alcohol is potent but the meat is
kind of rotten um right it's that kind
of bad in some way because why am I
saying that I'm not just saying that you
know I'm not disrespectful I'm not
trying to be meat I'm saying that cuz I
spent a lot of time in Neoplatonism I
read a lot of Platonist I read a lot of
Pro Plus I read a lot I know how this
word is used I know they're the
originators of this story but doesn't
mean what we mean by person yeah yeah
yeah you know the craziest thing
happened you know in the craziest thing
happened you had a conversation with
with Tyler about discord servers and
yeah you know you met you put out a
video about Jordan Peterson and people
start to want to talk to you and you
know I've talked about Sam before he's
our he's our resident nontrinitarian and
right and and of course you know when he
steps into the community it was very
interesting to watch because suddenly
all these people who are being bending
over backwards being kind to atheist
subtly pounced on him and it's like well
that's interesting
you know how okay so what is a person
well so yours here's me thinking I'm
just little old me and doing hundreds of
hours of yakking at a computer I
discover that I've got elements of not
only Plato and Aristotle but Herman
Babak and Abram Kuiper built into me and
athenais shis and all of this stuff read
into me so that when a nontrinitarian
comes in our mix all the Trinitarians
want to pounce on him and it's like we
haven't fought this fight for 1500 years
so what exactly am i because I wasn't
around 1500 years ago right and and so
and of course you know Sam of course
leads us into all of these Congress
about persons and when I was talking to
I had a conversation with Nathan Jacobs
who has a you know at a very interesting
story and you know he and so I finally I
said what do you what is persons and
he's he spent a lot of his time working
on this word and well it shouldn't be
such a surprise to us that we don't know
what persons are because we don't know
what we are that's the word that we use
to describe ourselves and it's the word
that we use to privilege these other
beings that were in contact in
relationship with and sometimes war so
yeah we don't you know we're so the the
stuff that we are using is so deeply you
know it's amazing anything works at all
frankly that reminds me of like when I
was dating the friends in my life when
I'm dating and I would come to the it's
amazing that the human species has
survived and reproduces because rais'd
does not work women that are now deeply
in love with yeah and and so you know
it's that's the thoroughness of of our
existence that and and the fact that you
know that even people who you wouldn't
begin to have interest or understanding
and anything that we're talking about
and you know work productively both with
both with glory and depravity in in
doing and producing both glory and
depravity in this strange existence that
we have so yeah I mean so I mean
hypostasis I mean it literally
translates as that which stands under
right now that became that substance
yeah but then and that's the arista to
the Aristotelian sense of substance it's
not our sense of substance right it's
it's that which stands under it's the
it's it's the it's the it's the core
principle that all the predicates
attached
- yeah wrists Italian logical terms but
so my worry is that there's a long side
member I said you know the Cartesian
collapse of the soul right to the center
of subjectivity we've also got you know
hypostasis as the the point of
hypostasis under you know that which
stands under or the substance and it's
related to I play a little bit with this
word because it's changed the meaning
but it's related to understanding right
which stanza it's that which affords
intelligibility right um and I think you
know that's that's what they were trying
they were trying to get at the under you
know the underlying reality that is
affording intelligibility and affording
and intelligibility right in different
in different ways etc but the you know
this historic this history of hypostasis
into substance right and then substance
into substance as stuff right has had we
I'm afraid that the notion of person has
gone through a similar loss right it's
been disconnected right one of the
things I see haider they're trying to do
with his notion of design is to
resituated
into the project of what it that we are
in relationship to that which grounds
and founds intelligibility that's what
he's trying to do he's trying to get us
out of both the the cartesian inner true
self and all that stuff that right mind
so critical of and he's also trying to
get us out of the notion that were some
kind of special stuff and the reasonably
who's we in that sentence we're some
kind of special stuff well he they the
idea that okay so be fair to you that's
always a legitimate move you make I'm
claiming I'll take responsibility and
I'm claiming on behalf of Heidegger that
these two degenerations
come to the notion that your soul is
secret special stuff inside you mmm-hmm
and see I wouldn't I wouldn't go there
go ahead and go there either well
that's a very pervasive and popular view
oh yes oh yes well so look at you know
look at look at this now actually again
years before I heard about Jordan
Peterson I was thinking a lot about this
stuff because you know okay so what is
because I you know just I was thinking
about Christianity because I always have
to try and explain it to people and then
it wasn't that means that I always have
to try and figure out what on earth I'm
trying to talk about right um you know
it reminds me you know again this to me
this this brings back to this you know
what we were talking about before in
terms of you don't you don't find the
Apple neither in the morning or the
suchness no but in the relation between
them and then and then and then you'd
have to ask well well then so you know
what I was wrestling with is so you know
long before I got into any of this stuff
well what is it what am i what is we
what am i and because obviously not just
simply this body because this body has
been transforming dramatically you know
so a representation popularly of you
know you'd see it in cartoons when
you're a kid you know somebody dies and
this little ghostly thing just kind of
comes up and even in the movie ghost
when you know because we tried our we
and all these things
in all fairness are of course
representations and and we can't but we
can't but use representations because we
want to communicate with one another and
whether we're doing that with words
where they're doing that with film you
know with art whatever yeah we don't we
don't know that which that which we are
and and and and I think about this I
think about this in in the context of
the Christian the Christian narrative
that people happily people happily
embrace this idea that okay when they
die they go to heaven I think okay a
little gnostic and throwing some entity
right now it's actually a resurrection
okay and then I think long and hard
about
alright well let's take this let's take
this imagery from the book of Revelation
and say well what does the consummation
of this inner longing that's at the core
of me right right what does that really
look like where does that really go and
you know the Apostle Paul says eye has
not seen and ear has not heard okay well
but he does promise that we'll be
knowing it we'll know as we've been
knowing as well yes he does and so you
know these are these are just all very
hard questions and I mean I don't have
any shame in admitting that I don't let
the kind of pastors I hate are the ones
who think they know everything I don't
really hate them but that's a bad
pastoral habit I'll say that so what
it's hard but I'm trying to I mean so
there's I've you know I've been trying
I've been thinking about you know
because of the criticisms that you and
Jonathan made of my work about you know
the distributed nature of this not just
the individualistic right I took that
the you know the scalability of taking
these criticisms deeply to heart arm and
so I've been thinking you know but
there's there's ways in which we can
culturally ourselves if we get
attached almost used it in a Buddhist
sense fixated on certain salient images
that have come through this kind of
process and have been they instead of
being portals there are barriers yes yes
right the the soul as the interior
special stuff at the core of my
subjectivity or whatever I don't even
know what that means by the way but
that's clearly of Descartes thought to
write that that disconnects me from all
of this stuff we've been talking about
and trying to unpack and that's a kind
of cultural in yeah because
it's making it's right and it verges on
ideology because it's making the wrong
aspect salient right and we're looking
at rather than looking through yeah and
you know and this comes up in weird ways
because you know
um you know I'll be in a conversate I'm
willing to talk to religious people as
you know I'm happy to do so and and you
know what the thing is you know a lot of
theology I mean you know Agustin and
Platonists and so you're a wonderful
conversation partner because you know
this and you don't have to do a whole
lot of explaining if you're a pastor so
keep going thank you I really appreciate
that but right so I'm gonna at a meeting
with a minister a reverend um and you
know he found out that I do cognitive
science and then he said to me oh yes
and you know and you know what do you
think of all these experiments where
they've measured how much the soul
weighs they measure the body yes the you
measure the body right before right
before it's dead and right after it's
dead
this sounds apocryphal to me but even if
it's happening I'm thinking I don't know
how to respond to that that is just that
is that is a series of that is a series
of equivocations and in Category
mistakes that yet so I was I was
dumbfounded and I thought well either we
argue for four hours or I'm polite so I
did the Canadian thing I just said oh no
I'm sorry I'm not I have not heard of
these things and and then sort of left
it at that but see in my business I come
across that kind of stuff perhaps more
than you do
where people have these really really
wonky notions right and I'm not evil in
churches at least they don't have that
they don't have as many they they the
pastor should know better but this is
what you find in a church because this
is exactly like you know and you know
you get not only that and you get
new-age walk enos that ain't no and it's
there's all kinds of stuff that swirls
around and this and this brings us back
to the point you know Zach science point
we have become so illiterate that we've
lost discernment and we can't we've
become and I don't mean philosophy in
that you know in the elitist academic
way I mean in what we're doing here the
human proclivity and need to make sense
to wonder and connect deeply right but
the the the the most people's attempt to
deal with this stuff is so
philosophically inept
right I'm sorry I'm not trying to be
harsh but you know our educational
project both culturally there are state
institutions and our religious
institutions have not properly prepared
people and what we we we've allowed all
of this to degenerate into
imagery in a lot of ways in my opinion
that is really really exacerbating that
the craziness that is occurring to
people right now yes yes and and so if
you want to have an understanding of
because for a lot of people people
people think pastors or people who give
sermons yeah we do that people who give
comfort yeah we do that but navigating
the kind of conversation you just
articulated yeah is most of what we do
because people come into church with a
grab bag full of stuff from other
churches stuff from Hollywood sometimes
stuff from our own tradition and and
then they just wander around with these
things in their heart until a crisis
comes like this and then suddenly now
what is required of them is well what
have you been you know it's like what
have you been training for in your life
and what they have is this grab bag full
of half-chewed ideas from Hollywood
movies and some self-help book they
bought and all over the place and then
they come to you as pastor in an
existential crisis saying stop the
crisis for me and so what you know as a
pastor is you know you you know you
could settle them down a little bit
because when they're in panic mode
they're not going to be and you begin to
try to but but you're not going to they
already believe that you know they have
these experiments and and so you're not
gonna take that on frontally so then you
begin and so to me it gets into you know
I think I've used your language a lot
because I think it's it's the right
language and I hope you don't hear it
when I went here dismissively when I use
it a religion is not a religion and then
the question is well well well what
exactly what exactly is it that we wish
to give to people and why well I think
okay so we have this pandemic right now
well what would we what would we like
for them to have and again not having
mode but what we like what capacities
would we like them to possess to
confront this moment in the best way
possible and this moment challenges
people at so many different levels I was
having a so every meeting we have a
council meeting and we were talking
about okay at some point we're gonna
reopen this thing and and one of my
deacons who is by no means philosophical
is a probation officer and used to be a
professional baseball player made it to
the major leagues and he says quite
quite insightfully you know people other
office bearers start talking about you
know pragmatics he says the real
question is who do we trust right for
information and I thought that's exactly
the real question and then I thought of
a lot of your project which is okay so
we have all of this information coming
at us and you know I and I get in
trouble on my channel because I have
religious people and I say at
least Americans Canadians if you see it
say in Church in Canada you
can't in America but um yeah you know
we're okay so we have all this
information coming at us and who do we
believe what do we believe about any of
this and and so then we very quickly
reflect upon the fact that all of the
information which again in our in our
imaginary we kind of imagine as this
impersonal we think of information kind
of as as what you know stop this yeah
this substance out there is information
and no but it's all coming at us through
people and and so everything is just so
so now we have to suddenly make our way
through
this and chances are even the best put
together people are going to get things
wrong not only take not only trust
people who are who are saying things
that aren't true but propagate those
beliefs and we're swimming in an
environment full of this all the time
and and so what we want from our
religions are again you know we we want
the four pees all operating yes because
we need all four yep and not only in
within but also between us that's right
that's right and and so and then you and
and then when I get to these points I
always get pushed to the end of it okay
for what to what end
well we want them you know and and then
and then suddenly again we just kind of
land in the religious language for me at
least because I I can draw I can I can
have little mental pictures about what
we want someone who is who's not going
to be depressed and they're not going to
hoard food and they're not going to have
a panic attack and so G K Chesterton in
his book heretics had a really lovely
chapter about the fact that you need the
observation that you know in this world
we can sort of get at the goodbye all
saying what it's not yeah and so this so
we say that the person who is
functioning functioning optimally in
during the Cova 19 pandemic well they're
not paralyzed by anxiety they're not
hoarding food they're not propagating
misinformation they're not they're not
they're not they're not but what exactly
is it that they are and to me as a
Christian I call their Jesus talk about
a low-resolution sunday-school answer
but and that's you know sort of where
Christianity all comes together and you
ask yourself again in it in a very one
of the things that religions do is that
they are they do provide JPEGs and all
these JPEGs are contextualized of
limited utility but they also have
certain properties that are that are
tremendously powerful and even even just
that as such the cliched what would
Jesus do if you take that in the right
way you say what would Jesus do in a
pandemic well and and you know you could
play that with Socrates - I mean
stoicism yeah or what
you know what would the Buddha do for
Buddhism yeah I talked about this in the
work that I published with Leo Ferraro
but wisdom that above and beyond all the
skills and virtues you have to
internalize the sage you have to
internalize the sage and that again
comes back to a concession I'm wanting
to make it's really difficult to
internalize something into your
personhood that isn't represented
personally to you yes yes no I agree
with that and I agree that that's a
concession I I just don't know if human
beings can do any other thing I mean
they they can I mean all of them we've
admitted that all of this is episodic
right that nobody does it continuously
and I go back to there's many aspects of
my existence that I regard as sacred
like when I'm doing Tai Chi Chuan in
which that is the case and I'm
internalizing something and you know I
think that's a better understanding of
what she is
she isn't some secret stuff energy
inside you she is that you've you have
internalized the DAO in some fashion and
so it is now an operative principle
you've got participatory knowing and
you've internalized it through that
participatory knowing you've identified
with it so it's now operative in you
that's what I take it to be and then
when you can fight that way you're a
dangerous person so I mean it has real
real practical consequences so so it's a
concession but and thank you for being
charitable about that but like I say I
like you there's a you know I see yeah
yeah I internalize the DAO in this
experience of Chi which I don't give any
magical properties to but I also need I
know that trying to internalize what
Plato is teaching me is we
he seems to me to be dependent on the
figure of Socrates because just what
you're saying
in the end it's got to be not well it
like I always say don't tell me what you
believe tell me where you practice it
you know a lot of people are making this
case that what you see in Socrates is
you don't just see a comparative
Socrates is not just comparing arguments
and getting us to try and steer between
merely formal protect pretense of
certainty or the obvious nosov common
sense that's why he's refuting both of
those because he's trying to keep this
space open in which we're we're both
moving but right but there you know and
he's a tip-off he's classically he
belongs to no category but he's not just
presenting arguments he is embodying a
way of life and he's making it beautiful
for us the point of that logos in his
speech is not just to get some
propositions established that often
doesn't even happen the point is to open
this space and show you that when human
beings live in it they become more
beautiful and they see beauty in the
world than they otherwise wouldn't see
and so that is how Socrates ultimately
seduces people I'm doing this because
it's no sexual seduction isn't involved
but he's right and and it's hard for me
to see how you how would you beautify a
way of life without beautifying a person
that that is that's another concession
on my part yeah yeah yeah that's a good
point there's a told the story in my
videos too it's one thing that seems
embedded in Christianity is this idea
that the that so often the and I used to
I used I used glory for you know for
this term of you know it has beauty in
it as joy warned us yeah mourneth you
know that there's this great story of
Eric little who they made the movie
Chariots of Fire about who was this
world-class sprinter and the movie kind
of has this idea of him you know it
showed it in one scene where he used to
run straight up with his head back and
and people say why do you run so weird
you rent fast so they didn't mind but he
said you know cuz when I God made me
fast and and when I run I feel his
pleasure he became he became a
missionary in in China and the Japanese
of course we pay attention to the kind
of the watery side of the of the
Japanese war in the 30s and 40s well he
was in China and so he was taken by the
Japanese and put in a tournament castle
brutal yeah and so he's in this
internment camp and there's a bunch of
other missionaries there and there's a
businesspeople and expats at various
courts the Japanese just pull them all
together and put them in the camp and so
there's this one guy he's not a
Christian he wrote he wrote reflections
from that camp and he talked about the
fact that a lot of these missionaries
you know they did they were there were
just as crappy as everybody else yeah
yeah but there's this one guy in the
camp and this was Eric little
the the sprinter who um when everybody
was when everyone was hoarding you know
he would give right and when everybody
was anxious he was relaxed and he he
died in the camp he got sick and died as
many do but this this individual comes
out of that camp you know
never forgetting him and and you know
when I talk about because I'm in the
business of religion formerly I we use
the word commonly and I think about
scalability
I think about I think about that it's
it's always instantiated and a person
because again and a human being because
that's that's what we get and I mean in
terms of that's what we understand I was
you know in another video I was talking
about
I forget what rationalist was talking
about you know Sam Sam Harris said we
want to make everything mean talk about
proposition we want to make everything
propositional so we can rationally work
it out and I was thinking about the fact
that when I became a parent I walked I
came into parenting with a first draft
of what a parent is that I didn't know
and of course that first draft I
received from my parents but I received
it without knowing I was receiving it
and it just got built into me so so
again in that sense it doesn't surprise
me that the best representations we have
of glory are people and the stories we
have of those people at least when we're
divorced from them in history the
stories are what remained yeah so I
don't know how we will
I don't know how glory is seen or
transmitted in any better way mm-hmm and
and so when I think about okay well how
what can I do what can I do for people
in the midst of this pandemic which
again for you and I and many listening
to this is it's a crisis but it's not
the second world war it's not a Japanese
internment camp it's it's not it's not
growing up with a physically abusive
father it's not growing up with a with a
different kind of abusive mother and
part of what I love of my and my
opportunity to be a pastor is that
you're always on the front line of such
a broad spectrum of the
right yeah-yeah-yeah-yeah-yeah and and
so then the challenge and it's it's a
it's an impossible challenge often just
like your pastor comes to you it has
this question it's like well I got and
most of the time I do like you do I
you're polite because you know I have
ten minutes to talk to this guy what
what can I accomplish in ten minutes and
so that's that's in a sense what pastor
you get you get a you get accustomed to
okay I got ten minutes what what little
thing what seed and again I'm just I
can't help but always use this biblical
language what seed can I plant
potentially in this individual and I
think you're exactly right in that every
now and then I think in in most of the
pastor communication I've done there
have been two or three points in which a
direct confrontation was the right
approach yeah and but that's in in in
the very few times that I've used that
only once or twice as it actually worked
even right and it's almost always much
more the case of two people having a
conversation in which two people get to
a place that they couldn't get on their
own and I think I think again the way
you say that I think it's just it's
exactly right and and to me that's what
ministry does and there's gonna it's
gonna entail pluralism in there because
you know lately I've also been thinking
about Tom Hollands observation that you
know Christianity you know tried to get
into India didn't get very far but other
things kind of got in underneath and
some of those things are helpful and
some of those things aren't helpful
we're always planting seeds that we
never quite know where they'll go and
sometimes and you know that as a college
professor for goodness sakes yeah very
much
very much and you see that represented
well in photonic dialogues because you
know Plato is very clear to present all
of Socrates as failures as a teacher
yeah yeah oh you're balsa boy he's
famously right yeah but I do think I I
think about that point that you know you
know and a lot of the dialogues Plato
will fail sorry Socrates will fail too
convinced the curtains because you get
to the aporia and yeah and they don't
want to give up and they're angry but
then though like in two separate dr.
dialogues they'll say but I want my
son's to come and like spend a lot of
time with you right and I think of
Marcus Aurelius when he's indicating the
people that are true philosophers for
him he does he goes through all these
people and he's clear to say they didn't
write anything down or say very much but
they lived their lives with well with
wisdom and that is for him you know I
think that's what we're kind of talking
about here and for him is is it is the
true mark of of a philosophical life
it's not you know being able to weave
long complex arguments its ability it's
the ability well it's the ability to you
know be that person in the Kairos that
you were talking about earlier um and be
that you know in a way that attracts or
seduces other people who who think maybe
maybe I'll take up this way of life or
at least maybe my sons should consider
this way of life and back for me that
well that circles us all the way back
around to this notion of faithfulness
that I was talking about right
beautifying things so that people feel
that it is naturally right to follow
them to be drawn into them a way of life
one of my favorite passages in the Bible
is at the beginning of the book of Acts
Jesus says you know crucified
resurrected it's about to ascend the
disciples come to him and say now will
you restore the kingdom to Israel and
when you read that line you have to say
you haven't gotten anything have you
you're still playing the games of you
know of the Old Covenant and and Jesus
who can seriously at times lose his
patience with his disciples and it's
right there in the text he very calmly
says it's not for you to know the times
or the places
but you will receive power when the Holy
Spirit comes upon you and you will be my
witnesses in Jerusalem you know in Judea
Samaria to the ends of the earth and and
that just kind of takes that idea that
Jesus in a sense is saying to them you
know you really haven't learned anything
I've told you and I'm trusting that at
least some of what I say you will
remember and at least convey with some
fidelity out there but and then you know
even thinking and it's a part of me
what's been so enjoyable about doing
this have having having to have the
discipline of talking to people like you
in terms of in terms of a secular frame
rather than let's say a church frame
right because in church frame you can
use all these short hands but all of
those have liabilities - which are
crippling the church quite frankly but
that even if you don't believe in
anything supernatural or woo-wee or you
know whatever that that somehow
something of Jesus by watching him live
got into these hapless disciples and and
and again the New Testament is very
frank about their failures they they
mess up a lot but they you know that
somehow this gets into into their
disciples and through and this is again
gets into the question of what is a
person yeah because lots of different
cultures have thought lots of different
ways about in terms of you know and what
way am I my father and my grandfather
and you know all the way back through
there
well well we'll somehow being with Jesus
changed these people which kind of you
know kind of like a pebble in a pond
rippled all the way out through people
through centuries to the place where you
know certainly plenty of
you know that you can you can you can
blame Christianity for plenty of evil in
this world I won't shortchange that but
somehow Jesus impacted the world for
good through all of these people and
they call it spirit which it's probably
the right word in terms of their
conceptualization but anyway I don't
know and so in that sense people often
ask people pastor because they're
anxious about their children what what
what do I need to do to be a you know to
be a good parent I'd I just always tell
them I say it sounds cliche but but be
the kind of person you want your child
to grow up into because you'll talk at
them and you'll mess up and all this
stuff anyway they did the modeling that
gets internalized as way more important
in the raising of children well Paul I
I'm sorry if we backed this for over two
hours and I've got to go to another
appointment
it's why I hope this has been worthwhile
for you I it's been deeply worthwhile
for me I hope it was worthwhile for you
oh yeah it was genuine dear logos I got
two places in my my thinking about this
stuff that I have not thought to before
and I think are valuable places to have
gotten to so I feel the same way you you
always bless me and I deeply appreciate
it
okay well let's let's talk again my
friend okay we will take care of John
okay take care bye-bye bye-bye