[Music]
Jonah Jordan really great to be
connected with you remotely and we've
done films with each of you on the
channel and where I know from talking to
you individually that you were both very
interested in each other's thought and
so this is the first time that we've
done something like this brought people
together to explore kind of
independently I'm hoping that I'm gonna
be kind of almost redundant in this
conversation but I'm really excited to
see what you guys want to explore
together and I'd love to start by just
asking you what it is that you find
interesting about each other's thought
and that maybe will sort of give us
something to spark off for the rest of
the conversation I'm very interested and
I've had a delightful conversation with
Jordan last week I'm very interested in
a couple of connections one that comes
first to mind is I've been exploring
what I use this metaphor of the grammar
the the cultural cognitive grammar of
the West and how it's related to the
projects of wisdom and meaning in life
and I see that Jordan seems to be
talking in a way that's resonant with
that he talks about a code and about
trying to get beyond the code and he
ascends towards this state that he
refers to by the term coherence and I'm
very intrigued by that and how that
relates to some of the discussions I've
had with others and some of the work I
do on self transcendence and insight and
I'm also interested in how that process
and how coherence it's clear to me that
it's not identical to but it seems to be
very I don't know
again convergent with the work I'm doing
on relevance realization and some of the
discussion about perspectival and
participatory knowing and what's really
and I want this to be taken very
seriously very seriously what's
intriguing me about Jordan is he's not
just talking about this I
see him you know exemplifying it and the
way he interacts with each other and I
find that also deeply thought-provoking
and interesting yeah I was contemplating
the question and what came up sorry I'm
I'm in the mountains of BC right now and
apparently a bear just approached the
dogs decided that wasn't a good idea
what came up for me and it made me laugh
was the the feeling of it seems like
John is is seeing or probably feeling
the same elephant since the blind men
I've spent a decent amount of the past
couple of years becoming blind so that I
am more able to reach out and I use a
different set of senses to try to
perceive what's going on
and those senses indicate to me that
John is doing something that is very
real and the part of me that is still
very much operating in I see called the
domain of semantic cognition is able to
connect the story that is telling with
things that I also understand to be true
so it's a really nice combination there
between a way of holding the story as a
weaving of a narrative that has the
characteristic of being what I would
call the semantically true or
scientifically true mm-hm and also is
doing something at a more fundamental
level that has that almost haptic
feeling of well we have the word for the
feeling of insight so there we go and
also what I interject that there's a
sense that we have as well on the
channel that I think we both talked
about before or we talked about with
each of you before that there is a kind
of evolving conversation may I also have
this sense that both of you are holding
quite important pieces of that evolving
conversation I think so too
one of the things that's and I keep
saying this but it's because it keeps
impressing itself upon me one of the
things that has been a great gift of the
video series is precisely my sense of
connecting with groups of people that I
think are putting real real time and
talent into trying to craft viable and
you know long-standing wait like ways
that we'll have long-standing in their
life responses to what I term the
meaning crisis and trying to and trying
to do the word sort of inadequate but
they're trying to create something that
the IC is simultaneously salvaging from
the past but having some genuine novelty
and creativity and if there's something
in it that people are working towards in
others and it's interesting because
there's a sense there's a simultaneously
for me a sense of play and what people
are doing because it and I mean that in
serious play the way children really
play when they're really learning but
there's also it's mixed with a sense of
urgency precisely because of a lot of
the situations we face in the world and
so I used to be sort of more pessimistic
about things but as I started meeting
people when people like Jordan for
example and in communities it's been
shifting in my mind to a more hopeful
stance so that's been a great a great
gift for me would you say you're hopeful
Jordan hmm I would say I'm full of hope
I don't know if anybody else noticed but
if you really reflect on the last bit of
time when John was speaking there were a
number of notes that came up that are
very much to the center of the what I
would call me being the essence of the
conversation I don't know for example
there was a point where he was
endeavoring to say something that was
difficult and he even specifically spoke
to the fact that the words were hard and
I actually was able to feel the energy
of playfulness and the energy of urgency
in the way he was bringing himself to
the thing he was trying to say and I
think that's so much
the heart of the matter of the being
there and the being out there feeling of
really being fully exposed and I guess
the metaphor we used in our last call
was playing jazz but it's almost yeah
yeah weaving jazz it's discovering jazz
in this in a moment if also playing it
and recognizing that you're playing jazz
for all the marbles and so it's more
even than hope than it is I would say
courage and the courage that comes from
actually noticing that as you're
standing there there are other people
who are also standing there with courage
maybe a better way of framing it playing
jazz on the wall walking on a tightrope
something like that Jordan had a well
there's two things I want to say about
that the first is it reminds me of the
notion ancient Israelite notion of the
off of sensing that you're participating
in a course and right and you're
involved in that and so and that was an
older meaning of faith as opposed to the
more modern meaning of sort of willful
assertion without rational evidence or
some such thing but the this older
meaning was the sense of you know this
participatory knowing of something right
that you're deeply involved in but has a
greater life than you and it has some
course and yet and you both sensing the
course but you're also being surprised
by it as it's unfolding and that's very
much become more more more salient to me
and the other thing I want to say
relates to this because Jordan had this
wonderful metaphor last time that I
believe he got from sort of
communication science about the way you
can sort of load lots of messages into
one signal and I found that particularly
perspicacious about trying to articulate
this sense of sort of a
multi-dimensional kind of participatory
communication that was going on and I
wondered Jordan if you could bring that
up again because I found that very sort
of hopeful last time yeah absolutely and
I guess suppose since we're using the
metaphor of tightrope AcroYoga
I feel called to try to do
in real-time so the thing that came to
me as you were saying that was the
phrase for those with ears to hear very
happiness there's a way of being able to
pluck the string of communication that
recognizes the way that all the
different modes of communication are
collected in a moment so just then for
example that was clearly saying a set of
words that have a very simple semantic
meaning but if you happen to have some
connection to the history or the
mythology that those words happen to be
associated with I'm invoking a frame and
maybe even a disposition that allows a
way of communication that is deeper and
richer that's just one example and the
point is they do that in many many
different modes simultaneously so tone
of voice
and pace of speech and the jumping back
and forth between different frames to be
able to create a very high order
communications fabric through which
larger and larger and deeper and deeper
and therefore at least in principle more
meaningful communication and can happen
in what is a stencil with the same
amount of objective time mm-hmm so I
find that very interesting because I
find this idea of if you'll allow me to
metaphor right if we think of the
typical models of communication like a
channel and sort of horizontal between
us you're talking about this sort of
more vertical aspect right we're trying
to bring in all these layers if I can
use that metaphor and you know and for
me that bespeaks something that I think
is very very important because when I
talk about meaning and meaning in life I
repeatedly acknowledge this is a city
where I'm using a semantic metaphor to
try and convey something like that's
ultimately there are deeper than the
semantic communication I talk about the
respectable knowing and the and the
participatory knowing and it's so one
way I've been trying to think about what
we talked about last time is that you're
trying to bring right a kind of sorry I
don't want to I don't want misuse your
word here but the word for the game to
my mind was a kind of coherence a
vertical coherence
between these different modes of knowing
these different levels so that rather
than than being orthogonal or disjointed
or disconnected they are mutually
informing and transforming each other
and then that's what's being conveyed
not to the other person I apologize I
just noticed that it's cold in Canada I
need to go inside one of the things that
time of the series is the different ways
in which people read text for example as
an example just try to start deepening
the metaphor
so I compare how we read texts we read
we tend to read text right in a consumer
Tori fashion we're taking in two
propositions we're looking for the in
sort of the logical coherence between
the propositions in our head and we're
sort of living inside of our head in
that way and then before that typified
you know people doing lectio divina
right was this this were reading that
was recitation it was done communally
and right and it's meant to be
participatory they like the way you read
a poem or the way you you sort of set
yourself to appreciate music and and
then the whole point of that was not
just to take in the information and
consume it but the idea was that you
could actually only approach the reality
that the words were referring to if you
were allowed something other than just
the semantic content to engage you a
transformative process right so it was
very much this idea that you can't these
deeper realities require a
transformation before we can
appropriately grasp you know the meaning
of the words that are being uttered and
so the the the and so crayons and others
talk about you know the notion of the
self was a much more extensive notion it
was involved with others and with the
text rather than being sort of locked
inside the head and locked inside the
propositions now why all of this is
relevant to me and I think to our
conversation is because right one of the
core aspects of what people reliably
seem to be pointing towards when they're
seeking meaning is this sense of a deep
connectedness connectedness to
themselves to each other and to a
reality that in some sense is is greater
than them and it's interesting because
I think this is what it seems to me I
think you're doing something very
analogous with spoken discourse as what
people were trying were doing with the
reading which was also being spoken by
the way what I mean by that is you're
trying to bring back right the
connectedness of the communication
process right that has tended to be
neglected back rounded and perhaps even
forgotten about right as we have
foregrounded this idea of getting you
know the propositional content and so I
feel like when I'm talking to you the
propositional content is in service of
this other I feel you really trying to
like create channels of of connection
right where we're mutually transforming
each other that's going beyond just
exchanging the propositions oh yeah
sorry that was a lot but I was trying to
protect there was not a frustration that
was a a no we were doing the thing what
one thing that was coming up almost like
what is it the angel in the shoulder
during is the the feeling I remember
when I was younger I I noticed that I
had a really hard time with music II and
I was wondering why that would be the
case and then I realized that it's
because most music that we encounter in
our lives these days is irresponsible
music has a very strong capacity to
modify the emotions and in fact to
modify the body and so if you're
listening to music you cannot help but
have some meaningful change in your
physical state and that's a very
powerful thing and needs to be held with
a very high degree of ethics I would
even say to be at the level of the
sacred and I was feeling that because as
you were talking about the notion of
connectedness and the notion of to be
transformed in the act of communication
yes there is there's a there's something
that happens in any form of
communication that has the ability at
least in principle to take advantage of
this wholeness of possibility and to
participate in that wholeness of
possibility to to be speaking in a way
that is simultaneously poetry and prose
and music and dance and allow all those
different modalities of expression to
convey something that is I suppose
deeper and as you say this starts to
move much more in the direction of
meaningfulness like there's something
connecting meaningfulness and wholeness
in fact know that I'm thinking about you
spoke to the fact that I think it was
episode 18 or 17 of the Platonists and
then later Augustinian weaving together
of three distinct threads yeah and I
think that's very much to the point
there's a when we are interacting with
each other to be able to heal each other
in the moment and to be able to bring
each other more fully present to what is
happening in the moment and then to be
able to do something that gives rise to
something that is greater than the sum
of its parts to have a thing in a moment
and I your invocation both Augustine
Platonists I think is very apropos
because I mean that's the idea dust goes
back to the core platonic insight right
and that's the that's for me one of the
crucial decisions we made in the West we
stopped the platonic dialogue and went
into the Aristotelian treatise right and
the platonic dialogue I mean at times
they're very ham-fisted I get that but
there are also moments where you can
where you can see Plato trying to catch
what was happening right in this ER and
the Socratic length goes in the Platonic
dialogue like what you just said that
the two of us together can co-create
something that transcends both of us but
I wanted to and I wanted to pick up on a
platonic metaphor that you also
mentioned and I didn't want to lose what
we were talking about because it wasn't
only the idea that you know you and I
are engaging in this mutual
transformation it's the idea that that
transformation is required for us to
enter into right a relationship with
aspects and dimensions of reality see
when when we when we did the sort of
Devore
that you know I don't have to go through
transformation in order to get access to
deeper aspects of reality I just think
clearly about it I think that was also
something that we've lost the so I think
what I'm trying to articulate now it
feels like it's resonant with what
you're trying to articulate it is no no
no right not only do do we have to get
into a particular mode of
transformational you know connectedness
in order to you know reach each other
and resonate with each other there are
aspects of reality that are also only
accessible if we are willing to you know
undergo transformation in order to
connect to them as well and I think I
think that needs to be kept in the
conversation as well if there's ways to
have like a laser strobe lights just a
few seconds ago I would push that button
it's hard to convey how
how powerful it is to be able to
perceive the meaningfulness of what you
just pointed to mmm trying its words are
very very not capable woodsy oh god it's
incredible so maybe is a very terrible
metaphor you can begin by talking about
the capacity to achieve a certain level
of coherence using continuity of
communication through propositions as
having a flatness to it it's a
two-dimensional thing mm-hmm well it
ain't nothing and we can make a really
big piece of paper and it can go on it
can be infinite in all directions but
it's two-dimensional and then there's
another move that has this deepening
which adds a third dimension which for a
second I kind of felt like was the thing
but then I realized that as I really
felt this proposition mm-hmm this
invitation to take transformation itself
as being so there it is got it that's
the whole point got it neat it is in
through it is through being transformed
that we are no longer merely perceiving
reality but are actually one with it mmm
this is the key to the whole move if you
think about there being a very strong
distinction between assertive analytic
approach where we endeavour to be the
observer outside that which is observed
and some other new thing which for just
analytic reasons I'll refer to as a
synthetic approach the analytic approach
has limitations as we've run up to over
and over again over the last two
centuries in the West
to the degree to which you are by
definition part of a system your
observation to that system cannot help
but modify the system and therefore your
capacity to perceive what is is
intrinsically filled with blind spots
mm-hmm but if you actually proceed by a
method of allowing yourself to be fully
transformed and you're engaged with
what's happening then you are actually
one with the system you are not
perceiving as an observer distant from
it you're Emersonian the Emersonian
transparent eyeball yeah and this is a
very different way of knowing it's a way
of knowing that has the capacity to
actually be perceiving wholeness to be
perceiving complexity and not merely the
complicated hmm I
I would say that I often try to point
towards that kind of knowing when I talk
about the participatory knowing they're
knowing that we know by not just you
know getting a proposition or having a
skill applied or even having a you know
a salience landscape to wrapped around
it but we only can know something by by
allowing ourselves to be transformed in
a coupled relationship to it we we
couple ourselves to it and allow
ourselves to be transformed and in that
in the way our Trent in the
transformation of our own self knowledge
we are simultaneously getting the
knowledge of the other thing and that's
that deep sense of oneness I think
you're trying to articulate right it's
it's I am its how I how I like when I'm
talking to you I feel aspects of myself
coming up right things are coming up and
that's part of how I'm knowing myself
differently right here right now and
that that's that's giving me an insight
into and a connectedness to how I think
right you are here right now and that's
what that's what I typically try to
point to when I point to participatory
knowing and and the fact that we have
pushed I mean this is not an idea
original to me by any means I mean I
think a lot of important people Marla
Ponte and others were trying to remind
us how foundational this kind of knowing
is and that all the other knowings
depend on it but we have tended for
various historical and cultural reasons
to neglect it and seriously background
it
and and and I want to say something
morning and and this isn't this is not
too many TV flattery it's meant to be a
genuine compliment you see if if that is
important to you and this is what I mean
when I say to people don't tell me what
you believe tell me what you practice
right you you have to practice
participatory and that's what I see
that's what I see you doing and that's
what I see you constantly trying to
articulate with people it's like no no
we can't just talk about this you ha
like it's like it's like an
anthropologist saying you know you got
to go and do participant observation in
the culture or you'll never get the
culture you'll never get it you can talk
about it you can reflect on it but you
got to go there you have to be
transformed by the culture and know
yourself differently and that's how you
come to know the culture and that's why
I mean it's so important that right that
there is this I don't want to make it
sound like you're you're stubborn
because that's not what I'm trying to
convey that that would be to mislead
what I'm trying to say is there's that
there is this way in which you keep
gently trying to being people back right
to this communication is something that
has to be practiced right it is a
practice it is it is not just a set of
statements or a claim or a theory and
and I and I find that so so central and
important it's easy to say but it giving
it the priority is just really really
important yeah I think maybe now might
be a window or an opening to maybe why
he why that would be the case and in
your in your series you you refer to the
meaning crisis and I imagine given who
you are and not using the word crisis
lately no yeah you're not saying the
sort of somewhat disturbing meaning
thing no no you're saying the meaning
crisis yes and I I think of course feel
very much the same thing so what I would
say is that in my particular journey to
come here which gives rise to what I
would say is the commitment that
that you're perceiving in terms of
stubbornness that's the word I want I
endeavored to explore every possible
route that was not at this route to
address that crisis mm-hmm I perceived
the crisis too clearly every time that I
looked at any aspect of life and this is
very much in the objective domain and so
whether I looked at financial markets or
I looked at nuclear proliferation or I
looked at concentration of hormones in
the water supply or fill in the blank
what I noticed was that the the thing
that we are participating in the mode of
civilization the mode of doing that we
actively engage in together seems to be
accelerating towards some point of
criticality a crisis a true crisis in
the Bronze Age sense yes and my life
left me with a certain capacity to think
clearly meaning to take things slowly
and be able to notice when something was
logically sound and when the evidence
was what it was and so as I found myself
holding more and more and more examples
of evidence of the fact that this was
the case I found myself compelled to
step in to trying to address it and this
then led to the journey that leads us
here which is to say that the approach
of proposition they approached it
apparently started in the West around
1050 or address the problem and it's
really as simple as that
mm-hmm and you can't get there from here
we can spend some time talking about why
we can spend time I was talking about
how it fails for those who've been in
trying it's be useful to notice why
that's the case but the the kind of the
jumping at the end game won't work it's
a not the right tool and so okay well
then what and then that leads to a
turning inward and it turning into all
the stuff that you've been hitting just
even in this conversation with
but I feel is almost a brilliance
bringing to a very narrow path a very
narrow window which is for us to make it
as a species through the exterior
aspects of the crisis that we find we
must as individuals first make it
through the interior crisis of becoming
transformed and to be allowing ourselves
to be intimately and vulnerably
transformed by the reality that is in
fact simply there and to be in
relationship with them with nothing
between us and it so that we can at long
last respond to what is really happening
and discover in ourselves that capacity
to be responsive to what is really
happening which is such a funny thing
like it's literally right there right in
front of us is that our at our hands
it's really a choice to be able to reach
out and grab the response to the meeting
crisis
thank you I thought that was I was very
very clear I got a professional sense of
like how you got here a glad that you
articulate the seriousness of though the
use of the term crisis because I'm
trying to convey with that term what you
said the deep need for deep
transformation and and and your code
your work your use of the word code my
use of the word grammar are this is not
a transformation in what we're saying
but more how we're saying and how we're
living what we're saying and and and we
need to and that getting back to that is
problematic for us precisely because of
the way the code has unfolded
historically mm-hmm and so that's part
of the crisis and then what I also am
trying to convey is the the sense of
threat which you've already articulated
so I won't repeat that I'm also trying
to articulate the pervasiveness of the
suffering the loss of agency the
distress you know that people are
experiencing
you know suicide rates going off alone
leanness all of these and you if you
give you if you look into these
discourses that people are talking about
it they're often implicitly and
sometimes explicitly converging on you
know it's the loss of connectedness that
is you know that's sort of the core
thing and so I'm trying to get also the
pervasiveness of the suffering and the
distress and then lastly and I think you
were you were hinting towards this the
degree to which the meaning crisis
causes a mental fog if I can put it that
way it makes us very incapable of
responding to the other serious issues
that are urgent and facing us right now
and I think that has to go towards a
kind of a sort of a psychological model
on that you know a scarcity mentality
when we the research shows that when
people are in scarcity for time or food
they become inflexible in their
cognition their capacity for insight
goes down they tend to become very
conservative and also fiying of their
worldview right there's all these things
that come in with a scarcity mentality
and I think when people are facing a
scarcity of meaning mentality it's also
having this very concrete
is so comprehensive in our cognition the
scarcity mentality is so becomes so
pervasive in our cognition our our lack
of flexibility our incapacity for
insight our our sense of the in that the
transformation is not sensed as being
viable for us it is this is also what
I'm trying to articulate with the word
crisis that the meaning crisis causes
this fog and there's ossification in our
cognition that right prevents us from
responding to the a lot of the threats
so I'm trying to convey all four of
those dimensions with the word crisis
and and that is exactly why I use that
term I do get some flack from it from
people but that is exactly why I use the
term that way and I I'm glad that you
you have sort of picked up on that I
just wanted to spend deepen that because
it means that
the project that you know that you're
engaged in and I'm engaged in and then
when were not engaged in it together is
really maybe I mean you have to worry
about beating self-promotional right but
I think it really it's the central
project of our time right it is the
thing we have to most do right now well
I think it's something that we can't can
say without having to worry about being
self-promotional is that I for me at
least I believe that to be the case
enough that I am in fact fully committed
what I mean in sort of the burning of
the boats metaphor we all in metaphor
there's I've left nothing in other
there's no portfolio Theory for me this
is a very specific focused this is it
this is what must happen and I will step
into that foot and you know obviously I
could be some variation between error
and insane but at least I can say that
mm-hmm
and I think that there's a clarity
anyone who is perceiving and I noticed
this is also I've been endearing that
when one watches what you're doing in
your series that this is also felt
you're in mm-hmm
you're doing it you are fully in you're
doing what you can with as much artistry
and commitment in it as you can to do
the thing that you find to be most
meaningful I wanted to respond a little
bit to this the weaving of crisis and
maybe make it more partly maybe make it
a little bit more first-person or more
personal sure because there's a
something very fundamental about how a
crisis works particularly in humans
where and the scarcity piece is
important it's like scarcity begets
separateness mm-hmm in separateness
begets
carelessness as opposed to careful this
and carelessness begets scarcity we're
right right as I feel a certain level of
what's begin with scarcity and myself
perhaps I have a interior experience of
hardening proud of reactivity where
something happens you know driving and
somebody cuts me off it's as simple as
that
so my interior experience then if it if
it brings me out of my sovereignty to
use the term that I've been using can
then lead to me pouring that interior
noise back out into my exterior I get
home and I yell at my kid right so
there's a movement between externalizing
noise externalizing separateness
externalizing that which is entropy to
use the physics concept having an impact
on the interior which then creates a
movement in the directionality of how
does one respond to a feeling of lack a
feeling of separateness of feeling of
scarcity which then has a characteristic
of becoming less careful less caring yet
less precise and pulling that back out
and it's kind of like a broken windows
theory of the objective and the
subjective and the individual and plural
in relationship with each other that can
begin to generate the feedback loop that
ultimately corrodes the fabric of
meaning and encouraged the fabric of
meaning both in the outside in what we
would call society or how we know how we
can actually participate with each other
as humans and not as primates which was
kind of the points of civilization and
corrodes the fabric of meaning on the
interior which is how we can be humans
in relationship with each other and with
the world and we become less and less
human become less and less reasonable
less and less thoughtful less and less
kind less and less rational for that
matter more of what we're doing is a
defense mechanism and a strategy of just
achieving local victories and power
plays and if you kind of just continue
to walk down that path David and I think
I've talked about what happens in
discourse when this shows up in the
distinction that I made between thinking
and simulated thinking when you strip
mine and abuse the fabric that is so
carefully woven through thousands of
years of our capacity to actually engage
in thinking together and to this other
thing simulated thinking that has a
rhetoric as its characteristic it's a
combat and alright have a surreal
adversarial right rival wrists it is
been loose and and more and more rights
I just kind of wanted to point towards
that can of worms and all the other
stuff that's sitting around that
territory to maybe help ground this
notion of how meaningfulness what the
meaning of meaningfulness is
there's something to the soil of that
that is requires of taking us slowly and
really embodying the sense of it to
grasp what it means again for there to
be a crisis and how crisis is actually
very simple um you know an individual's
undergoing a crisis quite often can
choose death over the suffering of the
crisis yes so too can a civilization so
I thought that I would I would like you
to uh talk a little bit more about that
distinction between real thinking I
think you said and simulated thinking
but that really that really sort of
resonated with me as you know I'm
interested very much in you know the how
people get in the age and self-deception
how they can themselves and I
want I'm wondering what the relationship
is between something like simulated
thinking and you know bullshitting
yourself things like that and and could
you speak to that please because I'm
trying on
I feel like they can be connected in a
helpful way yes and I just noticed there
were just about out of time okay so
maybe what happens this we have this
conversation another time
I would like to because I don't think we
can deal with it deeply but that would
be wonderful
I'd love to that I feel like this is
just uh this is not a one-off
conversation for the purposes of
creating an artifact for you to be
recorded so let's schedule is seven or
another call have that come fully in on
that I would love that I say thank you
guys for making the time for this and
for letting us have a window into the
conversation that you you've started
with each other and I think it's been a
really fascinating discussion and I look
forward to seeing where this
conversation of all's - next if you
enjoyed this we have an amazing
two-and-a-half hour emergent
conversation making sense of sense
making between Jordan Hall Jamie wheel
and Daniel SH Martin burger available
for subscribers in the members area of
our website
[Music]
you
[Music]