[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis so last time we followed
Heidegger into the depths where we
encountered Eckhart and this non
teleological relationship to the play of
being and that led us very directly into
Corbin and Corben's core argument that
gnosis as where we've been using it
I mean relates centrally the ability to
engage in this serious play relate
centrally to the imagination
but Corbin is making use of this term in
a new way he makes a distinction between
the imaginary which is how we typically
use the word the imagination and mental
images in my head that are only
subjective and have no objective reality
and the imaginal the imaginal which
mediates between the abstract
intelligible world and the concrete
sensible world and trans Jet's between
the subjective and the objective and
that is not done statically all this
mediation but a mutual affordance is
done and an ongoing transformative
trance framing and that the symbol
captures all of this and then I wanted
to bring out Corbin's core symbol and
it's a core symbol that relates directly
to gnosis because in gnosis and that's
transformative participatory knowing and
this goes to the core of Heidegger's
notion of design the being whose being
is in question we write half to see self
knowledge and knowledge of the world as
inextricably bound up together in order
to do that we are pursuing Corbin's
central symbol the angel which of course
is immediately off-putting to many
people including myself but I've been
trying to get a way of articulating how
Corbin is incorporating both Heidegger
and Persian Sufism Neoplatonic Sufism
into this understanding of the symbol
and I recommended that we take a look at
the work of first of all of staying the
historical work showing how throughout
the ancient Mediterranean world and in
up and through the Hellenistic period
and beyond up until the period of easily
our pseudo-dionysius around you know the
fifth century of the Common Era
there's the pursuit of the divine double
and then the idea is one that is deeply
transgressive of our cultural cognitive
grammar of decadent Romanticism where we
have a we are born with our true self
that nearly needs to express itself a
Larusso
and that author the core virtue is
authentic authenticity which is being
right true to the true self that you
have you know you possess rather than
for example a Socratic model in which
the true self is something towards which
you are constantly aspiring and then I
recommended trying to make this so and
what's the transgressive mythology sorry
the transgressive mythology is that
their self that I have now is not my
true self my true self is my divine
double this is right something that is
superlative to me it is not it is it is
bound to me it is my double right it is
bound to me and but it is superlative to
me it is both me and not me it's me as I
meant to be as I should be and that the
project right the existential project is
not one of expressing a self that you
have but of transcending to become a
self that is ecstatically ahead of you
in an important way and then I pointed
out that for many of you this would
still be sort of like okay but I get the
transgression but I still find this
notion of a divine double unpalatable
maybe for some of you you don't but
nevertheless I think there is an
important way by picking up on like by
asking the question why did so many
people for so long believed in they're
so deeply picking up on the question of
what's going on there and focusing on
the this aspirational process
and this takes us back into work that
that was core to the discussion I made
about gnosis and it has had a resounding
impact at various places throughout this
series which is La Paul's work on
transformative experience and then
somebody from who's from the same school
influenced by Paul having a different
viewer as Paul is more her
transformations are more like insight
Agnes Coward's notion of aspiration is
much more developmental but I argue that
they can be I think readily reconciled
together if you see development as a
link sequence of of insights to bring
about qualitative change in your
competence so we were zeroing in on this
right I'm using la Paul and Agnes Keller
to triangulate in to this relationship
of aspiration and picking up first of
all on Keller's important point that is
not addressed and this is an important
point by la paul the the the deep
connections between aspiration and
rationality that rationality is itself a
rash is an aspirational process and if
we make the process by which we cut
become rational itself not a rational or
irrational process we will get into
serious a position that it's seriously
self undermining similarly if the way in
which you become wise does not involve
sort of wise acts and behavior if the
process itself is not itself wise you're
going to get into all kinds of
difficulties if it's not in some sense a
rational process again last time I
reminded you how broadly but I think
also deeply I'm using the term rational
or happy being educated I mean we we
make ourselves better maybe even more
rational or wiser by going through an
education but education at least a
liberal education is a deeply
aspirational process if that itself is
not part of what makes us rational is
that if it's not itself a rational
process then of course our rationality
is again being undermined and and right
self contradictory fashion so the basics
of this argument is if we take if we do
not understand a kind of rationality
colored calls program
thick rationality that's the rationality
of aspiration the rationality that
allows you right that is the rationality
that emerges in education that emerges
in the cultivation of rationality that
emerges in the cultivation of wisdom
then a lot of human behavior is Right
improv is not going to be called
rational and it's going then that is
going to render our notion of
rationality as I've said self
contradictory
self undermining in some very
fundamental ways and so again we see the
rejoining of right love and reason that
was originally talked about so deeply in
Plato so now we've come back to this
problem I gave you the example of
somebody in a liberal education and this
is a colorants example right here's my
self at this time and this self at this
time and something I brought out that
color doesn't but important because it's
a it's it it's a concise way of talking
about the relationship between them and
that there isn't a direct inferential
relationship between these which is non
logical identity right this is part and
parcel like think about what I would
said earlier helped me broaden the
notion of rationality outside of logic
if calor does right and we have to
include rationality proleptic
rationality in our model of rationality
and involves its non logical identity
then of course we're stepping beyond
sort of a purely logical understanding
of rationality yet again for yet another
reason okay so what's the problem here
though well the problem is the problem
of non logical identity so we I don't
appreciate always remember both meanings
of that term too deeply and and they're
interwoven the two sides of aspiration I
deeply understand it and I deep I'm
deeply grateful for it I value it right
I don't appreciate classical music I
don't have the taste for it I go get it
and I want to be somebody who
appreciates
plastic classical music now if I want if
I do that because I want to satisfy a
current desire I have a current value I
have like I value impressing my friends
or I evaluate R acting members of the
opposite sex or something like that then
of course I'm not actually aspiring
because this person doesn't appreciate
classical music because it impresses
their friends or because it helps them
in their dating life or for whatever
other reason they appreciate it for a
perspectival and participatory knowing
that s one doesn't have that's the point
the appreciation that s two has is bound
to perspectival and participatory no a
of which s one is ignorant and that of
course is one of the central points who
you member of La Paz argument about
transformative experience so that looks
like there's something right there's a
fundamental discontinuity here okay now
to bring out the problem that we need to
sort of resolve and bring back and tie
this back to the notion of the divine
double I want to talk about April a in
which Callard
shows us how this is problematic as we
try to talk about it and she makes use
of the work of Strawson Galen Strawson
and he talks about a paradox of of self
creation right now Strawson points out
that for self creation and doesn't this
look like self creation here's a self
creating itself right right for self
creation be too true to be truly an
instance of self and creation sort of
emphasizing both sides of that double
form two things are needed one
requirement right is a continuity
requirement there has to be something
deep
continuous between s1 and s2 because
right if they are not the same self then
it's not an act of self creation right
they're not the same self it's not an
act of self creation so that's the
continuity requirement and so I'm going
to represent it like this right
s1 equals s2 so what this means is if
like if s1 is hit by a motorcycle and
their brain is damaged and right and
they act and behave in a different way
that's not an act of self creation that
is not an act of self creation s1 has to
be totally responsible for s2 or else
it's not an act of self creation putting
an emphasis on the self okay but now
let's shift to the creation side right
which is that there has to be real
novelty between them or else there's no
creation involved if s1 just develops a
skill or ability they already have that
is not real novelty that is just more of
the same that's quantitative development
not qualitative development so right if
all that happens is s1 you know improve
their skill you know deepens their
capacity to acquire something that they
already value etc that right is not real
novelty so real novelty means there has
to be a fundamental difference between
s1 and s2
now what Strawson does with this right
is he points out notice how right in s1
and s2 for the continuity requirement
have to be equal but the real novelty
means there has to be a real deep
difference between s1 and s2 right or
it's not creation and the permanent so
what he argues is the argues that self
creation is paradoxical in fact the
point he's trying to make is its self
contradictory there can be no such thing
as self creation right
so another way of thinking about this is
if you remember when we talked about
this in connection with transformative
experience we can invokes voters notion
of the idea that you can't you can't
sort of create a stronger logic by
logically manipulating a weaker logic no
matter how much I manipulate the
machinery of predicate logic I won't get
modal logic because what I have to do
right is I have to introduce axioms that
are outside forged Elian reasons
ultimately are outside the system of
predicate logic so putting it this way
right in order to get the real novelty
between s1 and s2 I have to introduce
something that's outside the logic of s1
the logic of its values and beliefs
right that will then make it into s2 but
if it comes from outside of s1 it is
foreign and strange and right and
therefore it right is not an act of self
creation what that shows voters idea
about you can't infer a stronger logic
from a weaker logic and it goes back to
a point we've made before there is no
inferential way there's no way you can
sort of infer yourself from s1 to s2 and
this of course is part of kirkegaard
whole point about the leap and the leap
of faith the leap of faith is to leap
into a process of development that is
going to put you through this kind of
qualitative change in your identity but
Strawson makes this very problematic by
saying right this makes absolutely no
sense all right
and so we're caught between two things
either we're caught we can break this by
saying right there is ultimately no self
we could go rapidly empiricist I'm just
a blank slate and all that happens is
stuff from the outside changes me and
then III go for the novelty but there's
no underlying self or I can just do the
continuity requirement I can become sort
of a Russo Lee and romantic
and myself is myself is identical
throughout right and all I'm doing is
expressing what was already within
myself that's all that's happening you
see empiricism and romanticism choose
one of the two over the other and when
strossen says is you you have to make
such a choice because self creation is
itself self contradictory Khaled says
this is all a mistake and I agree with
her she argues that this is both the
empiricism and the romanticism at least
the Brazilian decadent romanticism right
is not right it is not adequate or
accurate of our experiment of
developmental change what breaks this I
argue helping her I believe is that the
relationship between s1 and s2 is one of
non logical identity something of course
we practice the narrative practice
hypothesis by engaging in narrative all
the time and making ourselves into
temporarily extended selves that have a
non logical identity through time and
through development so I think both the
in their romantic Expressionism and the
imperious in Pyrrhic the empiricists you
know writing upon the blank slate do not
capture what's happening between s1 and
- it's not that s1 is just changed
randomly into s2 from the outside
neither is it the case that s1 simply
makes ask to the first self does not
make it right it's not it's neither pure
passivity nor pure activity this of
course is why I've continually
emphasized the notion of participation
we'll see how Barfield is trying also to
step above both you know making and
acted completely active making and
completely positive reception in
notion of participation a better way of
describing the relationship is s1 does
not receive nor make s2 but participates
in s is to emergence x2 emerges out of
s1 to the point that s1 disappears into
as - it's an emergency we participate in
an emergence so aspiration is coloureds
name for that process by which s1
participates in the emergence of s2 out
of s1 such that s one has disappeared
into s2 self one has disappeared into
has become s2 so colored now
reformulates
the problem that remains once we
acknowledge this there is a problem that
remains because it again
warts our usual cognitive cultural
grammar what's the problem that remains
well here's the problem
s1 in some important sense causes s2 my
actions now are necessary and perhaps in
some importance and sufficient for
setting forth a course of development
that is going to result in s2 right
but although s1 is therefore temporally
prior it's before s2 right you know in
the arrow of causation the opposite is
the case
normatively s1 normatively depends on s2
all of s one's actions only make sense
can only be justified
once s2 comes into existence because
only s2 appreciates the music only s 2
is rational only s 2 under can
understands and justifies the value of
rationality the value of the classical
music so although s1 causes us to
instant temporarily prior s1 is
normatively dependent on s2 in terms of
normativity s1 is right it's not primary
its secondary to s2 the first self right
all everything that the first self is
doing ultimately only makes sense when
the second self has come into existence
it's only after the operational
transformation that s one's behavior is
may can be made sense of can be
justified can be understood it's
interesting because the state that
justifies s one's action is the state of
s1 having disappeared into and through
the emergence of s2 because only s2
understands and appreciates rationality
understands and appreciates classical
music understands and appreciates what
it is to be a parent understands and
appreciates what it is to be a spouse so
this this goes against our normal way of
doing things right because we've got
this is temporarily prior but this is
normatively primary
okay so this is the s-1 is temporarily
prior but s2 is normatively primary in
that it's where we find the
justification explanation right
legitimation of the aspirational process
that the person that has become in s2
and that's weird for us because normally
the thing that is temporally prior and
causes is also the thing that is the
source of justification and explanation
now the temptation here of course is to
be teleological to think that in some
sense as to pre-exists us and causes s1
and i think that's partially what's
coming out in the mythos of the divine
double trying to deal with this a really
difficult way of thinking an easy way of
thinking about it is well the divine
double pre-exists it's already there
fully formed and they're drawing me out
helia logical until I eventually become
s1 alright but we've already I've
already argued last time and the time
before and earlier on in the series is
that the the pineal are the teleological
explanations are often thwarting us in
important ways and they were certainly
thwarting what Heidegger was talking
about so let's try and do this a little
bit more slowly I want I want to say s1
has the causal power but s2 has the
normative authority so s1 has the causal
power but s2 has a normal authority so
how do we relate to the self to which we
with a Spartan so when I am s1 and I'm
aspiring to being more like Socrates
more rational how do I now relate to
this s2 that doesn't yet exist but has
authority over me how do i how do I do
that well I sort of slipped it in there
right I sort of slipped it in there when
I talked about right aspiring to be like
Socrates
so let's take this take by step I need
I'm relating to this the aspired for
self their self that I aspire to there's
a non logical identity between myself
now and that self then that self that
I'm aspiring to is not logically
accessible to me and those two reasons
are deeply those two points are deeply
connected I can't infer my way to it
right and my representation of that
future self my current representation to
me now has to afford me somehow tapping
into this non illogical identity this
non logical process and that
representation has to actually afford
the transformation of me into the
aspired to self it has to actually help
me become a more rational person now
notice of course what this means what
kind of thing does this for me and this
is Corbin's point it's a symbol not in
the imaginary sense but in the imaginal
sense it's only a symbol that right puts
these two together in the right way it's
a kind of relationship that right
between things that are non logically
identical it is not something that is
processed in a purely logical fashion it
is a representation that is
participatory and it's supposed to help
to actually afford you going through the
transformative process now let's add a
little bit more my representation of the
aspire to self is it's a symbolic self
it's a symbolic self that I can
internalize into my current self
anagogical ii right this is remember we
talked about this we become we transcend
ourselves by internalizing how other
people's perspectives are being directed
on us right so remember Spencer
internalizes my perspective so that he
becomes metacognitive the stoic aspirant
internalizes Socrates so that he can
self transcend and become more Socratic
right so the symbolic self has
to be internalized and notice what's
happening in internalization
internalization is something other than
you yet it becomes something that is
completely identified as you not just as
an idea right it becomes part of your
metacognitive reflective rationality in
the case of internalizing Socrates it
becomes part of the very guts of the
machinery of yourself why anagogical II
because what I'm doing right is I am
internalizing this symbol this symbolic
self and what it's doing is its
reordering my psyche so that I see
different ways of being in the world and
as I inhabit those new ways of being in
the world they allow me to then re
internalize remember this I internalized
Socrates and right right and then I end
well the world in a more Socratic
fashion which allows me to better
internalized Socrates so that I end well
the world in a more Socratic fashion or
perhaps for the Christian right right
the Christ comes to live within them
until they live more christ-like so that
Christ comes to live within them more
they right so there's more
internalization more indwelling in that
an agogic and that Ana gothic process
takes off of its own accord but it's not
something that is you're just past
that's just passively happening to you
that coupled loop it's not something
you're just making happen it's something
that transcends receiving and making it
is participating so
what we're doing is you have this
symbolic self that internalizes other
people's perspectives others who live a
way they make viable to you this the
self you aspire to but as you
internalize them and that self is
transformed that the world is anagogical
transformed also the world is playing an
important role in this so what I'm
suggesting to you is the divine double
is amethyst way of trying to capture
this dynamic process which we've
discussed at length in this series and
what it does is it represents this
process and kind of a linear narrative
and therefore it simplifies it into a
simple kind of teleology but there's a
sense in which I think that peoole ology
is overly simplistic it's not capturing
the participatory nature the danger with
the teleology of course is it tends to
overemphasize the passive receptivity on
the part of s1 in the face of s2 so the
divine double I think what people were
trying to say with the mythos of the
divine double the devout
it's an imaginal symbol that affords the
dynamic coupling of an agave
that allows you to participate in the
act of self creation the act or a better
way of putting it the act of aspiration
the divine double is you but it's not
you it's it's the advanced others that
you've internalized into you but and
eventually become you and so you live
differently in that we're in a new world
a way of being becomes viable to you
[Music]
right it is the self you will be not the
self you are now but if there is no
inkling in your current self of if
there's no inkling of an identity
possible and already beginning to be
actualized between your current self and
the future self
right then of course it's not going to
be part of that aspirational process
here's you right you're in this frame
right you're trying to move to this one
I'm going to separate them just so I
have room to write normally this one is
round and encompassing so please allow
me this is just so I've room to write
write the divine double right allows you
to internalize from this more
encompassing frame into your current
frame but that is simultaneously and
here's the shining in here's the shining
in through the divine double angels are
glorious they shine here's the shining
through right into your frame but that's
shining that internalization affords you
moving towards indwelling that more
expanded world it engenders a trance
framing so that you can come to end well
this more expanded into frame the agent
and the arena are simultaneously
transform here's right so the divine
double shines the greater frame into the
current frame but it also what draws you
out by the way it would withdraws into
the more encompassing frame it gives you
a sense right of right the closing in to
your relevance but the opening into the
greater self see the gnosis the divine
double allows you to conform conform in
process to the very play of being itself
the way being is shining
but also withdrawing and how that afford
your radical self-transcendence which is
always a process also of becoming a
greater or better self so what I'm
suggesting to you right is that the
divine double is a central example of
the imaginal and that that is often
represented in the mythos of angels so
we see how the divine double is trans
jets trans framing how it's integrating
the abstract form or a concept of the
better self I have some a cracked sense
of the better self but it's it's
integrating that with my concrete the
concrete actions of causal actions of my
current self they're being the abstract
and the concrete are being drawn
together it's the divine double
subjective no that's not right is it
part of just about the objective part of
my world no that's not right either it's
it's deeply symbolic in nature and in
action and although it is a symbol it is
not just imaginary it is imaginal in
nature it it makes it affords right the
true development it affords the core of
the being mode the being mode is not
about having things it is about becoming
someone there's a deep interconnection
between the imaginal the divine double
gnosis and the being mode so the angel
in Corbin is a representation of the
divine double for and now the thing to
note is that for Corbin every everything
has an angel right because it's not only
the agent that is being transformed it
is also the arena your world is also
being opened up and aspects of being are
disclosing themselves that otherwise
would not disclose themselves every
object is shining and is also
withdrawing into its mystery everything
is a thing beyond itself and so you are
a thing beyond yourself as an agent
coupled two sets of things beyond
themselves as an arena and you are both
going through this coupled process
that's what Corbin means by the angelic
aspect or the angelic order of being now
given the way I've tried to interpret
and I think explain but not I hope
dismissively explained away Corbin I
wouldn't want to make I want to note as
I said there's deep connections between
gnosis and this divine double between
the being mode between self
transcendence between all of this I'm a
little bit unhappy with staying's term
though the divine double because it
seems to bind us a little too much to
the mythos and the the teleological
simple narrative struck merit of
structure that I think doesn't
adequately capture everything that we
can see in this in the work of La Paul
and colored and the response to
strawsons problem
right and also the the notion of divine
seems to bind this to theism which is
problematic given its deep connections
to gnosis and the Gnostics and also it
precludes non-theistic cultures or sets
of religions from having something like
this whereas I think you can readily see
the divine double in Buddhism where it's
talked about the Buddha nature and the
Buddha nature is very much the Aspire
itself but things have a Buddha nature
the Buddha nature is both their ultimate
real nature but not their conventional
nature or you can see the same thing in
Vedanta
when there is a deep identity perhaps
in the atman and brahman what I'm
pointing out is that this way of talking
about aspiration can be seen clearly in
non theistic religions it's clearly in
Gnosticism which i think is very much
should not be interpreted atheistical ii
i've tried to show you that it's clearly
the case in Neoplatonism staying makes
this case for it both in Platonists and
aspects that at least the Neoplatonic
aspects of Dionysius and so and that's
clearly not theistic so i'm not going to
use the devant of the term divine double
anymore
because i want to try and separate this
idea from its commitment to theism and
so I'm gonna call this symbolic self I'm
gonna call it the sacred second self the
sacred second itself it gives me even
more alliteration than divine double so
I win right so so the idea of the sacred
second self perhaps perhaps this is a
way wow I don't know I don't know what
what I'm gonna do right now but I'm
gonna do it because I have an inkling of
its value perhaps the notion of the
sacred second self is a way of bringing
back the idea of having a soul in fact
that's even the wrong way of putting it
perhaps that's part of what I'm trying
to transgress against your sacred second
self is us the soul that you are
becoming the soul that you are aspiring
through and - and perhaps that is a way
of bringing it back the reason I raise
this is because that will allow us to
make a bridge to another one of the
prophets
Carl Gustav Jung because this notion of
a relationship to a sacred second self
that is perhaps what we were always
talking about when we invoke the word
soul is central to Jung's work one of
Jung's crucial texts for representing
the meaning crisis and linking it to his
particular
psychology is the book modern man in
search of a soul so the response to the
meeting crisis is that modern man has
lost his soul now that doesn't mean that
a ghost has slipped free of a person's
corpus and is somehow floating around
untethered Jung is trying to talk about
though I'm going to argue the loss of a
real relationship to the sacred second
self that is needed for responding to
the meeting crisis and there are deep
connection therefore between Jung and
Corbin and this is not just similarity
of argumentation Jung and Corbin had
deep had a deep interaction a deep
influence on each other they met
regularly together at the Uranus
conferences and discussed as I mentioned
I find that Corbin is more responsible
through that relationship than young
Corbin talks more often about it
explicitly
whereas I do not see Jung given enough
credit to the influence of Corbin on his
thinking nevertheless we can move
between Corbin and Jung by picking up on
this idea of your relationship to your
sacred second self and I think this is
the best way to understanding the
process that is central to Jung's whole
notion of it's both a notion of
development and a notion of self
transformation and a notion of how to
fundamentally respond to the meaning
crisis this is Jung's notion of course
of individuation right
so how do we get to this notion well
we're going to get to this note notice
that each thinker gets into it in a
different way and what Jung is doing and
he's right he's picking up on something
that is not it's not really present in
Heidegger its present in Corbin but its
present more implicitly than explicitly
and this is psychology right the the the
processes within that psyche that are
conducive to responding to the meeting
crisis and by individuation Jung and he
clearly uses this adjective to describe
it describes this as a psychological
process now the way to get a little bit
clearer about how young is using the
notion of psychological is right to
contrast him to the most important
influence on him his progenitor Freud
and I'm not going to get into a deep
analysis of Freud I'm right that's that
would be too far afield Freud is a Titan
even if 95% of what Freud is said is
wrong it doesn't matter he gets to be in
the Hall of the Immortals because he
came up with the idea of the unconscious
he comes up with the idea of it it's
neither nature nor nurture but the
interaction between them in stages of
development is these are all just they
become so deeply interwoven with our
fundamental way of trying to understand
and theorize about ourselves like I said
so Freud is a Titanic figure however
let's pick up on the difference in what
fundamental way did Jung's model of the
psyche different from different from
Freud's so here I'm picking up on work
done by paul ricoeur in his book on
freud and some work done by store
anthony store in his work on young in an
important contrast so freud ultimately
has what has been called a hydraulic
model of the psyche it's so the psyche
is basically a Newtonian machine like a
steam engine
things are under pressure and the
pressure has to be relieved and it
drives and sort of pushes various
processes into operation so Freud and
and of course this makes perfect sense
Freud has a new toe
machine hydraulic model of the psyche
Yong ultimately rejects that and this is
more in store than in record because of
course we're not primarily concentrating
on Freud but what store argues is that
and this becomes clear in the language
and the metaphors that Jung use Jung
replaces that hydraulic metaphor with an
organic metaphor he sees the psyche as a
self-organizing dynamical system
ultimately as an auto poetic being so he
sees the psyche as going through sort of
a complex process of self-organization
and that you have to understand
individuation as this kind of organic
self-organizing organic self-organizing
process that you neither make nor
receive but you participate in okay so
this takes us to one of the
quintessential notions from Jung Jung
gives a psychological an allure Plato's
idea of the form a structural functional
organization this is the archetypes the
arc a tip house these right people
people should go back arkaid
foundational like in archeology getting
to the origins and the foundation
tip-offs the patterns so the archetypes
are the are are are the formative
founding patterns of the psyche these
are the ways in which these are the
structural functional organizations by
which the Selphy by which the psyche
self organizes the archetypes are
therefore very much psychological
versions of the Platonic forms and Jung
is much better at acknowledging plato's
influence than Freud is for example so
the archetypes are not images right the
archetypes are not images right you have
to take the images and treat them in an
imaginal fashion not as imaginary things
you
Zess in your mind but as imaginal things
that are leading you into into the
aspirational process of individuation
think of the archetypes more the way we
talked about earlier they're there they
are systems of constraints they are
virtual engines that regulate the
self-organization of what is salient to
us so if the hero archetype is active in
me it's not it doesn't mean that I have
I'm carrying around in my head images of
the hero it means that right this is an
imaginal relationship in which I'm Ana
got my salience Landscaping is being
transformed so I'm Ana gothic lis
interacting with the world and
undergoing aspirational self
transformation so that I am becoming
more and more heroic think of the
archetypes much more ad verbally than
you then adjective Olli an archetype is
a way in which you are Ana Garga Klee
coming to be not something in you right
that you possess and reflect upon so
Jung argues that all of these like the
psyche as a whole these archetypes
insofar as their virtual engines of
self-organizing processes are
autopoietic they have a life to them a
life to them these archetypes are the
way hear this word deeply way as method
and path of development the archetypes
are the way that psyche makes itself as
a living organism that's why I mean
think of archetypes in a deeply
adverbial fashion rather than archetypal
I'd saw adjectives oh so that was a
mistake so
where where's the sacred second self
well let's talk about the ego and what
Jung called the self and he's influenced
right by Vedanta this is the ego itself
and this is Othman right and the and the
notion of the self with the yeah see
that was such a bad choice in some ways
because unless you've done all the stuff
we've just done and talked about the
relation between right that's self one
and self two and all right you don't and
unless you've got the aspirational sense
of what itself is if you if you come to
Jung with just decadent Romanticism
you're gonna hear ah but this this is my
this is my inner true self that I have
to be true to your gonna relate to this
the self adjective early from the having
mode very great temptation to get into
right narcissism right I understand why
young did this because he he capitalizes
the s because he's trying to point
towards I would argue the sacred second
self right so the ego is the archetype
of the conscious mind the ego is the
virtual engine that regulates the self
organization of the conscious mind
what's the self well it's kind of the
archetype of the archetypes it's like
Plato's notion of the good which is the
form for how to be a form the I das of
the I das
it is the virtual engine regulating the
self organization of the psyche as a
whole it is the principle the self is
the principle of auto police's itself
it's the ultimate virtual engine that
constellated engines so that the psyche
can continue its process of autopoietic
self-organization remember when a system
is self-organizing its function and its
development are completely merged it
develops by functions and it functions
by developing so this functional model
is simultaneously a developmental model
that
it's what makes it aspirational it is
simultaneously functional and
developmental right so one of the things
you can do is you can set up an
interaction with these imaginal symbolic
entities the archetypes and that
interaction can be internalized into the
perspective so I can interact with the
hero archetype or the shadow archetype
and that will actually be internalized
into the way the ego self organizes
ultimately that can be can become part
of this the dialogue between the ego and
the self what jung calls the axis mundi
the axis of the world very maybe
overwrought way of putting it but in
some ways I understand what he's trying
to get at this is the process right as I
in dialog through the archetypes with
the self the egos perspectival knowing
and it's participatory being is being
fundamentally altered this is the
individuation of the ego the ego
individuals through its dialogue notice
that an agogic resonant way of talking
it's dialogue with the sacred second
self I noticed ultimately how that falls
back to Plato and Socrates this notion
of dialogue this of course is the basis
of Jung and notice the similarity here
again of Jung's deep right deep
criticism of literalism and
fundamentalism because of course the
imaginal right the archetype as imaginal
sits right here it mediates between
these right
why is young so critical of literalism
and fundamentalism because it is to
reduce the imaginal nature of the
archetypes into simply being imaginary
it is to lose the being mode and since
the simply having of subjective
representations rather than engaging in
the process of individuation right it's
a form of inflation in which the ego
pretends that it is sufficient unto
itself and tries to take on the right
the role of the complete role of the
self tries to just have an identity
rather than continually becoming in the
process of individuation it is deeply
disturbing to see someone who is would
claim to be committed to a Jungian
approach being deeply enmeshed or
involved with proponents of literalism
or fundamentalism this would be I
believe a deep form of self
contradiction what's my main criticism
of Jung which will then allow me a
counter criticism to korban both and
this is a these this is a criticism that
Corbin makes of young but it's also
independently a criticism that Buber the
existentialist the person who talked
about I it and I thou and picked up on
the difference between the being mode
and the having mode as well right
there's also convergence with the
criticism that Bluebird made of young
young young understands all of this and
that's how I've explained it to you as
intrapsychic Lee happening within the
psyche now my friend and colleague
Anderson Todd tells me that towards the
end Jung seems to be breaking out of
this purely psychological way of talking
right
but for most of his writing Jung
understands all of this and this is of
course this is problematic right and
this is what Corbin was trying to get
him to see he was understanding all of
this as subjectively his Con Thien ISM
was making him see this is all happening
in a very deep sense
within the mind the archetypes are
understood ultimately for very long time
in young as subjectively rather than
transductive ly and because of this and
then this is where boobers criticism
bites into young young missus all of the
existential modes that Buber wants to
talk about young can't talk about you
know the having and the being modes
because he's he doesn't have a way of
representing the translation ship for
corbin young seems to be reducing the
imaginal to the imaginary and for corbin
this is a mistake because the mystical
for corbin doesn't just disclose the
depths of the psyche the mystical also
discloses the depths of the world in an
integrated coordinated fashion
that's because corbin is ultimately
Neoplatonic and not content does why i
said if you don't understand Conte
you don't get young now in fairness to
young young can say but what's missing
from Corbin is a psychology what's
missing from Heidegger is a psychology
how does all of this existential
ontological Neoplatonic stuff play out
within the psyche if you're gonna talk
to me about internalizing I get it I'm
answering on behalf of young you don't
get say I get it I leave off the
indwelling in the world that Corbin
right is pointing to and Heidegger
has been pointing to but what young can
say is yeah but you haven't told me what
the internalization looks like how does
the imaginal get internalized into the
depths of my psyche so what I'm
suggesting to you this is neither Corbin
nor Boober
nor is it right young but Verve a key is
arguing to you that you can integrate
the three of them together and then you
get something much better than either
young or Corbin or Boober
I want to take a look next time at
somebody who shares a lot with all three
of these Corbin young and Boober and
like them is deeply influenced by
Heidegger and that's Paul Tillich thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you