[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we were
pursuing in depth trying to understand
Heidegger's work as a prophet and the
old testament sense of the meaning
crisis we took a look at this notion of
the thing beyond itself and realness as
simultaneously the shining into our
framing and the withdrawing beyond our
framing in a deeply inter fording inter
penetrating manner we took a look at
this deeper notion of truth not truth as
correctness but truth is Alafaya that
which grounds the agent a relief arena
relationship in attunement and allows us
the the potential to remember being by
getting into an attunement with its
simultaneous disclosure and withdrawal
but we can forget that we can get into a
profound kind of modal confusion and
this is the history of metaphysics as
the emergence of nihilism we can forget
the being mode we can get trapped into
the having mode in which the metaphysics
is a pro a propositional project of
trying to just use truth as correctness
and we misunderstand being as a
particular being we try to capture the
unlimitedness right aspect of being but
we only do it at the limit which
Heidegger is deeply critical of and so
we understand being in terms of a
Supreme Being being at the limit and
beyond the limit this is Anto theology
we understand God as the supreme being
and this is deeply amesh for Heidegger
with nihilism because this Anto theology
this theological way at least a version
of theology from sort of classical
traditional theism right this way of
understanding being gets us into the
deep
forgetfulness and modal confusion that
is the hallmark of nihilism but of
course we could perhaps remember the
being mode and this is what Corbin
following Heidegger talks about as
gnosis we can understand what this
gnosis is what it what does it look like
what would it be like to remember from
the being mowed through Alafaya being so
I want to pick up on this idea of gnosis
this serious play in an in particular
piece of work by Heidegger Heidegger
discusses and this avens
discusses this in his book and Caputo
also discussed is this hid it in his
excellent book the mystical element in
heidecker's thought so both avens and
computer talk about this heidegger's
commentary on the poetry of angelus
silesius angelus silesius
was a poet who was basically trying to
put into poetry and we can sort of think
of or at least for see some things bar
fields gonna say he's trying to put into
poetry the work of meister eckhart who
was one of the great neo platonic
mystics within the Rheinland mystics
that i talked about so long ago now it's
important of course for meister eckhart
and this discussion of gnosis as the
remembering through Alafaya of the being
mode that alleviates the forgetfulness
alleviates nihilism right is that
Eckhart of course is also experiencing
this as a form of sacredness as
something that is appropriate to a
religious context so we also noted in
conjunction with that that Tillich is
going to be deeply influenced by
Heidegger as critique of Anto theology
but he's also going to set you it
situated within although he's going to
radically revised what this means a you
know traditional religious term which is
idolatry now let's think about
heidegger's
commentary on this poem so what's the
poem here's the poem what's in
translation so we unfortunately you lose
some of the poetry the rose is without
why it blooms because it blooms it cares
not for itself asks not if it is seen
right so it's interesting that when
Heidegger is doing this he's actually
talking about this word fuzes the Greek
word which of course is the core of the
word physics which again right he's
trying to get back to a rien stuff is
achill as the important way of
remembering the being mode this is a can
why I think many people misunderstand
and I've argued this elsewhere I'm gonna
keep coming back to it the response to
the meeting crisis is somehow a
rejection of physicalism and the
physical Heidegger's instead trying to
show you how it can more deeply be
remembered now he's picking up on the
Greek for this term so again he's doing
some etymological worker Fu's this means
right you know you know blossoming forth
from its fell springing forth from
itself right very much like the Rose is
being described right and think about
what this means is what Heidegger says
the blossoming of the Rose is grounded
in itself has its ground in itself the
blossoming is a pure emerging out of
itself pure shining now what's going on
there now of course
Heidegger will never talk just about
this shining even though he doesn't
explicitly mention it here it's implied
and shoot we should therefore remembered
in the fruit phrase emerging out of
itself that this shining is simultaneous
with drawing we get a sense of the depth
of the rose in its fuzes because as it
shines it shines in a way the showing
that it's shining out of itself shining
out of its depths shining out of that
you into which it withdraws as it
presents itself to our phenomenological
experience
so here Heidegger is right he's picking
up on one of Eckhart's Maxim's this is
what Eckhart said live without Y right
or what you could also translate it as
live without a lie now that sounds to
some people like what that sounds like a
meaningless existence there's no why
there's no purpose there's no grand
unifying purpose right but think about
it a little bit more carefully right is
that quest for the grand culminating
purpose is that is that maybe perhaps
coming from the having mode and not from
the being mode I thought it's not
proposing meaninglessness he's actually
proposing a non teleological way of
being an ontological way of being it's
to move beyond theirs right there's no
narrative to the Rose the Rose is right
it's not that right it's sort of lacking
it's it's it's beyond above and beyond
the narrative right so a way of thinking
about this and I promise to come back to
this earlier in the series and I'll come
back to it now
right right and we talked about this in
a couple places we talked about it back
with the Stoics and we talked too about
when I was talking about perhaps we
can't get back to a narrative in a sense
of a teleological aspect - who's this -
the physical universe but maybe the
universe as a whole is like the Rose
maybe it's blooming from itself grounded
in itself blossoming shining from itself
well always always withdrawn and think
about how that well that actually
comports with you know the physics of an
ever expanding universe coming out of
the Big Bang but grounded in the quantum
like is that so far in a way of talking
about the universe that it's very much
like the rose and we get better at being
connected to its losses if we drop the
axial age requirement that there be a
teleological narrative to it all right
this horizontal narrative it look it's
important the horizont narrative gives
us practice in something it's just
important practice in something right
we're going to come back to this you see
the thing about narrative is narrative
gives you deep practice cognitive
existential practice in non logical
identity we've talked about this and the
relationship right it has to the symbol
so let's talk about it first of all in
the symbol member here's a framing and
then you transfer aim and then there's a
non logical identity between the world
inside the frame and the world outside
the frame and a non logical identity
between you here and you there remember
this this non logical identity between
who you are inside this frame and who
you are after write a trance framing
remember that when we talk about
aspiration when we talk about aspiration
remember that now the thing about
narrative is that narrative is a way of
representing through time symbolically
we can often repres talking about a kind
of transformation through time but one
of the things that narrative does is
through time it represents how you have
a non logical identity to yourself look
I was born in Hamilton in 1961 I'm not
in Hamilton
now I'm not you know nine pounds
I'm 190 pounds that kid that was born in
Hamilton can't speak English couldn't
walk couldn't move around certainly
couldn't teach this that kid is in so
many ways different not identical for me
but in another sense it's me and on him
right
narrative is a way of tracing out and
training us in being able to work with
non logical identity to work with this
kind of fundamental transformation but
what we can do what I think that cart is
pointing to so we can exempt that
ability for non logical identity we can
exempt that symbolic identity and
instead of thinking of it as unfolding
narratively across time remember how the
Stoics criticized this stop pursuing
fame and glory and wealth and power
instead of the horizontal narrative we
can do the vertical onto law ontology we
can do the vertical ontology in which we
are connecting that depths of ourselves
to the depths of being in a non
teleological being mode this is I think
is what Heidegger is pointing to and
what Eckhart is pointing to
so as I mentioned the pure shining
what's blissful let's put this on here
here's the pure shining the way the Rose
shines phenomenon experience right
I think that's shining I think we can
talk about it as relevance realization
the salience landscaping into
intelligibility
salience landscaping and two
intelligible what the what about the
pure withdrawal
all right
this is the independent exalt
inexhaustable nosov a comet orally
explosive reality right independent
because it is inexhaustible we cannot
drink it dry
the tout HN right then the towel is a
way of understanding fuzes the way
Heidegger's talking about right look at
the book a Heidegger an Asian thought or
Heidegger secret sources where it talks
about the connection to Taoism he might
have been directly influenced by it
right and the talented Qin talks about
you know how the Tao is a well that that
is never used up it it is in exhaust it
is the inexhaustible mother right so the
independent inexhaustible nurse
of a combinatorial explosive reality the
things the thing and the things beyond
themselves I think we can draw these two
together as I've already argued into
this I want to say this very carefully
right we can see this right we can
experience this from within the being
mode in the following way H a trajectory
a trajectory of trans framing that is
always closing upon the relevant while
always opening to the morning the
trajectory of trans framing that is
always closing upon the relevant as it
is simultaneously always opening to the
morning when we recognize that Alafaya
remember it from within the being mode
so that we can accentuate it and
celebrate it that's what I've argued
sacredness is and that seems to line up
very well with what Eckhart is saying
now one of the things I have about
Heidegger is he's reticent to talk about
this in terms of sacredness Tillich is
it Heidegger is and that's part of why I
think he goes astray in certain ways so
we can think of realness as a tonus this
creative pension it's something that
Barfield brings out tremendously and
clearly in his work right we can think
of realness as a as a tonus as a
creative polar tension between you know
look the other word confirmation
coherence right and more Ness and
remember you need both if the virtual
reality just has the confirmation and
the coherence it falls flat if it can't
provoke a sense of open
wonder if there's no element of surprise
if if it's all a simulation and no
accommodation if it's all right
assimilation and no accommodation
remember accommodation is experiences
all in wonder if it's all of that if
it's just assimilation sorry they're not
accommodation if it's just the
foreclosure and never also the opening
if it's just the home in and never the
numinous see these themes then it's not
real it's not experienced as real and
that being able to attune and this is
where the Dow is so like Taoism is such
a powerful symbolism right you have you
have the yen which is the confirming
right drawing down right and the yang is
the opening up and both of those
interpenetrate think of the classic Tao
symbol within the white is the black dot
within the block is the white dot and
they're sinuous because they're
interpenetrating interleaved together
and all of that is the disclosure of the
inexhaustible nosov the Dow I'm trying
to make a convergence argument here all
right Taoism
is all about the serious play the
serious play with the serious play of
being and that's how Corbin describes it
right when you talking about gnosis he
talks about the play of being so does
avens when he's talking about
Corbin so I'd like to pass now
explicitly leaving Heidegger behind now
and moving into Corbin I've already
noted how deeply Corbin was influenced
by Heidegger but he's also you know he's
deeply influenced by Platonism and that
leads him into probably his deepest
influenced him so all of these things
are important to Corbin Heidegger the
Neoplatonic tradition but most
especially Neoplatonism within persian
Sufism so Sufism is the mystical branch
of Islam
and Corbin is particularly focused on
Persian Sufism and I think that's very
something important that we should pause
to note one of the gifts of Corbin's
work is to help us remember and thereby
overcometh no centrism how central and I
use that term decidedly how central
Persian philosophy is to the history of
philosophy in the world Persia plays a
pivotal role and I don't mean it as a
neglected middle well it is by us but it
shouldn't be a neglected middle Persian
Persia plays a central role between for
example between right
again the the Arab world the European
world and the world of India and China
the Asiatic world and what's really
important about Persian Sufism and I
can't that the history of Persia is a
fraught one right we sort of think of
now and this is because of you know the
history in this since the 70s we think
of you know Iran is sort of rapidly
Muslim and something like that and in
that into a significant you know and
that's played up by propaganda it is not
to deny that there is a there's an
Islamic fundamentalist a tallit Aryan
regime in controlled in Iran but what it
is to what I'm trying to do is challenge
that as a monolithic representation of
all of Persia and all of Persian culture
instead you have to remember that Persia
was made Muslim via an Arab invasion
that was nothing less than a genocide
and I know Persians they remember this
deeply to this day so the attitude
towards the Arab overlords is something
that has become deeply woven into
Persian culture why am I saying that
because that means that the Persians
were especially attracted to
at least for huge periods Rumi and
others right right they are deeply
attracted to Sufism they're attracted to
a mystical interpretation of Islam
precisely because they are trying to
find a form of liberation from an
oppressive Arab right Empire so that
means that it's important that it is
Persian Sufism and this is deeply has an
impact on corbin he's really taken up by
this and how that Persian Sufism has a
much more I'm trying not to be
dismissive here has a much more flexible
relationship to Islam then you might
think of when you think of Iran today in
the world okay
and so like reading the poetry of
ancient purr of ancient Persia and
alright well not even ancient Persia
what the the the the the poetry from
purchase since the Arab invasion and
genocide I think is an important thing
to do to remember these aspects now
Corbin did all of that he read this
stuff deeply profoundly repeatedly
extensively now there's ways in which he
suffers there's ways in which as you
know a Frenchman he will fundamentally
misunderstand some of this literature
and I'm not going to say that he is a
perfect interpreter but I will say he is
an insightful and important interpreter
so he draws all this in he's drawing in
the Heidegger and the neoplatonism and
aspect and this is something that you
have to and right and the Persians who
first know this the deep influence of
neoplatonism on Sufism right so there's
neoplatonism then there is a mystical
form of Islam right deeply influenced by
neoplatonism and then Corbin is bringing
that into understanding higher
and then he's bringing all of that as a
way of trying to explain this gnosis and
how this gnosis can ultimately be
salvaged and redemptive in the face of
the meaning crisis remember he talked
about gnosis as transformative selves ik
participatory knowing a deep at one mint
attunement at one mint to see how all
these things are resonating with each
other now what does Corbin bring to this
that we don't have in Heidegger and
here's a where I think you can see the
influence of Sufism and the rich world
of Persian poetry upon him and I think
it this is an important thing
Corbin sees there and argues for reading
Corbin is very different than reading
it's like Heidegger in the sense that
it's it's difficult but and because he's
trying again to break out of the
cognitive a cultural grammar but it's
but it's it's very lyrical it's very
beautiful but sometimes the you you pick
up the beauty and that's again the
Persian the influence of the Persian
poetry on him
you pick up the beauty without and then
you you you should pause and say yeah
but did I really understand what he just
said so you have to read you almost have
to recite Corvin and repeat Corbin now
he uses that kind of argumentation to
make a claim that the recovery of gnosis
is bound up with imagination in an
important way and you may think oh no
John is just going to jump off into some
decadent reform of Romanticism no
korban is doing something very
interesting about this I recommend the
Lachman book that I've recommended for
Corbin
see also avens book the new gnosis that
I've just mentioned see all of Chatham's
work the world turned inside I would
imagine all of the the third one was all
right at the end I think what's that the
angelic nature of being I can't remember
the third title anyways we'll put all
the panels up she'll thumbs work on
Corbin is a fact I reckon I recommend
reading avens and reading Chatham before
you read Corbin so if you take a look
Corbin is doing something very important
with this he's not using this word in
the way we typically use it and in order
to bring that out he actually makes a
distinction a distinction that's going
to be important especially when we
turned to talk about young he makes a
distinction between the imaginary and
what he calls the imaginal and it's the
imaginal that is bound up with gnosis so
imaginary the imaginary is what we
typically mean when we invoke the word
imagination we meet we mean the purely
subjective experience of generating
inner mental imagery which we know is
not real and that we can sort it's sort
of completely in our control and we can
play with it as we wish that is
explicitly clearly definitively not what
Corbin is talking about Corbin is
talking about the imaginal and to try
and convey the imaginal I'm going to try
and schematically represent it to you
because if you don't get the imaginal
you don't get what Corbin is talking
about I also would say you ultimately do
not get what Jung is talking about when
he's talking about active imagination
because you'll just misunderstand
imagine active imagination as a purely
imaginary experience as opposed to
imaginal experience and as I'll point
out later
korban and young are deeply influential
of each other
Corbin is much more open about that
relationship young doesn't Corbin talks
about in and works young often
critically but at least clearly and
explicitly and with credit way more
often that I see young talking about
Corbin which i think is a criticism I
have of young okay so let's try and
represent this so first of all think of
two ways in which you sort of try and
can't you know represent come into
cognitive contact with reality one is
right through abstract representations
abstract the abstract intelligible world
the world that you get through your
intellect right so you you you know you
grasp reality as a mathematical formula
or something like that or you know you
grasp reality as a purely formal entity
and then in contrast there is of course
the concrete and of course concrete and
abstract are always relative terms or
not absolute terms the concrete sensible
world all right at the bottom here so
one thing the imaginal does is it
actually mediates between these two
right it bridges between them it allows
them to come together in meaningfully
structured experience because in my
phenomenological experience of course
there's both an intelligible order but
right that I can abstract intellectually
but they're that intelligible order also
affects the way I come into sensual
contact concretely with things okay so
the imaginal mediates between these and
one of Corbin's arguments is and you see
what he's doing here he's arguing that
the cartesian cultural grammar right
that
basically you know replicates the axial
to worlds but within us right so so
right the here's the world of mind write
the abstract intelligible world put your
mind and the concrete sensible is the
world of pure matter right this is the
the Cartesian division and what right
what Corbin is arguing is yeah but we've
lost the imaginal that bridges between
right those two worlds between the mind
and the material
now of course Descartes split things in
another way and the imaginal mediates
between those and these of course
they're not the same that's why I
represent them with different axes but
they are not independent that's why I'm
putting them together within the schema
the imaginal also bridges between the
purely subjective and the purely
objective so to use the term I've been
trying to develop with you and we saw it
all through Heidegger the imaginal is
deeply transgender so it mediates and
it's trans jan what you have to do is
you have to see this whole thing sort of
in motion like which I can't draw for
you right because the imaginal isn't a
static relation it's it's also a
constant transformative trance framing
there's a movement to the imaginal it is
vibrant and vital in that way there's a
movement to it okay so this is what
Corbin means by the imaginal it's a use
of images but not using them
subjectively using them transductive lee
will try to come back to that right in a
way that mediates bridges right
integrates the abstract intelligible
world and the concrete sensible world
together but again not just statically
but in this ongoing
octave sorry in this ongoing
transformative trance framing so because
of the centrality of the imaginal to
korben korben and he explicitly
understood himself as doing this and
stated this right he was deeply opposed
to fundamentalism and here you can of
course see the connection to the Persian
history I was relating to you he's
deeply opposed to fundamentalism and
literalism why because fundamentalism
and literalism right first of all they
Ralph I this they make it static right
and they put things into right either
the abstract intelligible world or the
concrete sensible world or just into
subjectivity or just into objectivity
they freeze this and then they fracture
it and thereby they completely lose the
Nexus of the imaginal and for Corbin
right if you lose the imaginal you lose
the capacity for gnosis and then if you
lose the capacity for gnosis you lose
the capacity for waking up within the
being mowed through Alafaya to be it and
the ground of being in sacredness this
is going to be something we're going to
keep seeing and again something that
Heidegger doesn't make explicit but it's
it's explicate it in Corbin the deep
ongoing criticism to fundamentalism and
liberalism it's a deep component of
young as well right young sees
fundamentalism and little and little ISM
as the antithetical movement of thought
and being in the world to everything he
is trying to promote as a response to
the meaning crisis it is also deeply
antagonistic to what Barfield is talking
about when he's
talking about poetic participation so
we're seeing again a potential way in
which we can understand Heidegger's
critique of Anto theology because there
is a tendency right and all of these
thinkers keep pointing to it if we get
into the halving mode and we get into
Anto theology and we have the Supreme
Being and we have our propositions about
this ultimate being right that we can
think that the way in which we should be
is to have these propositions in a
fundamentalist literalist fashion and we
lose all of this and what we and what
you'll hear right is you'll hear the
invocation of this symbolic as a
dismissive term yes oh that but yes yes
yes you can read this symbolically but
you know it's just symbolic meaning it
has no real relevance or importance to
you Corbin is trying to argue exactly
the opposite if you have an attitude
towards the symbolic as that is
dismissive then of course you have lost
the capacity for gnosis which means you
have lost the capacity to remember to
forget like to overcome in Alafaya
the forgetfulness of being to come out
of the deepest kind of modal confusion I
see somebody as exemplifying this
although I don't think he's directly
influenced by Corbin I see Jonathan
pazzo is trying to bring us back to this
gnosis of the symbol and how we should
not be dismissive of it we should not
try and slide it into either that a
conceptual world or a sensual world we
should not interpret it as merely
subjective or reject it because we can't
make it clearly objective for us look at
all the ejected going on subject reject
okay
so now to try and bring out the imaginal
in a way that connects has design your
being in the world because remember your
self knowledge and your participatory
knowing of being or interpenetrating and
knowing together I have to bring out
something of Corbin that if you read it
and you haven't done all of this work
you I guarantee will miss read it and
misunderstand it and it's a part that's
difficult for me because it pushes my
buttons in ways that I don't like which
is where I keep reading this stuff right
because I have a tremendous sense that
it's pushing my buttons in a way that
they need to be pushed so that I could
perhaps where free from them at least to
some degree and here's where Corbin is
different from Heidegger where he really
does pick up on the sense of sacredness
that is going on within the imaginal
okay let's talk about how Corbin
understands the symbol the imaginal
understanding of the symbol as opposed
to the imaginary understanding the
dismissive understanding of the symbol
okay so let's what are these features so
the feature that was brought out when
Kris and I had that excellent discussion
the translucency of a symbol you look at
it but you look through it in both
meanings of the word by means of it and
Beyond it like the way I'm looking
through my glasses the symbol is
translucent I can look at it but I can
also simultaneously look through it and
I can put those two into a an important
dialogue why do I want a dialog between
looking at it and looking through it why
is it so important to have those in
dialogue with each other because that is
how the symbol can help you to capture
the non logical identity between your
agent arena now in this frame and the
agent arena in a more comprehensive
encompassing frame
so symbols are translucent as I've
already argued they're trans ejected
trying to make them either subjective or
objective is aligned with a having mode
dismissal of how the symbol is trying to
challenge you to transcendence if you
look if you are not transcending in
response to a symbol you really haven't
understood a symbol if you just treat it
as an allegory that you can replace with
other literal terms then you haven't
really remembered through the symbol
there has been no Alafaya in your
pursuit of the correctness of truth you
have forgotten the Alafaya of the symbol
this is why I'm so critical of people
who are so dismissive of symbolism right
the symbol is not only trans ejected
it's tragic t'v it's putting you on a
trajectory of transformation as I was
just articulating the symbol is
transformative
remember the transformative of the inner
man it's it's transformative view at a
fundamental level and the sense that
symbol is ultimately trans-temporal town
trans facial because it has to do with
with this movement between worlds which
really isn't a narrative temporal
spatial movement
it's an ontological movement between you
know a smaller frame and a larger frame
I represent it with an arrow but it
isn't movement through space and time it
isn't a narrative change
it's an ontological shift so I'm trying
to pick all of these up the translucency
of this symbol it's transformative and
it's trans temporal spatial Alafaya
through the symbol
that's how you do gnosis now let's give
the troubling example that is central to
korban and I found it disturbing in ways
and some of you will too and I hope so
what I ask for right now is be patient
because I want to unpack this I don't
want to try and be dismissive but I want
to show you that Corbin is not using
this notion in a way you standardly will
and it like I say hesitate to do so the
the most important symbol of this for
Corbin is what he calls the angel and
that's why chethan puts it in the title
of his book and alvin's puts it in the
title the subtitle of his book on the
new gnosis and soon as I put that up
there many of you are now rolling your
eyes as I did and I said there's a part
of me that I can feel there's tension
behind my eyes wanting to roll them all
right oh no angels oh it was silly
superstitious idea you know cherubs and
only New Age people that you know swing
crystals and you know they're angels and
all that stuff and it's like oh no what
a disaster and I i I deeply appreciate
that
okay I'm not being dismissive of that I
would say that that's an imaginary
understanding of angels one that Corbin
himself repeatedly and deeply rejects
what's he talking about
and why is he using this term okay he's
using it because it's a term that is
filled that fills some of the literature
of the Persian Sufism that he reads I
want to propose to you an alternative
way of understanding this - what right
are sort of cultural imaginary way of
understanding this let me let me go back
in our history first to try and get a
right a different way of leading into
this notion and then take it into some
current cutting-edge analytic philosophy
believe it or not and show how that
well and comports well with the
cognitive science we have been doing
throughout this response to the
for-profits of the meeting crisis okay
so this is now I'm making use of the
seminal work of staying staying wrote a
book called the divine double which is a
follow-up to a book he wrote on
pseudo-dionysius and he's written some
brilliant articles in pseudo-dionysius
that brings all this out now so the book
is called the divine double and he's
pointed to a particular motif that was
prevalent in the Mediterranean world
during and right remember we talked
about the Hellenistic Dom inside and
thereafter and you have the rise of
narcissism in early Christianity so
during this period and across many
different groups you see it within
Gnosticism he makes a clear case and you
know I again did some people are going
to know no but he makes a clear case for
this motif showing up within early
Christianity you can see it Americanism
you can see it clearly in Neoplatonism
and platanus this notion of the divine
double I'm spending time on this because
you you won't understand young also if
you don't understand this divine double
okay so what's the what's the notion of
the divine double it becomes prevalent
through the Mediterranean spirituality
of the Hellenistic and post Hellenistic
period and I didn't talk about it that
much when I talked about the Gnostics
and the Neo plainness because I wanted
to talk about it here because here what
I think it belongs this is this was the
idea and again part of this is how this
is so antithetical to our way of
thinking especially our to our decadent
romantic way of thinking so the decadent
romantic way of thinking you know and
that sort of goes back to Rousseau is
you know you're born with your true self
and you have to be true to your true
self and and you have to express it and
that's what it is to be authentic so
this and so and this has become
pervasive in our culture right in in
this Mediterranean
spirituality the motif is very different
it's this idea that here I'm here and I
have a self right now or they might say
a su K right a spirit or a soul I have
myself right now
but it is bound to the divine double
there's a double of me right
that is archetypically more important
than me and that what I am doing my true
self is actually this divine double and
my spiritual path is to reunite this
self with that divine double and to
bring it right bring the two together
and that realization of their
interdependence culminates in right a
kind of mystical union between them now
this is still all very fuzzy language
I'll grant you that but first of all
notice how this is very interesting
think step aside from the mythos for a
minute and think about the conception so
you see how this is Nasik gnostic right
not in the sense of Gnosticism but in it
well a little bit in the sense of
Gnosticism because there's this
transgresseth it's trying to break
grammar it's trying to break the grammar
of thinking of your true self as
something you have your identity is
something you have that you're born with
it it's in you and what you have to do
is express it authentically and that
grammar is being subverted and
transgressed by the idea that your true
self is beyond you and you have to
aspire to it and only and you see
there's a bit of the Socratic element
there right then your true self is
something you aspire to rather than
something you have it is the true self
is something realized through the being
mode of self transcendence not through
the having mode of inner possession and
so the divine double right it is
pervasive it's a pervasive mythos and
what I'm first of all I recommend is and
I think this is a very fair
recommendation you understand
Corbin's use of the age
as a symbolic way of talking about the
divine double and you may say okay
that's great and I see why it challenges
the grammar but I don't care about this
because all right I didn't believe in
angels and I don't believe in divine
doubles so telling me about angels in
terms of divine doubles what does that
gave me that gives me nothing well I
want you to be very I want to be very
careful here I want to start a problem I
want to start you on a deep analysis of
this right let's put aside the mythos
let's put aside the metaphysical claims
right and let's focus in on this very
process of ass of aspiration towards a
better self towards a more angelic self
right please it goes back to the
Socratic project but you can also see it
in the depths of right our current sorry
not that's too broad sorry
you can see it you know this process of
aspiration towards a greater better
fuller self is of course all the way
through Maslow is all the way through
and young right this aspirational
process is central to a lot of the
mythos that we have about talking about
right how we are going to normatively
improve not our situation but our self
so
is is the divine double a crazy idea
well in one sense it is again if you
just sort of literal eyes the mythos
into some sort of axial to world
mythology right or metaphysics sure but
maybe it's not a crazy idea if we go
back and try to ask this question
instead of asking the question look and
this one I meant about real dialogue
Philo Sophia not father nokia instead of
asking the question should I believe
that first ask yourself the question why
did so many different groups of people
in that world believe it what was going
on there what was it doing and here is
where I think I can immediately invoke
the important work which we have
discussed repeatedly throughout this
entire the entire argument of this
entire series the important work of La
Paul and transformative experience and
that was bound up with the way we talk
about gnosis now I alluded to somebody
else's work work that was influenced and
from the same sort of like I don't know
what to call it school has la Paul's
work and this is the really important
work of right of Agnes call art and her
book is entitled aspiration and she's
arguing for a neglected form of
rationality that is best understood
through aspiration any rationality what
remember I don't use rationality to mean
management of the just the logical
management of argumentation
rationality means any systematically
reliable internalized psycho technology
that reliably and systematically affords
you overcoming self-deception and afford
you cultivating enhanced connectedness
enhanced meaning in life that's why the
notion of rationality I've argued for is
bound up with the right it can culminate
it can point towards the cultivation of
wisdom
so there's let's talk about yourself
before the transformation or before you
launch into the aspirational process and
the self afterwards s-one and s-two now
la paul tends to represent the this as a
much more sort of rapid transition and I
think there's important truth in that
the insight where as colored is
representing it much more not
incrementally that's not the right word
but much more developmentally having a
much more extended developmental
trajectory and I you can reconcile those
I think quite readily by seeing
qualitative development as a sequence of
insightful transformations so I don't
think there's any deep inconsistency
here ok so what's the problem here well
as I've already pointed out with any
genuine quantitative sorry I used
exactly the wrong word I apologize as
they've pointed out with any genuine
qualitative development quantitative -
Gela means you just get sort of more
things more beliefs more experiences
qualitative development is why I am so
different in kind from that kid that was
born in Hamilton it's a fundamental
difference of competence of what I can
know and what I can do and what I can be
rather than just how much right so I've
already pointed out that you have an
issue here of non-logical identity
okay so this is not an identity relation
that they can be captured by the
fundamental right identity theorem and
logic that a is identical to a meaning
that they share all the same properties
we do not John in Hamilton and John and
Toronto John and Hamilton men and John
in Toronto now we are not we we are not
this right we have a non logical
identity and I've brought that out and
how much gnosis is about their
difficulties trying to overcome the
difficulties that this pose is because
of this non logical identity and I'm not
going to repeat these arguments go back
and look at them when I talk about
gnosis
we cannot reason our way through this we
cannot infer our way through this and
colored is the disease colored is the
deeply in agreement with this aspect
you cannot deliberate your way through
it you cannot decide your way through it
right so what is the nature of the
relation right well colored thinks it's
aspirational it involves what she calls
aspiration but she's at pains to point
something out that la Paul doesn't which
i think is very important right you
can't if you don't include this process
as part of what you mean by this term
you're gonna get into a deeply
self-refuting position because my
relationship to rationality and my
relationship to wisdom are aspirational
I am aspiring to become rational
precisely because I am NOT currently
that rational and if the aspiration to
rationality is not part of rationality
you're getting into a weird kind of self
refutation the aspiration of rationality
is constitutive of the ongoing process
of being rational
therefore it must be included in your
notion of rationality and notice how
we're getting back towards the Platonic
idea of the deep interpenetration of
love and reason took a long time they
took a long time to circle round back to
them of course this is also the case for
wisdom it's also look think about this
this way one of the things I need to do
to become rational is to become more
educated and but colored off argues
explicitly right a genuine educate well
there's different weaning so that word
now one is just the accumulation of
facts and skills and stuff like that but
for many and this is what this was
supposed to be maybe it still is the
defining feature of a liberal education
liberal liberal to liberate you gnosis
to save you to liberate you from
existential entrapment a liberal
education is designed to make you into a
better self a better person which is why
it seems so useless to people who want
to manipulate and control you think
about that when you side with all
liberal education ah haha silly you're a
bottom your sight I think you're getting
on the wrong side because you Lou we're
losing something there right so a
liberal education and this is what it
classically meant when you go back into
the Middle Ages is gnosis it's it's
aspirational it's it's and you don't
know what it's going to be like remember
all that stuff about La Paul so let me
just leave you with the example from
color and then we'll come back and talk
about this in the next episode and
expand this whole what is that what am I
trying what am i leading you towards I'm
leading you towards that this is the
relationship between the existing self
and the divine double or another way
perhaps of putting it the divine double
is a symbol in korban sense that allows
you to
move from yourself now to yourself then
to the better self one of the examples
that Keller gives an aspiration is and
think about how this fits in with a
liberal arts education somebody who
wants to come to appreciate music and
notice a plate and that how that word
appreciation means both understanding
and a gratitude it has an akan not've
right emotional aspect and as a denote
inception alas spective i well cognitive
aspect I should say I will understand
music so I wanted let's say I don't
currently get classical music but I have
an inkling and it's really important I
think that that you know Charles
Williams and Barfield and Tolkien and CS
Lewis called themselves the Inklings I
have an inkling that there's a there's a
self and a world there remember we
talked about right the person trapped in
this world but a sense that there might
be a better self in a better world over
there I have an inkling that right
I should like classical music but I
don't currently like classical music I
have to come to be the kind of being
that right appreciates classical music
how do I do that how do i bridge from me
now not appreciating not getting not
liking not enjoying classical music to
somebody who can sincerely say I love
classical music I really get it now how
can i we use this phrase in it it's
notice how it's so rich and resonant
with you know contact epistemology right
right that now I have a taste for music
I've an acquired taste for it let's get
behind the metaphor how is it right and
notice when you taste something you're
putting it into you you're putting it
into your being it's not only contact
right it's even consumption not in the
having mode sense but taking it deeply
in right what is it to move that way
what I'm trying to show you is that
Corbin's talked about the angel is a way
of him invoking and bringing into
activity all of this stuff about
symbolism that we've talking about and
integrate it with this process of
aspirational rationality that is so
central to self transcendence and so
central to us becoming more rational and
more wise thank you very much for your
time and attention
[Music]
you
you