[Music]
you seem to have this very powerful
sense of direction directionality in
your life and and I also want to know
about your boyhood when you were younger
and then and I want to go back to chess
a little bit because because it seems to
have been what well I was when I was
reading the book I was thinking about in
one sense it's the form of ultimate
escapism and and the other sense it's a
form of actually going deeper into life
and that kind of that kind of that kind
of comes back to what we're talking
about about retreat and versus let's say
action or or being being away from the
world versus you know going out into the
world and doing something activism
versus meditation there's my question
clear here try so and well as I say in
the book chess was initially just a
family pursuit like any other like a
game like like football like monopoly
just something we did but then somewhere
along the way I got good enough assets
to begin to feel it was a bit more
meaningful than that that it was a kind
of hmm cultural practice of some kind
that I was taking part in a tradition of
some kind there were art also as well
but something but there was a structured
form of life in a way that you know
maybe tiddlywinks wasn't or you know
there was a sort of sense of being part
of an institution or tradition and and
then I got to meet some grownups a
report of that world and I kind of quite
liked them and I was very curious about
the the world they were in and then
various things happen to my family my my
father's mental illness became worse my
parents split up my brother
well I buried my head in books for for
school to some extent but the main
coping mechanism was chess hmm and it
was a field of life where I was in
control where I was independent mostly I
mean actually thoroughly dependent on
others in some ways families who drive
or determine sand people who would feed
me and people who would pay the
tournament entry fee but still
psychologically fairly independent it
was some kind of suffering and even
reckoning with death which goes along
what we're talking about which kind of
gave you that direction yeah I mean
there was a lot of stuff of me mm-hmm
going on sorry so yeah certain demands
up okay a certain amount of escapism Bob
in the book I write about this is a
whole chapter on escapism in some ways
and I call it the chapter this our
lesson of the chapter each chapter has a
kind of take away idea and this one it's
we have to make peace with our struggle
mmm I think that's for me what chess was
about it was it wasn't wishing away
wanting to be a different family or
wanting to be another person but it
wasn't way of sort of reenacting Andrea
experiencing the struggle I was going
through and to some extent overcoming it
because I kept on facing this resistance
and these battles getting better and
better and better and fitting myself
growing in autonomy in mastery and it
was a kind of relief and also a way of
[Music]
we were feeling safe in a sense rather
than trying to retreat from the world it
was sort of deeper into the fight and
winning it's almost like you need to you
need to do battle in an imagined an
imaginative realm before you can do
battle in in in the real world something
of that although remember we're talking
about a young boy here who now have
children of a similar age when I started
playing chess and they don't have that
much power you might think they do you
but
it wasn't it was something about
experiencing through the game what I
couldn't experience or feel properly
access the feelings I have to feel and
we run chats and that sense it was very
important and also there's you know
other thing I was thinking about as I
was reading your book was it's just it's
it's such a it's also in one level it's
a game it's fun it's completely it
doesn't have a meaning to it except in
and then a game so there's this paradox
between it being deadly serious and
being just absurd play right absolutely
so I love that and and all the
characters that you met who played chess
in and these maverick figures and it's
like an alternative universe or but it's
also very real and and more real than
real Ansari absolutely and so it speaks
to life in general in that sense and
what you just mentioned there is a
version of that and the rights were
George Steiner whom I believe you know
New York for The New Yorker at least in
many other places but he described chess
and ultimately insignificant but
enormous a meaningful significant or
meaningful and that is true to my
experience yeah and I suppose I wrote
the book because both things seem
equally true and in some ways it was a
way of it was a way of processing what
that had been about and by the end of it
you know how it ends with the poem and
everything I sort of feel it a little
bit more of the feeling both ultimately
insignificant and almost an enormous de
meaningful yeah I managed to feel at
peace with it being elsewhere the
insignificant without losing the meaning
so maybe the the the work of
articulating not in your book because a
lot of people have a sport or have a you
know something they do that they excel
at but they don't have the gift of
articulating that at the same time so
that's kind of interesting that you can
articulate that in such a way they took
a long time
you know writing a book is a big big
commitment but if I think there's a
lovely line by Ted Hughes the poet who
says that we write to take fuller
possession of our periods that's it
that's it that's how it feels you know I
feel as though in developmental terms
previously sort of chess had me for many
years but now through the puzzles of
writing the groups with a sense in which
I have chest it's still there but I'm no
longer lost in it somehow you're no
longer lost in and it's been a platform
for you to move into all these other
things that matter to you hmm
wonderful in terms of the other question
you asked about direction I'm quite
pleasantly bemused by that in the sense
that okay I I don't you know I don't
obviously recognize myself in that
however I suppose we gonna look like
that retrospectively like our lives
teachers who we are and the return they
some lean years where I spent two or
three years do nothing in particular
with some kind of gesture is a kind of
cover story for that oh that's great I
love that because it looks like you have
all this like direction but you know
much of the learning is just fooling
around it's just in between things
traveling around and just fooling around
and centralized along the way of what am
i doing you know film applications
readers attempted languages begun and
drops you know various unfinished
businesses but but you know when you
look back I don't really regret any of
it you know it's I'm quite glad for all
those different false rules and full
starts you sort of need them somehow
yeah so that's everybody's life nobody
has it has a sort of it all figured out
and a plan and then they follow this
plan okay very good
well let's start with Peterson let's
let's get that over with because I wrote
this article a long time ago just kind
of a critique of your article about
Peterson I also said in the article I
thought it was probably the best
critique of Peterson that I'd read when
I was also critiquing your critique and
then when I saw you in Kiev I I kind of
wanted to apologize for it but I didn't
and I still don't know whether I should
apologize for it or not
think so no I am I think he thought he
misread me maybe but uh I'm sure I did
it was just a blog post yeah yeah
exactly
we get we take these things way too
seriously
I mean what I can say is that it was
very very intense experience hmm coming
and becoming aware of him we meet
briefly meeting him being on the stage
with him dealing with the fallout of
that and then the day after feeling hmm
I hesitate to say possessed but
something like the energy was still
there you know they came the intensity
of that encounter was still with me was
psychoactive somehow yeah well I just
want to say one more thing before you
you tell us you wrote a very big long
essay about him and I wrote about him I
was thinking probably the amount of
words we wrote about him is equivalent
except I wrote I wrote like a lot of
blog posts about him and I didn't have
the discipline perhaps to put that into
one essay it was just how I felt at the
time and so so I think we were both
possessed by speaking about and thinking
about Peterson and you called that Peter
Sohn at Peter Sony and it√≠s Peter's
Peter tinnitus yeah okay don't go on I'm
well it was an industry period students
always were speaking now by early 2018
for me so two years ago funny and I just
briefly mentioned of course I believe
Jordan Peterson I'm not sure quite what
she called it but he am you know he's
struggling at the moment and for what
it's worth I wish him well and you know
I met his I met his wife on the day and
you know they're human beings and
whatever else happens they're going
through very difficult times and I you
know I don't wish that on anyone
it was very intense because Peterson was
sort of on the frontline of the cultural
war yeah I was on the stage thinking
that I was being something like an
honest broker trying to bring either
what I knew was his real quality in
certain spheres it was a there was a
certain quality of psychological and
theological death and an intensity of
communication and a passion that I felt
was missing in public life and I thought
there's a lot going on here there's a
reason people are drawn to this person
he has a certain prophetic quality that
we're missing right
especially my sort of liberal
progressive chums who were just finding
him you know we're just allergic we just
couldn't seem to solve just see him saw
mr. boogeyman
how's the devil or something yeah right
and I thought that wasn't the whole
story another hand having tried to sort
of elicit from him certainly more
nuanced positions on for example climate
change yeah and the way his his fans
viewed that online was that I was just
like cast as any other lefty you know
there was even one particular YouTube
video that I think said left his host
was destroyed by Peterson it's an
instantly regret sitter yeah and these
things were viewed in their millions you
know like literally millions of times
mmm and I was right at the center but
and partly because of that you know
walking around the streets my
hairdresser my neighbor my people at my
son's school they said are you know are
you that guy was you know that's how big
it was at the time so it was a very
intense experience and actually took
about two or three months I forget
exactly how long to write that piece of
meat there's no one medium yeah the
thing that went wrong is that I thought
because it's been so long in it I should
try and publish it somewhere big and you
know get more attention for it we're
gonna film what was going on was really
important which was not so much what
Peterson's saying because animal can
read the books or watch the videos and
make their judgment yeah but not so much
really the cultural we have a word in
Scots from Ashe like mess bangle
confusion that was a fallout from that
about Peterson yes or no right also felt
a bit lame you know like media culture
that obliges us to pick a side like
truly we can learn
than that and find the active
ingredients the insights without buying
into someone wholesale and yeah
polarization is such that that was
difficult and so what I was reading
about is what do you do in that context
yeah I think having absorbed so a lot of
his material having gone through a
little bit of the culture war and not
really being on any particular side of
that so amongst the sort of meta game
community is where something's call
ourselves trying to think well what can
I say about Petersons of any volume yeah
and I tried as you know you were right I
think in some ways that I was maybe
there was a little part of me that was
trying to be smarter than Peterson he
does a little part of me that was trying
to beat him at his own game and nuance
the professor and maybe there was a
little bit of hubris in that yeah you
are probably right in your critique of
Mia as being trying to monopolize the
situation to get people to pay attention
to my articles I mean I just have to
write something about Peterson too even
today and and you know I'll get
thousands of people that will read it so
so it's it's it's it's temptation no
suffice to say that I think that essay
might still be one of the best things
I've written because it was so important
for me to process what I'd gone through
to be right at the heart of that culture
war it wasn't really about him at all
you know not really it was about what he
signified about where we are and our
inability to speak coherently in this
somewhat contaminated cultural context
and yet to bring to bear the things that
were forgotten like what is your answer
to the climate collapse yeah
where are you an inequality what is
happening to democracy where are those
questions in this to me and can you
listen to what he's saying without just
watching those little fragmented clips
that show you in your filter bubble what
you want to see oh sure
well the funny thing for me is that I
was characterized as a sort of Peterson
fanboy that was just support
but I actually had some criticisms in my
articles of him and you work you you are
characterized as you know attacking
Peterson and a progressive you know so
social justice warrior but you actually
had some appreciation for suffered for
certain aspects of his thinking so so
it's it's funny like we got pushed on
this other side whereas whereas only now
I guess we're having a well this is the
thing about open conversation about it
right and I mean you know it's not about
him it's not about us it's about you
know the predicament which is how do you
speak of contentious matters in a way
that goes beyond picking a side and how
do you get beyond tribal affiliation
there's your primary reference point to
a public conversation and that's what
Peterson brought into the public square
it was like okay here is this very
intense somewhat toxic for many very
inspiring cultural warrior who also did
another thing you know he signified
expertise but he didn't always speak
about his area of expertise
he played off that and yet he would
often be very speculative on political
matters and people would only hear that
but not here where he really was quite
profound I mean all of that was going on
so it was a kind of epistemic what was
it thunderstorm really it was a sort of
epistemic thunderstorm in which no one
really knew how to orient themselves
adequately some just became fanboys or
fangirls mostly fanboys of course some
just thought this is just a misogynist
who's into himself he's a performer and
those two worlds didn't weren't part of
the same world they were watching their
own
versions of reality and then they were
attacking each other and the attack was
part of why the reality perpetuated
itself and so I could feel both sides of
that because I because of the networks
that I'm in and you know I was
conflicted
because I didn't think he was a the good
guy be or be the bad guy or see
somewhere in between I thought something
else was going on so I what was going on
can we look at that now like what what
for me I'm I think he blew open a huge
you know possibility uh-huh where is
there there are some problematic aspects
of his thinking but at the same time I
see him as blowing up this huge
possibility and now disappearing like
he's not there anymore he's he's gone he
just he was so present on some level at
least if you were a person who spent any
time online and now he's just he's just
gone well conversation about him is
almost over or something and it's like
he's just dead or so I mean right I
don't want to do it it's very it's very
odd sorry
well you might say it's all I look for
many this was always on the cards he
looked like a shooting star somehow oh
sure this is straw and Richard yet to
read that couldn't continue itself and
but I mean my answer to what was going
on is my I forget how long it was there
was roughly about 10,000 words mm-hmm
two or three months of work trying to
process that I think it's called
cultural in digestion what we learned
and failed to learn from Jordan
Peterson's rise to fame and as you know
there I go through 12 different
perspectives on him some of which were
about his thoughts some of which were
about the reaction to him some of which
were about critique some of which were
about kind of appraisal and and it was
no accident that people like for example
Ken Wilber highlighted that he was onto
something important but equally he was
he was partial you know he was true but
partial he was tapping into the lost
spiritual dimension of our
he was critiquing liberalism indirectly
by saying look he was also critiquing
certain aspects of post-modernism more
than perhaps caricature in them too a
lot was going on he was he was prismatic
I think there was one of the words I
used to make sense of him he was also
really I called a multi phrenic because
unlike schizophrenia which is a kind of
disorder he could move between the kind
of avuncular sympathetic guy who guide
you see life to this somewhat shrill
cultural warrior who attacks someone in
the in detainer that would get the
maximum amount of retweets so he was
just like I said I cannot understand a
thunderstorm that we needed to get out
of the rain for a while to make sense of
it and it's not as though I don't think
he himself or his thought it's
particularly important actually I think
when you look very closely at maths of
meaning in the 12 rules for life in his
videos there's a lot of fascinating
material error but the biggest part of
the fascination was the spectacle yes
this is man on fire with a determination
to make sense well one thing that I
noticed is if most people weren't really
paying attention to his actual ideas
they were mostly a spectacle that's true
I think and I don't think his ideas I
think his ideas I think he was doing a
good job of bringing Nietzsche and dusty
esky and and and all of these thinkers
who I loved in my 20s you know I mean if
I if I if I had if he if he had been
around in my 20s I just would have you
know I almost think that my interest in
him was like not me right now where I'm
at right now but my 20 year old self who
was reading Nietzsche and US vs qiyam
Solzhenitsyn and just just really deeply
akin to the existentialism and Carl Jung
and all that yourself that's where I
come from in terms of so so when I so
when he when there's this guy speaking
about him with such charisma and
eloquence I just I hate it up completely
while at the same time you know I had I
had you know I don't think his critique
of post-modernism is very deep and look
and I think is I think is I think it I
think that he is a he does tend to have
caricature eyes you know positions on on
things and he attacks social justice
warriors and he's being a social justice
work no I can see all that critique at
the same time I I don't think he was
insincere I think he had his weaknesses
and he was being attacked in such a
pathetic you know malevolent way by a
lot of people at the same time that I
felt I had to you know defend him
against that on some level right right I
mean for what it's worth in may I see
the first symptom of Peterson itis I
described as mesmerised intellectual
excitement at the spectacle of
passionate thinking laced with confusion
and what exactly is being said and
that's um and then I then I have moral
done finding arising from the intuition
that Peterson is wrong in important ways
even when his reasoning is persuasive
and then finally and slightly and you
know playfully emotional exhaustion
caused by too many hours expecting
answers from an anguish face on a
computer screen because of course his
rise to fame was principally online and
you know these videos that were watched
by and shared so widely but suffice to
say that I think as a cultural
phenomenon he was very important because
he spoke to people in a way others were
not speaking to know the comparison I
used in the intro actually was non
Chomsky mm-hmm and when I said that some
people on this order but he's like don't
Chomsky on some level you're saying what
is the sentence that you inspired
thousands of a particular kind of out
Lucan generation he was meeting a need
in the culture at the time to make sense
of something Chomsky was moral about the
military-industrial complex and you know
abuse worried about you know just
your shit together yeah you know
Chomsky's kind of abuses of power look
more deeply systems see how corrupt it
is see how hold power to account in the
right way and that was needed at the
time because it's more like what's
happened to the meaning of life you know
people are like yeah that's the question
where is that yeah so yeah I'm glad to
be honest after writing that piece I
felt it was like an exorcism of sorts
you know it was like that no I haven't
thought about him for the last two years
hardly at all but I'm glad I went
through it you know I was it was it was
an experience yeah hmm yeah so it was
very personal for you like I think that
what my critique of your article was
that it was you were saying that you
were not being personal where it seemed
to me a very personal article on some
level right I mean seemed to be
something very personal in it to you
uh-huh well it's personal because I was
there with him and first of all because
of where I am in my career as well
perspective is up to it is partly about
trying to bring to bear fundamental
questions of meaning and purpose into
the public realm in a way that informs
debates about things like the economy in
society and democracy and Peterson
seemed to be doing that so in the one
hand he was like an ally another hand he
was doing it in a way that was quite
reactionary and quite you know get back
to basic stop trying to think you could
change the world just tie to your room
and so I was conflicted between on the
one hand it was a huge ally bringing to
bear the right kinds of questions but I
was also very ambivalent because he was
doing it in such a way that he was
antagonizing the kinds of people I felt
needed to hear at most mm-hmm
it was personal in that professional
sense it might have been more than that
it was it was also that I felt I could
see where he was correct and where he
wasn't and I wanted to make sense of
that but to be honest you're right
there was a little bit with hindsight
our motivated reasoning in terms of
trying to sort of be the ultimate
insight at the Peterson there's a
certain hubris
and finally well I kind of think what
Nietzsche says that everybody's
philosophy is very personal on some
level so I just say philosophy is a very
personal and I think thing about
Peterson that wasn't said enough is that
he has a very bleak fairly dark outlook
on life and and it's informed by the
readings of souls in its skin and
reflecting on the Soviet Union and the
gulag and for him those were like that's
where reality is that's that's the
battle that must be fought of one at all
times
that's you know the first noble truth
but not the other ones right but this is
not a Buddhist personable truth this was
something more like the monster at the
gates at all times
that has to be waiting to come and eat
you it's less about too much of a mono
myth or something that's that's what I
feel and I suppose I when I read some on
the back of Peterson experience I read a
bit more souls in its skin and I got to
know life of the Gulag and I think for
Peterson liking the good life is very
important reference point yes like it
could be so much worse and he's right
and we don't realize that enough and
with the Chimera virus at the moment
come back to that we're sensing that
right well I think that's was the
important part of his message in a
census like as I kind of kind of look at
look at the potential for for you know
what what you could be or you could be
the camp guard at ostrich and yeah
there's the shadow issue but it's also
he maybe wasn't sufficiently clear ass
yes life is actually pretty peachy
compared to how it could be in the gulag
but there was a sense in which he always
felt the gulag was somehow the human
default but somehow that was our natural
inclination to revere that way
mmm-hmm we didn't win the ideological
battle on the right way
I'm not sure we ever quite won that
argument that was always more his
personal stuff than something he
actually convinced people out okay yeah
okay yeah sure that's that's great I'm
glad we had that conversation I again I
I think I've also exercised Peterson out
of my system through writing about him a
lot and and I I don't have much more to
say about it I I move on in good or in
other areas right I was glad I started
to write about John Verve a key I
started to study that you know and I and
I I didn't really want to be typecast it
as being you know sure somebody who you
know cuz because yeah because I you know
study Buddhism for years I have all
these other interests so it was just it
was it was a period it was a very
intense period I thought and I don't
think we need to feel any great regret
about being part of it and it passed a
lot of people by you know some people
never heard something some yeah some of
some think who's this guy yes my friend
Neil says those were real scholars in
the kind of the main people like exact
just wasn't that impressed it wasn't
that impressed you know let it go on so
they're people who didn't get caught up
in it for me it was a very good group
experience to go through it and process
it okay why don't we why don't we why
don't you talk about you what you what
you're trying to achieve a perspective
a-- and what are your future projects
and goals and you know what what are you
looking towards well honestly i'm we
basis well it's a lot of question right
now because everything kind of stopped
but yeah well there's a little bit of a
genesis story to make sense of this
which is that as I mentioned the de
spirituality project
not society right to London and that
began around 2000 and let me get this
right twelve and went on until about
2014 15 and around the same time I was
also working on climate change and
before that climate change project I was
working on behavior change so these were
the three main so formative influences
around my professional life it was a lot
of chess there was a there was a
philosophy politics and economics degree
there was a mind brain and education
degree that got me into psychology a bit
more and then there was a PhD on the
idea of wisdom so that was kind of in
the background I kind of few medical
psychology philosophy with a little bit
of politics and economics thrown in that
was my kind of information and then
there was chess and then I got to this
job at the RSA anywhere basically if you
raised you on funds
you could not quite do what you wanted
but it was a fairly porous environment I
mentioned that because my work on
climate change was a kind of I hesitate
it's gonna sound a bit self
congratulatory but I would see an
introduction to political consciousness
sense that I began climate change
thinking that how do I get people at
home to travel or to change their diet
or a fly less or whatever and quite
quickly when I looked into that I
thought hang on this is not going to cut
it there are these macroeconomic
influences that affecting our lives
there are these forms of advertising
there are these political structures
which have vested interests as part of
them then there's this global problem
and whatever we do here the work that
what happens in China or India and then
there are these supply chains that are
not part of the metrics and meanwhile
the scientists are not really being
listened to and people are afraid of
their deaths and and the whole thing
began to look like multiple things so
climate changes are kind of waking up to
the interconnected nature not just the
different features of a problem but
different ways of knowing so climate
change was at once a kind of climate
change denial being connected the death
denial for example
consumerism being a kind of self
formation issue identity issue so all
that was going on and then there was
like okay well what's for the economics
of this and where my own carbon taxes
where am i so all of these questions are
over
you know they happen at once and that
led to a project called the seven
dimensions of climate change which I did
I wasn't really familiar with at the
time an integral language and met some
modern language and stuff but I suppose
was laying site and seven dimensions of
climate change
combined with the spirituality project
would have been like a kind of entry
card into that community on the one hand
quite deeply
neck's essentially but also yeah across
contexts
well you mentioned Ken Wilber and I
think Ken Wilber had a big effect on me
as well and I wonder
yeah this this I guess an integral model
right so I guess we I guess what
happened is he wasn't a big formative
influence I was aware of him right
nobody laterally actually me as we're
trying to make sense of what I was doing
people said all the signs of it like
this local guy you know that's what I
caught up with that later on and but
what happened was the spirituality
project and the climate change work
around that time I met Thomas Bjorkman
who was very who's a Swedish
entrepreneur and also philosopher he had
rented all of my material and said there
aren't many people in public policy work
trying to connect human development and
spiritual questions but in my experience
at the Club of Rome this is precisely
what people need to hear to help them
with their economic thinking and their
societal right and he said you want to
try it you know we can talk about how we
do this and I said well look at me I'm
at a bit of an allpass of my career I've
had six years here I'd like to do
something else and so he gave me the
seed funding to create this organization
called perspectiva he was a cool finder
he remains you know trusty and he set it
up and it gave the early funds to make
it possible for me to quit my job I was
how expecting my second son of the time
so it was a very busy period but then it
was like okay what is the survive man
what
what is the organizational mission and
purpose and we came quite quickly on the
connection between three main things
which for those who studied Wilbur will
again look very familiar
and we decided partly based on called
popper partly based on GU Atari and
laterally we realized Wilbur a few
others but our tagline is systems souls
and society so it's about the connection
between complex systems of various kinds
both natural and social and ecological
mmm-hmm and the inner life of human
beings and all its complexity the
totality of our life both the question
of how we grow and change and develop
how we cultivate virtue maybe but also
spiritual experience and meaning and
purpose and what it's all about
and then finally society and that sort
of where that Peterson essay I mentioned
comes in a little bit how do we talk
about this stuff how do we connect these
worlds I'll be kind of it again to bring
in another model in an Wilbur's terms
it was connecting the sort of left-hand
side of the quadrants about the inner
life from the shared inner life the
culture and the psychology with the
systems of you know machine
now the machine yeah if you like health
and education and economy and so forth
and also with the biology you know what
kind of an organism are we yeah so that
was this an origin story and then I
spent a few years trying to make sense
of what it's a buyer we raise some funds
from other places we have a particularly
valued partnership with the Fetzer
Institute who how does their mission to
create a spiritual foundation for a
loving world and we do it you know cuz
I've written spiritualizing it's like
what I've thought about spiritual
foundations a bit but not yet you know
it's a lot like things work it's not a
finished project and and let me start a
few things about activism how do we
become wiser activists we have something
about project called the digital Eagle
which is about you know how do we how do
we make sense of what the egos doing
when it's online how do we improve that
and we also have a very important
project for the transformative education
alliance
perhaps if we talk again we can talk
more about education because I think I'd
love to talk to you more about that and
then just briefly to finish that off
that's yeah lesson sort of main body
worker and we also have a little
publishing arm perspectiva press which
is creating we're trying to specialize
in short roots especially and
particularly books that help sort of
activist scholars get their work done
because books are cultural artifacts and
kind of symbols of authority as much as
bodies of content right so we we have a
role to play there in helping people do
their work and finally as you know
because you were there in Kiev there's
the emerge which is kind of our social
network emerges you know it's not the
same as perspectiva it has his own
autonomy but it's we have quite a big
role in directing habits when it's for
and how it will evolve over time mm-hmm
right yeah so that's I mean what I'm
trying to do honestly get through the
day makes sense of it the best I can
stay soft and employ some people build
some interesting projects not quite hope
for the best but at the moment I am
working towards a clearer sense of plan
and mission but we're also in a world
where planning looks a bit silly so
there's a sense in which I'm just
sensing my way and I do think that
transformative education and making
sense of what that means is very
important if there's one quotation that
haunts me at the moment it's a by Thomas
Metzinger
the German philosopher he wrote a great
essay called spirituality and
intellectual honesty and he has a line
in there which says words of the effect
but over the next few years as the
effects of anthropogenic climate change
hit home we will increasingly experience
ourselves as failing beings because this
first truly man-made planetary problem
appears to exceed and this is acute the
key line appears to exceed the present
cognitive and emotional capacity of our
species
that for me is the heart of the matter
it's like what are those capacities what
are the species cognitive and emotional
capacities how do we work with them
cultivate them you know it's not it's
not over till it's over so if a problem
is that those capacities are not up to
speed and we need to change them how
what does that mean how do we do that
which is where the educational
imperative comes from well we have
education without religio as genre Venki
puts it and we don't mean religion but
just this I guess spiritual education
that we that we deeply need that is
totally lacking from schools yeah and
and also it's about what societies
Forbes like I mentioned economic growth
it's like if we're not trying to just
get slightly richer every year what are
we up to right and that's again where
education comes in and says well we
thought about the human being and what
it might be what he or she might be poor
or they met before and that's a big
project but it's like flipping them on
its head the purpose of society rather
than having right and not economic
growth but real growth natural growth
growth towards awakening like exactly
and I'm glad to see the excitement
that's exactly the palpable feeling I
want people have like it's in its what
do we do and we still trying to grow the
economy and start trying to grow human
beings in their societal context and
it's another conversation but you know
this is the heart of what they call in
Germany and the Nordic countries bill
doom which roughly translates as
transformative civic education it's
about it's not just about self
development it's about self development
response to societal need in your
historical context mm-hmm so that's
that's a whole conversation but that's
that's roughly what we're about great
wonderful oh that's really cool that I'm
talking to you I've you know I also
talked to Zach and I talked to Bonita
and I talked to all the people at
perspectiva not intentionally but but I
you know you just have such an amazing
group of minds there so well that's
awesome that's
thank you very much and we're you know
in a sense you know the virus as I say
highlights that were in quite a
difficult time and you know it's there's
a fair amount of the sphere around and
the challenge is just to find an
alternative to despair
right find something meaningful to do
that make some kind of sense of what it
might mean to mobilize the response that
would save civilization from itself over
the next hundred years but I call
perspectiva an urgent 100 year project
for that reason there's an urgency to it
but there's also a need to to get deep
and real about what those changes will
be politically ask for initially and
that's beyond me and I feel out of my
depth most days but it does feel like
the necessary work hmm yeah I guess
feeling out of your depth this is at
least if we're Trent if we're if we're
stumbling towards something then we feel
our lives are meaningful or or yeah we
have to have a kind of closable story to
tell about what we're up to right
I think all that and the book about my
chess chess used to be my alibi you know
I used to when people would ask me the
existential auditing question what do
you you're tiny you do what are you
doing dude you say well I know this is
my story this is my alibi for my
existence to justify my maybe no one
label will suffice like I must say I'm a
musician you know what I like though is
there's certain cultures where they
wouldn't dream of asking you that you
know like we feel like far to direct a
question because it's a kind of status
pegging narrowing down box putting quite
and it's not a true question either
because we're not one thing we're we're
we're Legion as yeah much better when I
was at a party in Spain I don't forget
someone coming up to me and saying hello
what was the best moment of your day so
far I'll be with this personal evening
you want me to be you know like it was
just serving a very different kind of
register for
what do you do right uh yeah that's
great yeah there's warmth in that
question and not just you tell it
utilitarian or purpose or humans as ends
not means that's a big part of the story
yeah mm-hmm well it's been a huge
pleasure talking to you Jonathan
exceeded all my expectations and I'm
very very happy to connect and I'm going
to edit this and you know I don't know
maybe I'll put it out in two parts if
it's if it's time for people to digest
it and what at one sitting whatever you
whatever you like and I think because of
the virus sooner is good but I also know
it's good to get it right so yeah I
don't know I'll get it out and I'll get
it out and in a week for sure
hopefully sooner well that's great
that's great and I really enjoyed it and
I hope you get many more people to speak
to who you have on your radar but son
yeah well I've been thinking that I I'm
enjoying like I'm gonna talk to Zach and
John another again I'm gonna talk to
John and Kristoff and I was thinking I'd
rather focus on a few people and go into
depth with those few people than just
have a lot of people right now I'm
totally new at this game right I
yeah it's it's a totally new project for
me and I don't know what as I don't know
what I'm doing at all but what feels
right to me is not put out sort of
generic podcasts but but to talk with
individuals like you and go into depth
with them you know that's great I think
you I think every podcast has to find
its distinctiveness and that sounds like
a great thing mm-hmm
so I saw I ain't know I will see how
this goes but I'd love to talk to you
again and and maybe with some other
people or
being for a couple of years medics would
be quiet for various reasons just right
yeah I mean I was surprised that you
agreed to talk to me because I haven't
seen you out like in this realm much and
I be like for example I yes I've said no
but a lot in the last couple of years
partly from being too busy Carly just
not being quite ready at some
but now I feel a bit more up for it cool
oh great yeah
cool well thanks a lot Andrew and look
forward to seeing it when it's ready
thank you very much have a fine evening
and good and all the best to you and
your family and you stay safe yep take
care okay