howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
listeners have asked us provide pointers
some of the resources we talked about on
the show we now have links to books and
articles referenced in recent podcasts
that are available on our website
we also offer full transcripts go to gym
rut show calm
that's gym rut show calm today's guest
is Roman Jung pulsky he is a professor
at the speed School of Engineering at
the University of Louisville hey Jim
thanks for inviting me ah great to have
you on Roman is the author of several
books and many papers across areas
including AI safety artificial
intelligence behavioral biometrics cyber
security digital forensics games genetic
algorithms and pattern recognition and
actually a bunch more I proposed a new
field of study that he calls intellect
ology the study of intelligence very
broadly defined for example he places
artificial intelligence as a domain
within intellect ology in fact let's
start generally in that area in fact the
first thing I saw of yours when I was
looking around for topics to discuss was
your paper the universe of minds which I
thought was very interesting could you
talk a little bit about you know maybe
both intellect ology and also how that
fits into the concept of the universe of
minds sure so as you mentioned to have
many interests I stick my notes in many
pots but actually they have a comment
that come looking at intelligence I'm
looking how to design it how to detect
it how to measure it how to control it
anything and everything intelligence and
many different fields contribute to that
but they don't have a unifying framework
and that's where Intel ecology comes
there the space of minds is a particular
subtopic and that where we're trying to
understand well what types of minds are
really possible so we know human minds
and they're somewhat diverse we have 8
billion different humans running around
but can we go beyond that ok we can add
animals higher-level animals primates
fish they have somewhat different minds
we can start thinking about aliens well
if aliens exist would they have
different minds as well different types
of
once wishes desires properties and you
can go with that in the few formalize
idea of the mind as some sort of a
software simulating this physical system
you quickly arrive at possibility of
essentially equating all that software
to an infinite set of integers you just
map it onto integers each individual
represents some sort of a software
product and you can show that there is
no limits to how many different minds
you can have as long as your definition
of different minds includes some
specific level of difference let's say
one bit difference is sufficient to
distinguish two minds yep and I think
from the formal mathematical perspective
that's interesting but perhaps even more
useful is to get people to open up their
thinking about what constitutes a mind I
know what I'm talking to people about AI
and particularly AGI I see an awful lot
of thinking channelized into thinking
about minds not very different than our
own may be a little bigger maybe a
little faster maybe a little smarter but
you know they're thinking that I've done
on the topic at least leads me to
believe that there's a vast space of
minds available that may be very
different than ours and that will have
some serious implications around things
like AI safety of course and we can
start thinking about the differences in
terms of how we get there so we
simulating human neurons are we evolving
that software are we designing it from
scratch all of those lead to very
different architectures very different
systems and that's just again tiny drop
of this infinite universe of
possibilities yeah I think it's really
important for people working in this
field or even in trying to understand
this field from a policy perspective to
understand that when AG eyes finally do
arrive they could well be very very
alien as compared to human brains
there's no reason at all they have to be
very much like you even brains it may
turn out that's the easiest way to start
but it may not be the easiest way to do
it we will soon find out it seems like
if we just do it without care without
taking safety into account it's easier
to create any general intelligence than
to create a specific one with human
friendly properties so statistically
speak
we're more likely to get a random
possibly malevolent one if we just do it
without concern yeah we'll come back to
that in a bit when we talk about AI AG
AI and AI safety but I want to happen to
see that you wrote a paper about one of
my favorite topics Boltzmann brains I
want to put a warning in at this point
if you happen to be tripping on LSD at
the moment you might want to stop
listening I always warn people when I
tell them about Boltzmann brains and
never think about Boltzmann brains while
tripping a very bad idea it's one of the
most curious most mind twisting ideas
out there why don't you tell our
audience remember we have an audience of
smart people but not necessarily
knowledgeable about the domain what is a
Boltzmann brain so if you think the
universe is infinite in all directions
that's a lot of computational resources
and there is some physical theories
which tell us that matter comes into
existence after quantum fluctuations at
random and sometimes it's photons
sometimes it's a molecule but given the
infinite amount of resources
periodically something more complex will
pop out and maybe just maybe a brain
with memories with capabilities will be
such fluctuation and they are called
bossman brains and there are some
interesting philosophical consequences
of it for one maybe you one of those
fluctuations and you just have all these
memories and universe around as a
side-effect of being one such absolutely
random meaningless
Boltzmann brain yep and the other thing
about them if you assume as you did you
laid out nicely the required assumptions
which I'll get back to later it's
essentially guaranteed that for instance
a Boltzmann brain could come into
existence that was powerful enough to
simulate our whole visible universe
for example fact we know it will happen
if your assumptions are correct that we
have infinity of time and space and
matter and the matter behaves the way we
believe it does under quantum mechanics
that's what I think is one of the
weirdest and strangest thing about this
idea however that's where
I tend to look at this concept and as
fascinating as it is I say you know it
may not be real at all and the reason is
that those assumptions may not be real
there may be a limiting case that makes
them not able to produce high-powered
Boltzmann brains infinity is the key if
the universe is infinite
yeah it's finite I should say even if
it's very very very very very very large
the probability of a high-power
Boltzmann brain randomly fluctuating
into existence is still astronomically
small as we that would you agree with
that all right if resources are not
sufficient obviously it's not going to
happen but you can think about some
simplifying assumptions maybe it's just
an instance of time maybe another second
of experience which pops in not a whole
long life you just perceive it as such
that's certainly interesting that would
open up the space a bit say let's assume
it's very short but I think the other
thing I've thought about I'd love to get
your thought on this is even if the
universe were infinite if a sub-region
of the universe was limited by its
causality let's call it the light-cone
then probably we can rule out a
Boltzmann brain that has any impact on
us because if we don't have causality
across some unit of space-time then that
is the chunk of space-time that we have
to use for reckoning whether a Boltzmann
brain has any relevance to us does that
seem reasonable it seems reasonable but
you have to self place yourself in that
part of the universe if you already a
Boltzmann brain which is just
hallucinating things you just perceive
it as such hallucination it's not
necessarily true that you are part of
that restricted part of the universe
it's true it could be a simulation right
that's what I you know what I alluded to
earlier it is certainly possible that if
there were some higher level domain that
was infinite in time-space causal
linkage had matter it sort of acted like
our matter in with respect to quantum
behavior then we could say for sure
there would be a Boltzmann brain of
sufficient power to have simulated our
whole visible universe at arbitrary
levels of precision and we will never
know the answer to that probably you can
also take it to the next level it
doesn't have to be just a brain it could
be a whole ball slow universe
into existence just as well I mean if
resource to say infinite we can go crazy
with it yeah exactly and so it's
interesting I have chosen to preserve my
sanity to take the pruning role that
Alright
although implications of Boltzmann
brains are so crazy that I'm just going
to for personal purposes assume the
universe therefore must be finite you
know can't prove it of course you know
nuh no such metaphysical speculations
can be proven that or they wouldn't be
metaphysics but I do find it very very
useful to say all right let's just
assume that the absurdities that come
from Boltzmann brains can easily be
turned around and lead us to say alright
we're going to reject infinite universes
and instead assume finite universes well
they can be finite but you can have a
multiverse of them as well so it could
be infinite in different directions yes
it's it's possible but again I would
come back to the point that if the
multiverses are finite the probability
of any of them having a Boltzmann brain
in them are very of any substance of any
size is very very small and we'll get to
this topic later when we talk about
evolutionary computation but the amount
of random things it has to happen to
produce a Boltzmann brain are
exceedingly low probability and so
you're for instance a universe the size
of our visible universe I think I'd be
willing to say that a long duration
high-powered Boltzmann brain almost
certainly has not emerged within our
visible universe within the last
thirteen billion years it probably is
through but then again we're observing
from insight we are the possible
hallucination of such a brain so
whatever resources we observe just what
we see it's not necessarily to the
resources available outside of the
simulation of course and you know at the
next level up we can't say anything
actually right which then gets us to the
a little bit broader question of
simulation you know many people have
been talking about it you've written
about it I believe but what are your
thoughts about whether our universe is
the simulation or not or what what can
we say about that
statistically it seems very likely I
would be very surprised if we were one
ideal world especially given how weird
it is with some examples of weirdness
that make you that leads you to that
conclusion
a recent political situation definitely
makes one pause and go this has gotta be
a reality TV show this cannot video I'm
joking of course this is not at all
relevant but if you look at the
statistical aspects of it just the sheer
number of video games we're running
right now already without more advanced
ability to create graphics and virtual
experiences it seems very unlikely that
you are in the real world not in a video
game not in a simulation let me push
back on that a little bit you know as I
mentioned earlier I've chosen to assume
an infinite universe I'm a finite
universe sorry about that
and further one that is the real
universe I have chosen to take the
scientific realist perspective on the
universe we live in and one of the items
that I put forth as evidence to support
that assertion and it is an assertion
there can be no proof about such things
yet is the amazing fidelity of physical
laws and not to say that it's impossible
in a simulation couldn't have that level
of fidelity but it seems at least
indicative to me that maybe it's real
that you know the fact that every
electron appears to have exactly the
same mass that quantum mechanics appears
to be reproducible to fourteen decimal
points etc what would you say to that
how would it be different if you were in
a simulation you'd have very good
graphics you'd have excellent algorithms
consistently providing same results I
don't see how that how would it be able
to simulate it the same level of detail
everywhere that appears at least based
on what we can tell from things like
spectroscopy that the same quantum laws
are operating at exactly the same
precision far far back in time and
billions of years from now billions of
years in the past I should say from you
know from white so I think there are
some differences in physical laws they
do change a bit over billions of years
but I don't see how it would be a
problem for garite them to be consistent
throughout the whole simulation I can
have a video game where the gravity
constant is the same everywhere and but
the precision also again 14 decimal
points is way better than the physics
engines
in in our video games today well I agree
with that but that's not a limit on
technology there's just a limit and what
we achieved so far it's following the
same exponential improvement as anything
else digital and computational it looks
to you like it's pretty good graphics
but you have no idea of what the
graphics are outside the simulation if
you are Mario in an 8-bit version of a
game you don't know any better you think
8 bits is like awesome
yeah that's true that is true so and
again it's not logically impossible we
certainly could be a simulation and my
view on this is if there's a realm above
ours that is infinite then we are
simulation yeah the fact that there will
be an infinite number of Boltzmann
brains powerful enough to simulate our
whole visible universe essentially makes
it an almost metaphysical certainty that
we are a simulation just enough that
it's a significantly larger percentage
you know III don't know about that I
think it has to be infinite world
creates let's just say hundred hundred
simulated ones still just 1% chance you
are yeah it may be true my intuition I
can't prove it but my assertion is if
there's a realm that's infinite we're
definitely in a simulation if there is
no infinite realm and it may even be
there's a pruning rule if there is no
infinite realm that's causally connected
I'm going to think about that one some
more then we're not and so that would be
a program of thinking should we ever be
able to look beyond our universe to the
higher realm to maybe get some hints on
whether we're in a simulation or not
another paper you wrote was so it was a
called glitches in the matrix I think at
the end of the day you rejected glitches
in the matrix but talk to us about that
a little bit so we are both interested
in discovering are we in a simulation or
not and what you would look for is
computational artifacts then we do
computer games
there are certain things we do to make a
more efficient for example we may not
render something if no character is
looking at that object so you have
observer effects you can detect you can
have some sort of you talked about
precision
if we see a universe as a digital
universe right digital philosophy there
are certain discrete components Planck's
level of time and space which kind of
indicative of digital underlying
architecture so those are not proofs but
those are interesting things to look for
if you make a prediction okay we're in a
simulation
what possible glitches would I find and
then you can look for them and see if
it's in fact the case yep a friend of
mine and Solomon who was at Miri at one
point you know I'm sure she's not the
inventor of this but she would always
say well wonder what happen if we sent a
probe Alpha Centauri maybe we find it's
just a wireframe that would be
interesting he probably wouldn't be
because we would be getting there and
observing it and it would change how it
is represented it would improve
rendering for distant objects once we
got closer yep and if it was like a game
that would likely be the case the
example I gave earlier is perhaps more
interesting that the spectroscopy from
galaxies very far away in both space and
time we're not yet able to prove 14
decimal points of quantum behavior
fidelity but we can get increasingly
high levels of quantum fidelity that
again to your point doesn't prove
anything but at least is perhaps
suggestive that the computational loaded
least to simulate the universe at that
level of fidelity could be awful large
as a cybersecurity guy for me the
interesting part is if it's a software
simulation how do you hack it how do you
jailbreak it how do you get source code
access modify some things so maybe
escape to the real world
yeah can you be neo right something like
that yeah yeah so back to glitches again
scanning your paper rapidly it looked
like your conclusion was yeah as a bunch
of crazy people claiming various
glitches but there's nothing provable at
this time is that where you stand the
crazy ones are definitely meaningless
they don't mean much I'm more interested
in how different properties of quantum
physics can be mapped under this idea of
us being simulated so observer effect is
definitely one of them
interesting ones when you actually try
to perceive something it changes how it
is rendered how it is presented to you
to me that's an interesting surprising
effect which is very consistent with
this idea of intelligent beings
impacting how the virtual reality around
them is presented of course that's a
very controversial view in the field of
quantum foundations earlier in the show
we had least small anon from the
perimeter Institute and he would argue
that there is no observer of fact but
there is a measurement effect and the
measurement effect turns out actually to
have to do with interactions at
different scales of quantum collapse has
nothing to do with whether there's an
observer or not so I think that's still
an open question whether there really is
an observer phenomena in quantum
mechanics
he's definitely a better physicist no
doubt but my understanding is that in
physics they still have not decided what
he's an observer is it a conscious
entity is it a measuring device is it
something else what is the minimal
observer sufficient to collapse quantum
equations and things of that nature am I
wrong in that yeah that's an area again
it's still as you point out it's still
an area where people argue but Lee
Smolin and also my friend recently
passed away murray gell-mann was also of
the view that whatever we were calling
the observer effect really had nothing
to do with a conscious observer but had
to do with the interaction between
uncollapse t' quantum phenomena and
collapsed quantum phenomena and so there
really was no observer in the loop
because he would always say do you think
that moon didn't exist before someone
observed it and he'd say of course it
existed and you know the fact that it
was a collapsed example of physical
material was sufficient to essentially
ground the uncollapse quantum events
that are happening throughout the moon
but again it's an open question but it
would be an interesting area to probe
other possibilities for detecting
fluctuations or glitches in the matrix
again I have a project coming up I
haven't actively worked on it but the
idea is to study exact bugs in games and
virtual software and to see if they're
equivalent
in latest physics I collect bugs of all
sorts one of my big hobbies is bugs in
AI I have multiple papers on that
subject just historical examples of
accidents and so continuing with this
line of reasoning looking for very
common artifacts of computation and
trying to see if we observe them in
visible universe at least interesting
now of course in software we can have
actual bugs in the software and then we
can also have Hardware transients you
know the classic example is a cosmic ray
that flips a bit or two in memory
absolutely and we can study all relevant
effects we don't know what type of
computer is running this simulation is
that quantum as its classical is it
something completely different we have
no idea about and cannot possibly figure
out but it'd be interesting if a certain
consistent mapping and predictive power
and this idea there are some papers
starting to look at that but they're
very science fictiony at this point a
closely related topic that you've
written on is unexplained ability and in
comprehensibility in AI tell us what
those things are so we're starting to
make really cool AI systems very capable
and a lot of them are based on deep
neural networks simulations of human
neural architecture to a certain degree
and they are sort of working like black
boxes they have a lot of components
millions of neurons billions of
connecting weights all different weights
for feature vectors of thousands of
different features for let's say
classification tasks and we would like
to understand how decisions are made
they make very good decisions may
outperform humans and many domains but
they cannot just give you an answer we
would like to know well how did you get
this decision if you denied me alone for
example why the best we can do it now
some sort of simplified top ten features
while you deny it for this reason that
reason but we don't get a full picture
it's a simplified explanation because we
just can't handle the full complexity of
the decision being made
so many features and a lot of people
feel that it's just a local limitation
we're gonna get better at this and we're
gonna get to the point where we can get
perfect explanations whereas in the
paper I argue that it's a fundamental
impossibility result so there are
certain things a more capable system a
more complex system can never fully
explain to a lower level system and even
if there was some way to compress this
information there are limits to our
comprehension we would not comprehend
some of the more complex results because
we're just not smart enough to get to
that point yeah so I I like that
actually this thing should you made in
that paper between unexplained ability
and incomprehensible 'ti so in one case
it may be that you know a black box AI
is just unable to produce sufficiently
granular explanation but the second
might be that our cognitive limitations
would make us unable to comprehend it is
that what you is that the distinction
you were making between those two terms
exactly so we see it a lot with let's
say universities right for certain
majors we require students to have
certain GRE scores as ETS course whatnot
because we found that students at lower
level don't seem to understand those
concepts well so we have even like with
all of us almost identical in our
intelligence we see already differences
in what can be understood that take
dreams take it to systems with million a
cue points equivalent it's very unlikely
that we'd be able to follow along and go
yep that makes sense all right indeed
now let's talk about that a little bit
humans I'd argue and I think you
actually mentioned this in passing and
those papers as well are also not
explainable for instance it's the
example I love to use we talked about
this is the last sentence you said you
have no idea how that sentence was
created right humans have black boxes
and there are some beautiful experiments
and split brain patients and what really
happens it seems is that we come up with
explanations for our decisions and
behavior later and most of the time we
just make it up it's complete BS yeah
the famous confabulation and you know
there's been more and more work on that
and I'm now coming away it's
a whole lot of what we do is black box
so if humans are mostly black box why do
we believe we need to hold a eyes to a
higher standard well we hope we can get
there but for me that's actually
evidence an argument for why I'm right
it's not possible and I cite it in the
paper and I say exactly that if this is
a simulation of natural neural networks
why would it be capable of doing
something the actual thing cannot do
yeah of course this red Gary Marcus's
book recently in fact he's gonna be a
guest on the show later this month and
he argues actually against deep learning
or at least relying on it too much
because of its lack of explained ability
and he proposed putting more efforts on
symbolic approaches which are more
inherently understandable what do you
think about that I think he likes hybrid
approaches taking advantage of both
methods of computation and intelligence
and it seems to be what humans are doing
we have a subconscious component where
some magical set of neurons fires and we
get kind of a few good choices to decide
for example for chess and then we use
our symbolic explicit reasoning to pick
the best one out of two or three and
it's likely that machines will follow in
the same way it will be a very deep
neural network doing pre-processing and
then some sort of expert like system
making final decision due to some
constraints as well yeah that's the
approach project I've been associated
with lightly for a few years called
OpenCog is taking that approach where
there's an inner symbolic layer and then
there's the ability to plug in a many
different perhaps deep learning type
architectures to do the equivalence of
perception and classification object
identification etc so I'm with you on
that one and Gary that probably it's
some hybrid that's gonna be the way we
actually reach AGI I think so and there
are so many different methods in AI over
the years and I think all of them are
valuable they just different patches of
this bigger puzzle and eventually we'll
learn to see how they fit together and
that's going to be the way to succeed
interesting let's see here where are you
on predicting the road to AGI and for
again for our audience AGI is
artificial general intelligence which
means more or less something like a
human level of ability to solve many
different problems at a human level of
competency looking at where we got good
results and succeeded it seems that just
adding a lot more compute and a lot more
data to existing neural architectures
takes us very far and it doesn't seem to
stop taking us in that direction so for
a while I think we'll make great
progress just kind of scaling everything
we have at some point we'll hit some
bottlenecks and that's where this other
method symbolic methods will allow us to
move to the next level I think certainly
deep learning is just amazing the
progress it continues to make every week
we see an interesting result on the
other hand I thought Gary Marcus made
some good points of showing that yes
it's amazing the results it makes but
the limitations are also pretty
staggering so far for instance in
language understanding so far there's
nothing like real understanding it's all
very very powerful statistical
associations and that he at least would
argue that's qualitatively different
than real understanding any thoughts on
that right but the real understanding of
language is AI complete if we had it we
would have AGI you can get partial AI
complete solution you either have it or
not and so for a while we're not gonna
have real understanding until we do and
that's too late at this point we got
full-blown
AGI interesting yeah let's hop ahead a
couple one of my questions I have is
you've written on AI complete AI easy AI
hard and the Turing test could you
explain those terms and and and your
thoughts on the Turing test which as you
know is quite controversial whether it
is or is not a good test
all right so in computer science theory
there is a very useful concept of NP
completeness we found that almost every
interesting problem is both difficult
and can be converted to every other
interesting difficult problem so if you
solved one of them it's like you found
solution to all of them and I argued
that in AI there is a similar
survey I complete problems starting with
passing the Turing test as the original
one where if you find a perfect solution
to one of them you basically got a GI
you got solution to AI if you can pass
Turing test you can have intelligent
conversation and any topic you can be
creative you can be novel you can do
well in any domain because any domain
can be a subdomain of questioning in a
real unrestricted Turing test so those
are the problems I call they I complete
I did originate this term I just kind of
try to formalize it and use it and it
seems that language understanding true
language understanding is required to
pass the Turing test yeah if it's not
constricted to two minutes with amateurs
and then that makes it an AI complete
problem and so we're not gonna see any
sort of warning we're not gonna see
partial understanding before we get to
four one interesting I have to say I
agree with you I've been advocating on
the OpenCog project for how many years
now five years that language
understanding is the bottleneck if we
get through that on the other side we're
mighty close to AGI right I just go next
level and I think that's AGI if you have
full understanding if there's no limits
to your linguistic abilities you you are
one of us now probably they met or it's
just shy of it we'll see maybe they also
have to have some linkage to affordances
in whatever domain you're operating in
because intelligence is not just
understanding it's also the ability to
act and solve problems right so notice
that humans we perceive humans as
general intelligences but in reality
they are very limited most of us are not
general in all the means most of us have
very hard time doing things we require a
eyes to do to become a GIS right I
cannot fix a car I don't speak Chinese
there is whole bunch of things they
cannot do even though I claim to be a
type of AGI on the other hand if we
assume well let me back up a little bit
I agree with you that we overestimate
human capability in fact I like to say
because mother nature is
seldom profligate in her gifts from
evolution which we'll get to later it's
almost certain that humans are just
above the line of general intelligence
we're almost certainly a weak general
intelligence and from the work I've done
in in research I've done in cognitive
science and cognitive neuroscience it's
really obvious where some of those
weaknesses are for instance our working
set size of working memory of you know
seven plus or minus two it would seem
pretty clear that a mind sort of like
ours with a working set size of a
hundred would be qualitatively different
than five who's the village idiot and
nine who's Einstein we got to 100 it
would be a very different brain some
other examples on why we're pretty damn
weak is our memory as we know it's low
fidelity it's unstable its rewritable
from when you retrieve it can be
accidentally rewritten with changes etc
so we are a pretty weak example of of
AGI I agree we have a paper on
artificial stupidity where we talk about
safety features which basically limit
artificial intelligence systems to those
human levels making them not better than
us and so making us capable of competing
and controlling with them I actually
sent that paper to David Krakauer my
friend who's president of the Santa Fe
Institute turns out one of the areas
he's interested in is stupidity and he
is collecting interesting research ideas
about stupidity so I actually said to
him yesterday when I was doing my
preparation so if he reaches out to you
you'll know why that happened well I'm
always a stupid expert you know and he
was on my show earlier and he said I'd
like to propose that somebody set up
endow a chair as a professor in
stupidity he says we need that position
I thought that was hilarious and of
course you need the smartest person
around to be a professor of stupidity
self-esteem exactly right you got to
have a you know fully confident of
yourself so we've talked about a lot of
things where I was going to talk about
later but now we can hop back to some of
the framing which was how are these
things related to AI safety fact maybe
if you could just talk a little bit
about AI safety in general and then kind
of relate how some of these ideas we've
talked about have some bearings on AI
safety great question so if you look at
examples of other minds we have wild
animals for example or pit bulls
they are somewhat different in what we
trying to do and so sometimes may hurt
us people who unfortunate to have mental
disabilities sometimes act in dangerous
ways so those are trivial examples with
a little bit of difference there are
already some dangerous and safe
behaviors if you take it to extreme the
difference has become extreme the danger
grows so a lot of times it's not
malevolent intention it's just a side
effect there are some silly examples
like if I have the super powerful system
but it's not very well aligned with
human preferences and I tell it well
make it so there are no people with
cancer around there are multiple ways to
get to that goal and some of those like
killing all humans are not what we have
in mind
whereas others were you're actually
curing cancer and people are happy is
exactly what we hope for
so specifying those differences and
making sure that the system is under our
control is what we're trying to do but
we don't fully understand well how is
the system different I have other papers
and impassibility results talking about
limits to predictability of such systems
we cannot predict what they gonna do if
they smarter than us there are other
limitations and one of the papers I'm
working on right now is kind of
surveying those limitations from
different domains all of which are part
of a ICT research game theory control
fee a systems networks all of them have
well-known impossibilities also
mathematics of course economics public
choice theory and it doesn't seem like
we have any tools to overcome some of
those limitations so maybe the best we
can hope for is safer AI not safe a guy
in a perfect sense we're referring back
to some of the earlier things we talked
about certainly the fact that there is a
very large universe of Minds available
to AI may make this problem as you say
unsolvable I'm leaning towards that
conclusion more and more I'm starting to
see
some kind of paradox based
self-referential proofs for that of
course it really depends on what
specific system we have whatever high
tech chure what limits are in place for
it but it seems like unrestricted super
intelligent system would not be
controlled by us or at least it will be
very very difficult right I'm leaning
towards impossible at that point control
will switch and there is hope that maybe
there is some alignment between us but
it's very unlikely to be by chance it's
only if we have some sort of control
over initial design and those initial
features are propagated to later updates
of that software okay that's interesting
so basically you say we're doomed well
not yet we still have a bit of time it's
possible we'll make some good decisions
about what to do and not to do we have
examples from other domains where we
kind of slow down a bit with research
human cloning genetic engineering
chemical weapons biological weapons lots
of examples of situations where we said
let's not do it just yet let's study it
a bit more and then we'll decide if we
need to clone humans maybe it's super
beneficial but let's make sure we do it
right the first time yeah interesting
now I've heard some people propose a
very extreme measures to avoid the AI
apocalypse you know some of the folks
associated with miry have floated crazy
ideas like maybe we should sterilize the
earth with very large EMP pulses every
10 years that would destroy all
electronics to keep people from creating
a GIS so sometimes medicine is worse
than disease and don't propose anything
which will completely destroy our
standards of living or anything of that
nature of course if you truly believe
that problem is unsolvable and the
outcome is doom as you put it then
perhaps the solutions become less crazy
yeah I think a lot of that comes around
to what one things about the singularity
you know for our audience at home the
singularity
is a very interesting concept almost as
wild as Boltzmann brains not quite I
think it was first stated by Vernor
Vinge though there were some predecessor
people who said things very similar but
it's essentially as follows let's
imagine we have an artificial
intelligence that's about as powerful as
a human maybe a little bit better to
keep the argument simple let's call it
one point one human power what happens
if we give that artificial intelligence
the job of creating its successor and
it's not only smarter than humans but a
lot faster than humans and so fairly
quickly it produces a improved version
of itself that's 1.3 human power and
then you tell that artificial
intelligence to design its own successor
and it produces a successor that's 1.9
human horsepower and then the next one
is 3.6 and the next one's 10 and then
one after that's a thousand and soon
it's a million times as powerful as a
human
that's essentially argument about the
singularity some people believe the
singularity could occur within hours or
days after reaching ági levels of say
1.1 humans others say no and if it were
to have runaway super intelligence
within hours of creating the first AGI
then it strikes me AI risk is really
high if it turns out it will take
centuries to grow from say one point one
to a hundred human horsepower
equivalents then the idea of AI risk is
probably very manageable where do you
come out on this concept of the
singularity I think it would be a very
fast process we are simulating as you
said human intelligence just at scales
of many many magnitudes larger with
larger memories larger access to
information so speed up would be huge we
don't need to sleep they don't need to
eat they don't take breaks you can run
many many such systems in parallel so I
think the process would be very fast at
that point trying to develop safety
mechanisms and the goal would be a
little too late interesting and I have
to say after thinking about how limited
humans are I agree there's a lot of room
above us which I think it's at least
supportive of the argument that the
take-off could be fast as used to have
those limits and memory and short-term
memory if they were just moved we would
already be much more capable you see it
with certain savants and their
mathematical ability and other abilities
yeah and those people have working
memory sizes no bigger than nine or ten
so what happens when you get to a
hundred it's almost unfathomable is that
now so let's both agree that at some
point the singularity could be fast
takeoff another article that you wrote
is called leak proofing the singularity
talk to us about that how do we be
prepared to deal with a fast takeoff AI
situation so this paper specifically
talks about developing tools for us to
be able to safely design develop and
test artificial intelligence systems so
everyone's working and making one but do
they have appropriate infrastructure to
study it to control inputs to control
outputs if you are working with a
computer virus
you're gonna isolate it and a machine
not connected to internet you will try
to understand what servers it's
connecting to and so on there is not a
similar protocol for working with
intelligent systems so that was my
attempt to do that design different
levels of communication protocols how
much information goes in what type of
information goes out to prevent social
engineering attacks overall conclusions
of that paper is that it's a very useful
tool it buys us some time but at the end
of the day the system always escapes
from its containment ah that's
interesting so we're doomed you keep
saying that I think you know there are
other people working on you know this
question you know one group of future of
humanity Institute for instance what do
you think of other people's work in this
area it's a very good we take very
different approaches I looked at it from
cyber security point of view
specifically side-channel attacks they
look at it from I think more
philosophical point of view being
philosophers but I think we all agree
that it's not a long-term solution you
he staked a superintelligence to a box
permanently the miry guys are now
Eliezer is at least thinking that maybe
we can I don't think he does I think he
actually did experiments where he
pretended to be super intelligence and
was able to escape almost every time
just by talking to regular people so
that's not encouraging he and I had a
debate one time where I took the
perspective there there's no way you
will ever be able to constrain in a
super AI and he claimed at that point I
met this was 12 years ago that yes I
can't debit you know I don't know if
you've ever met him but he's strongly
argue strongly argumentative guy and so
am I so we had a good time I don't think
either of us convinced the other but we
had a very fruitful conversation I'm
glad to hear that he has come around to
my point of you goddammit then it's
gonna be exceedingly difficult if it's
at all possible to be able to constrain
a super AI what we need is more
mathematical proofs and the rigorous
arguments showing who's right and people
love discussing static but I think there
is very little formal argumentation for
either point of view I'm happy to see
someone prove that it's possible and we
are actually not doomed my guess is we
won't be able to prove it one way or the
other that this is a complex systems
problem and having been involved with
the Santa Fe Institute for the last 19
years 18 years and making the study of
complexity one of my areas of strong
interest I've come away to realize there
are a huge amounts of domains that
aren't really very amenable to closed
form mathematical analysis at least not
with existing tools there proves that
that cannot be done in principle yeah
there may the world like there's two
different oh well there's three
different cases there ones that can't be
done in principle you know boydle has
shown us that such things exist but I
would argue there's a vastly larger
group of things that can't be done in
practice and the one I point to as a
very general case example is
deterministic chaos we know that even
rising ly simple complex systems
you know the three-body problem for
instance even minor changes or Lorentz
equations even minor minor
in the initial conditions any
measurements produce you know vastly and
entirely in commensurable results and I
suspect strongly that AI AGI is going to
be in that case that even if in
principle it were mathematically
determinable the realities of dealing
with a real AI and all the huge numbers
of design space questions about it would
lead you to a situation like
deterministic chaos or are in a bill the
limits of our ability to be precise
would make solving it in closed form
mathematics
whether it was containable or not
impossible I don't disagree with you I
just would love to see someone publish
indirect oh yeah I'm sure they're people
working on it but I my bet I'll put
money on the long bets thing anyone that
wants to argue the other side I'm gonna
bet that no such proof will be done I
will not take the argument that we can
prove it can't be done but I'm not gonna
say just that it isn't done because of
something like the deterministic chaos
problem you might be completely right
I'll share my next paper with you on
some of those impossibility results I'd
love it that's an area I'm hugely
interested in as you can see now let's
turn from the the real runaway we're
doomed without which I call the emperor
of paper clips scenario you know that
being an example I think was Bostrom
used like a laser actually used this way
back yonder also that you know we
stupidly give a super intelligence the
job of optimizing a paperclip Factory
and it escapes the factory and decides
to turn the whole earth into paperclips
builds interstellar spaceship so it can
go around the universe turn all the
planets and all the stars into paper
clips you know that's the AGI run amok
scenario I'm saying yes that's possible
that that is a risk however there's an
earlier risk and I think this is one
that will resonate with you based on
some of your more practical AI security
issues work that you've done which is I
called the bad humans with sub AGI a
eyes you know that's put a very tangible
example the Chinese I think we have a
lot of things we have to worry about
risks with the misuse of AGI or you know
everyone will decide what's used for
misuse of AI
in ways that are bad long before we get
to AGI I agree I have the original paper
and malevolent AI how to create it how
to abuse it and that's the unsolved
problem even if you manage somehow to
create a very nice friendly AI product
what stops the bad guys from flipping a
bit and now it's spreading cancer
instead of hearing it that's hard to
solve inside of that is very difficult
to address we don't have any solutions
in that domain we only have a few papers
and a few workshops even looking at that
and that's definitely a harder problem
because it includes all the other
concerns misaligned values bugs and code
poor software design you name it it's
still part of it but now you have
additional malevolent payload yeah and
even that's not necessarily even my
level and I kind of doubt that the
leadership of China is malevolent they
probably think that they are doing the
right thing but from our perspective at
least I think we would argue that what
they're building is the technologically
empowered fascist dictatorship that even
George Orwell couldn't have imagined
well we're not limited just to very
powerful governments as bad guys it
could be anyone with access to this code
and a lot of this code is becoming
open-source crazy people Domesday calls
just anyone suicidal people you name it
anyone can just add their own goals to
AI as a product yeah if if it's powerful
enough I mean this is where I make the
distinction between sub AGI and AGI if
we have AGI then yes one could imagine
let's say it's some crank in the
basement it seems the first AGI they
could do great damage how much damage
can they do with a sub Agia I the damage
is proportional to capability we already
see people whose ransomware scripts they
not experts they're not hackers they're
on a program and caused billions of
dollars in damage its scale so ci
becomes more capable damage goes
perforation grows but the problem is the
same you have actors who are not
necessarily experts are very powerful
with access to this very powerful
technology and once it gets to general
super intelligence
it only gets worse I mean most of a
casus I think about the person next to
it gets punished first but let's say it
is controlled in some way by good guys
that bad guys can still change that fact
interesting are you alluded to that one
of the issues here is that a lot of AI
code is open source I'm sure you know
that the recent case where open AI who
was set up with a name
open AI to be open has decided not to
publish the full form of one of their
models the GPT two language processing
system could you tell us a little bit
about things like that and whether open
source is or isn't a good idea for AI as
a you know as a AI security practitioner
sure so I think that particular example
is more of an exercise in seeing how you
can not release a model what effect it
would have on community would it be an
acceptable practice would someone else
quickly just achieve the same results by
passing this limitation I don't think
that particular model is that dangerous
and there are some partial models and
competing models which achieved very
similar results but as a general concept
yes if you had somehow managed to get
working AG ID products releasing it on
the internet right now with no safety
mechanisms will be a very bad idea
and yes ironic that their name is open
AI in general open source software is
better reviewed more reliable has less
backdoors but this is like releasing
code for a very dangerous virus or
something similar to that it's just not
safe to do so yeah that's an interesting
question
again the OpenCog project now also the
singularity net project which I said
then loosely affiliated with for a
number of years they make the opposite
argument they argue that there's an even
bigger risk which is the problem of the
first AGI being achieved in a closed
fashion by some power whether it's US
government whether it's China whether
it's
whether it's Google and that the danger
of a single first mover with AGI is so
large that it's better to do AGI
research as open source so that there
are multiple AG eyes that come into
existence you know at the moment of the
assuming it's that they're their project
is the one that gets over the line first
so if there's many AG eyes that can be
used to police each other what do you
think of that argument so there are good
arguments and both sites open a closed
but this particular argument they think
is not optimal so in my opinion if it's
not a controlled AGI you just got there
first you probably be the first victim
to begin with so it doesn't give you any
advantage to be next to it physically
first you do have control of it if you
don't have control of it you don't have
an advantage is not beneficial to you
the best argument they have for slowing
down is exactly that if you get there
first but you can't monetize it you
can't even survive it why why are you
doing it in the first place
and again that's assuming fast takeoff
right and I think we both agreed fast
takeoff is not a bad hypothesis if it's
low takeoff it's a different story and I
think that's a very interesting fork in
the road when we're thinking about this
if an AGI takes off to the singularity
rapidly then it's probably unsafe to
have out in multiple hands in an
open-source fashion if it's slow take
off maybe not so much it also creates
competition and possibly warlike
scenarios so let's say one is more
likely to be changed into a safe version
always safer now you have multiple
problems to deal with you have multiple
rogue general intelligence is competing
fighting using I don't even know what
technology to defeat the others and
humanity is a side thought they don't
really care about us but yeah this this
is the game theoretical trap right
unfortunately which is let's assume
there's competition to produce the first
AGI and let's you know let's get rid of
the open source let's say they don't
have the resources but it's you know a
dozen proprietary entities around the
world corporations countries a small
number of really rich people like open
AI they all have an
centum to be their first particularly in
fast takeoff because whoever gets there
first can probably dominate everybody
else and prevent them from achieving AGI
we there that for have a race to be
first and if we assume that safety comes
with a costs in both resources and time
there's an unfortunate perhaps deadly
game theoretical trap which there will
be a strong incentive to not pay
attention to safety because if you pay
attention to safety the person that
doesn't pay attention to safety will get
it to AGI first and be able to suppress
you you are correct but what most people
don't realize is that money in a post
singular it's world has very different
value I'm not sure if it has any so if
you're trying to maximize shareholder
profit and you get there first and you
have this uncontrolled superintelligence
this is your least concern how much
money you share some where you really
have much bigger problems to address if
you still around yeah I great money may
not be the factor in fact truthfully I
think the rich people interested in AGI
it's not about money it's about hubris
and ego right you know they're smart
enough to realize that the world will be
very very very different the other side
of AGI would take Lee if there's fast
take off and you know the current status
hierarchy will be completely overturned
you know but think of somebody like
Putin right he has said accurately at
some level he who controls AI controls
the world and I think we can say with a
high level of confidence that what Putin
would like to do is control the world so
let's imagine that a Russian government
lab produces the first AGI or at least
is aiming for it and they under Putin's
instructions he says forget about safety
you know we want to be first so we can
dominate the world aren't we caught in a
game theoretical trap around that you
correctly said whoever controls AI not
whoever has access to random super
intelligence okay we make that
distinction no that's that's good work
that one control are you actually
telling it what to do or you just have
this super powerful genie with no
controls and it does whatever it wants
and maybe you will be used for resources
first your country let's
Rasha will be the first set of molecules
converted into paperclips
ah okay I like this so so that if a
sponsor for AGI is rational is rational
enough whatever that means
then they will not fall into the game
theory trap of rushing for AGI without
safety because they will get no benefit
from it that to me is a strongest
argument for any type of moratorium of
self restriction and visa research
basically pointing out if you're smart
enough to understand this argument if
you're smart enough to build HDI you
should be smart enough to understand
this argument very interesting I like
that a lot because it's the kind of
argument that's accessible to any
reasonably intelligent person it
requires no special knowledge in AI or
engineering or anything else it's
probably an argument that a bright guy
like Putin could understand now the
question is has the people around Putin
made sure that he is educated with that
argument I'm not in the know I don't
have any insider information from
Kremlin but my concern would be that as
he's getting older he has less to lose
and it's kind of gamble you can take if
you're gonna be gone anyways in the
hopes of getting solutions to mortality
solutions to other problems just
becoming that historical figure who got
there so if you have less to lose you
more likely to take the risk even if you
understand it ah yes humans they are not
so rational right as we know they have
all kinds of agendas that are not
strictly rational we talked about
stupidity as a big factor in all of this
so yes yeah I was saying you know kind
like Putin is clearly not stupid but he
but he may have agendas that aren't
strictly rational and for the good of
the human race or even for the good of
Russia they could be purely ego driven
absolutely and again as people get older
they change how they think how well they
think so that's why term limits a good
thing yeah yep you know we just noticed
the Chinese got rid of their term limits
which is a bad very bad sign for exactly
that reason
you know now one guy couldn't say you
know the state is me and as you say if
he's interested mostly in his historical
record or something like that you know
he might go all out and he has a lot
more resources that Putin does to try to
get there first and to ignore this
logical argument that ignoring safety is
actually not the smart thing to do
because you'll get no benefit for it
maybe an argument in such cases is to
say that the system would be more
powerful than the leader and so he'd
lose power to that new leadership yep I
think it's important to get these ideas
out into the world because I don't think
they are out in the world all that well
very few people in this space
unfortunately if you look at everyone
working in AI safety in general
full-time it would not be a lot of
people in comparison to how many work on
developing more capable AI I think
that's absolutely right for the game
theory reason right what business is
going to invest in safety when there's
no return for it in the short term well
for big corporations very certain cost
of unsafe embarrassing products we saw
for example with Microsoft Chad but
there was a lot of negative publicity if
they just read my papers they wouldn't
make such silly mistakes as releasing a
Chad but to learn from teenagers on the
Internet yeah no I think that's about
political correctness not about AI
safety I think frankly nothing wrong
with what they did they were just too
much of wimps to take the result you
know the world was not threatened by
that chatbot but because of political
correctness were embarrassed by it
of course what I'm saying is malevolence
is proportionate to capability
everything that Chad bot could do was
kind of insult people and it did exactly
that as it becomes more capable it will
do whatever have a bad thing is capable
of if you don't explicitly work around
it alright okay so now this gets to my
next question yeah to a degree that
that's a a company like Microsoft must
be investing in safety probably in part
ought to be driven by how close we think
we are to AGI if we're four centuries
away as some people argue then you know
the moral argument for must invest
heavily in safety is relatively modest
it's just pragmatic is the you know
embarrassment or
quality of your products worth spending
X amount on if we think that AGI is near
then there's a strong moral argument
that says we ought to be spending a lot
on safety because to your point if we
have it built safety before the takeoff
it'll be too late
so I guess that brings me around to your
thoughts on how close we are to AGI
that's a difficult question I don't
think anyone knows and I don't think
that is going to be a warning before we
get there or 10 years before we get
there we're just gonna hit it a lot of
data a lot of predictions point at 2045
I saw more extreme predictions and
boffins sometimes from industry insiders
with a lot of excess but I think it's
reasonable to concentrate on that date
for now it gives us enough time to
actually do something but it's not so
far that it's meaningless yeah that's
kind of the Kurzweil timeframe right
exactly and he's doing a good job with
his graphs and predictions in the past
reasonably good yeah I've heard through
the grapevine I won't say from whom that
is part of the deal to raise a billion
dollars from Microsoft that opene I told
Microsoft that they believe they're
within five years of AGI
I heard seven years before as insider
information I think it's less likely
proportionately but I don't think it's
crazy at all I'd give it at least ten
percent chance okay so we're gonna say
that Roman says 10 percent chance within
seven years right 90 percent not in
seven years but a 10 percent chance of a
run away okay so let's compound the
things we've said we think are true we
think AGI will be fast takeoff more
likely than not and there's a 10% chance
it could be achieved in seven years I
think I would agree with that also
because and here's why because something
else I think we both agreed with is that
real language understanding is the
portal through which if we could solve
that AGI we'll take off very rapidly and
the fact that it's just one problem it's
a damn hard problem but it's just one
problem tells me that all it takes is
one person with the right insight or one
team with the right set of approaches to
crack that problem so
could be on the short-term so if we have
a 10% chance of fast runaway AGI in the
next seven years doesn't that mean that
we should be expending billions a year
on AI safety I would support that thank
you I'll take all the help I can get
I also would like to remind you that I
think a lot of it is just scaling
resources so scaling compute and size of
our data so seven years becomes very
reasonable if you just project how fast
those things grow I definitely try to
work in this full-time I hope a lot of
other people do as well yeah so it's
quick little back of the envelope
calculation I think tells us as a matter
of social policy that it's very
important that the powers-that-be
piccoli people control large budgets
start to realize that it would be
imprudent not to spend significant funds
on AGI safety right now but of course
the question is is it the problem of
money is the bottleneck money if I had
billions of dollars can I solve this
problem in seven years and I don't think
the answer is years or even remotely
years I think today as of right now as
of this minute no one in the world has a
working safety mechanism or even a
prototype or even an idea how to make
one which would scale to any level
intelligence it may take seven hundred
years to get there so just pouring money
into it would be like war on cancer or
something like that lots of money feels
good but no results now there are some
results in the war on cancer but not
linear to the inputs I mean as we know
the outputs of these hard problems are
nonlinear it's fundamentally different
you don't get partial success you don't
have slightly controlled super
intelligence you ever control it all the
first mistakes
it makes may be fatal yep yes but what's
our alternative if we're going to have
an AGI in seven years possibly 10%
chance pretty high chance suppose I told
you there was a 10% chance we'd have a
nuclear war in seven years and all out
20,000 warhead nuclear war in seven
years we would be doing everything we
possibly could to make that not happen
so openly I has a lot of good people
with really good expertise and safety if
they really felt that there
seven years away I think they would do
things to make that a bigger number
getting a billion dollars is good for
whatever you're working on but I think
they understand the uncontrolled AI is
not beneficial to their interests not
just humanity centers so we came it up
perhaps hopefully think that they
understand the argument that you get no
benefit from AI if it's not controlled
and therefore they'll spend an
appropriate part of their billion
dollars even if they believe they're
only seven years away
you get no benefit if you have debt now
that is true except maybe Fame you know
but what do you care if the emperor
paper clips turn the universe and the
paper clips all right I'm gonna flip to
another topic regular listeners of my
show know that we fairly often probably
at least half the episodes address the
Fermi paradox number of the things we've
talked about have at least some bearing
on the Fermi paradox and again to remind
our listeners the Fermi paradox comes
from a lunch conversation at Los Alamos
during World War two where a bunch of
smart physicists we're trying to
estimate how many human level or above
intelligent civilizations there were in
the universe and Enrico Fermi walked by
and said well where are their you know
if there's lots of them gonna see no
sign of it and interestingly to this day
we've been doing increasing amounts of
searching and so far absolutely no sign
so what are your thoughts on the Fermi
paradox that's a very interesting
problem and there are many great answers
alight I can tell you about some of the
answers how people proposed so there is
this idea that instead of going out into
the universe advanced civilizations kind
of minimize and go inside they become
more condensed go into virtual worlds so
you just wouldn't see that from computer
science point of view and communication
point of view we're looking for signals
signals of communication but already our
communication is encrypted hidden and to
save power we communicate with silence
so basically there is nothing to look at
it's random noise you would observe so
it's not surprising that we don't see
them I also think that the
where are they we'll look around and we
don't see intelligent beings but yes we
do we are them there is a number of
theories from spermy a theory saying
that we are the biological robots Vannoy
man probes sent by some distant
civilization and we are here basically
trying to figure out what's our mission
and looking around for instructions so
that's a short survey of my thinking and
some of those yeah one argument it's
called the techno signature argument is
that all right maybe we're just
completely wrong about looking for
signals because as you point out you
know even us teeny little baby AG is
called humans are already rapidly moving
from radio to fiber and from open
communications to encrypted
communications in fact the recent paper
by some of our Santa Fe Institute people
demonstrated that almost any reasonably
advanced civilization their signals
ought to look like noise so we may just
be have been mistakenly looking for
signals the other new approach is called
techno signatures which is that we can
look for artifacts in the universe that
are signs of having been created by an
intelligence Robin Hanson one of my
first guests on the show for instance
makes the argument that on economic
grounds he's an economist rather than a
astronomer that any advanced
civilizations that's existed for very
long ought to leave techno signatures of
the Dyson Sphere sort where advanced
civilizations are harnessing more and
more and more of the energy of their
star to build more and more either
biological civilization or let's assume
they were eaten by their AG I
computational infrastructure and the
techno signature of that ought to be a
shift towards the infrared in stars and
you know his claim is there is no sign
of that and therefore their main there
may be no galactic intelligences right
so I actually have another subfield of
inquiry I found it called designer
Mattie
where we try to figure out
what are the differences between natural
objects and engineered objects and if an
object is in fact engineered what can we
say about the engineer behind it so if I
give you an iPhone you can tell me that
whoever made it is of certain
intelligence they have good
understanding of chemistry computer
science and so on
even not mentioning things like made in
China you know so we're trying to
generalize this we're trying to
generalize it to biological samples so
if you look at the artificially created
cell can you tell that it's in fact
engineered and not evolved just from
that sample alone with no other records
and it seems like if you don't restrict
resources something we talked about in
the beginning of a show you can tell
whatever something is natural or
engineered by some super powerful
intelligence and then we look at the
universe for glitches are we in a
simulation those are the techno
signatures we're looking for right and
if it's done well you would not find
them because it would be hidden and
purpose the only way you would see them
if they explicitly they're a warning
pops up this is a simulated universe
designed in that year and so on so all
of the things we discuss if they
strongly connected and we're trying to
make progress in all those directions at
the same time very interesting very
interesting yeah for instance one of the
theories of Fermi paradox so-called dark
forest theory that there are predators
or at least it's reasonable to assume
that there are psychopathic
civilizations out there and then if you
show yourself you will be killed by
these psychopathic civilizations
so therefore the co-evolutionary result
is that no civilization that shows any
sign of being there exists long enough
to build these large-scale techno
signatures because they are killed by
the psychopathic predator species and
for the same reason the psycho and there
may be multiple those and they and each
of those shows no sign because it would
call in the other predators against them
of course the fun part is to combine all
this ideas Boltzmann brain simulations
super intelligent malevolent the ice
with thermi paradox and see if you go
crazy
uh heck no I just love to entertain
these ideas but on that note I think we
have covered so much ground that it's
time to wrap up this has been so much
fun we have touched upon so many of my
favorite topics it is an awesome
interview thank you so much and I hope
your listeners will look at some of the
papers we discussed maybe pick up a
bullet oh yeah absolutely
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com