[Music]
so please welcome Daniel rotten burger
hey thank you so Daniel if we just fast
forward to 2020 2030 2040 2050 which is
really going to the future what would an
ideal hospital look like I think in this
open space a lot of ideas were being
brought up about that yesterday as well
I think everybody has a clear sense that
the environmental design and
environmental psychology of the space is
a huge part of it the air flow the
lighting both natural lighting and the
right spectrum and the right amount of
lumens and really paying attention to
the way the environment is affecting the
health and the experience of the people
in the space so the actual design of the
infrastructure of the building itself I
think the nature of the amount of time
and also the amount of time that the
providers get to spend with people and
also their training for the quality of
time and how they spend that I think
there's a lot of things we know about
the tech that we want to see in terms of
both much higher quality and less
invasive Diagnostics and there's a lot
of diagnostic tech that by some of those
dates will be online that isn't now
that'll make a huge difference the kind
of dream of Thera knows that they didn't
write it didn't really have the tech for
their there is tech that will achieve
things like that there's a company
called gene radar coming out of a
company called now bio sim that I think
will probably make huge
in that time and other tech like it
where instead of needing reagents to be
able to do blood labs we can simply do
chip based amplification and so a single
drop of blood can be able to measure
every biometric and if you imagine not
having the cost associated then just run
every biometric every time on every one
run big data analysis on an individual
person longitudinally over their life
plus on lots of people and that's not
just in the hospital that can be
decentralized so that we start finding
early disease indicators and being able
to prevent most things so I think
there's a bunch of examples of better
diagnostics and machine learning that
can augment the human doctor and
healthcare provider capacity so that the
healthcare provider can be much more
focused on actually connecting to people
and taking in the kind of diagnostic
info that humans are uniquely good at
that machines don't do as good a job at
which is less biometric specified and
more being able to get the gestalt of
the person that lets you even know what
to look for and how to interpret it so
there's a lot of things like this that
we could talk about one of them was
mentioned yesterday that I just feel
like bringing up is the idea that the
hospital would feel more like a sacred
place like a temple of some sort seems
to be at the heart if if we put that at
the heart of the consideration a lot of
other things make more sense yeah and
when you talk about heart based medicine
obviously we want a medicine that is
really excellent in terms of operations
and we want a medicine that's really
excellent in terms of the actual science
and the technology of it but what's
motivating all of it is the sacredness
of human life and human experience and
wanting to be able to support people to
have the highest quality experience and
the highest quality capacity to offer
what if there's to offer while they're
here and so that every one in the health
care space remembers
and continuously that that's actually
why they're there and the entire design
is around supporting that experience you
know you were talking about experiences
where people died in your care and where
they died in ways that were really
beautiful versus painful based on the
nature of the care so if you think about
a hospital as a place where people will
be born and people will die and people
will be brought back from death and
people will have the chance to have a
totally different life trajectory based
on the care they get like the sacredness
of life is more on the altar there than
may be anywhere else and I would like to
see something where the doctors and
nurses go through a ritual before they
actually enter every time not it becomes
a dogma because the moment the moment
that there is an intrinsically
recognized Dharma that becomes a
protocol becomes a dogma then obviously
just becomes performative lifeless and
you either do the performative thing or
just reject it but if someone actually
kind of reconnected to the most
beautiful experience as they had in
medicine the most heart-wrenching
experiences why they were there what the
Hippocratic oath was and why they're
there the way that would affect the
quality of the interactions and not just
from the point of view that patients
experience would be better but also the
actual quality of the care would make a
tremendous difference so we can talk
about a lot of things based on
specifically what we have this bait
might be available in those different
time lines what things we could do
retrofitting existing hospitals versus
where we need to build them from the
ground up what things we're still
thinking of a hospital versus where we
start to think about decentralizing
healthcare into all of life so that's a
start hahaha wonderful thank you so many
open questions let's sum you were
putting the temple in the center so
maybe let's start with the center
and I believe it's what you're
describing is that the subjective
experience of a true dedication of a
true interest of the healthcare provider
so rather than busy being busy with
themselves but actually truly caring
about the person they're under the
indica that subjective experience will
improve the quality of care not only in
terms of making less mistakes like this
is I realized it's the first time when I
know where I learned to make all these
prescriptions and so here you go and
here's another one and here's another
one here's another one in you're just
describing and then I realized suddenly
my kids were in hospital and I sit there
and say like okay all right now my kids
that hospital next one next and then hmm
so I really want that such an important
moment to realize that when I see
children and I prescription based on
what their disease is or I make a
prescription for somebody that I have a
personal direct relation with it's
somehow there's a moment of mmm there so
the quality I'd completely agree that
the quality of care when we talk about
patient safety a big topic today if we
talk about patient safety we improve the
way that healthcare providers show up
this will improve the quality of care
will improve the safety of the patient
but it will also improve patient
satisfaction and so there's a subjective
experience on the other side so what
could you see as steps taken well no
let's start with the end in mind what
would you see in you know 20 30 40 50
what might be the way that what might
describe or constitute the relation
between a health care provider and a
patient
so you mentioned less mistakes
I think getting rid of all of the
avoidable iatrogenic illness is it would
take a few things increased presence on
the part of the doctors and pharmacists
and nurses is going to make a huge
difference to that it's not only that
though it's also the medical training
upfront it's also removing the
financialization of Medicine that ends
up influencing the training and the
incentive structures of the doctors as
long as the hospital has to have the
doctors seeing more people per day or in
private practice you have to see more
people per day the mistakes are just
going to go up so some of it can be
addressed at the bottom of level of
things individual doctors can do some of
it really has to be addressed at the
top-down level of the of the major
top-down institutions that are affecting
medicine and optimizing for something
other than quality of care and if we
have trillions of dollars a year
optimizing for things other than quality
of care compared to the relatively small
level of a few doctors that it's
actually an asymmetric warfare against
health right as long as at a federal
level we want to optimize GDP and we met
we think about GDP as a sign of the
success of the country sick people are
better for GDP than healthy people are
in a narrow point of view in terms of
medicine and obviously this the same for
a pharmaceutical companies incentive or
things like that if if we could just
prevent medicine by making healthy
people we would obviously have the best
system of health care and it would
totally tank GDP from both a
pharmaceutical and hospital revenue
point of view as well as from the
revenue of food drug etc companies that
make more money off addiction
so there's systemic factors as well as
kind of individual practitioner factors
that have to be addressed to remove
iatrogenic disease and then as you're
mentioning the the increased presence of
a practitioner with a person who is in
one of the most disturbing positions
people can be in where the
quality of their life or their loved
ones life is like up in the air and they
don't have the technical expertise to
know how it's going to go and so they're
trusting a stranger with the most
precious thing to them actually feeling
the care and the presence and the
attention of that stranger is gonna make
a huge difference where even if the
thing is uncurable the actual experience
of someone is a terminal value in and of
itself independent of how that
translates to objective outcomes and it
will translate to objective outcomes
both in terms of increased diagnostic
insight on the part of the practitioner
and a psychologically better state and
less stress on the part of the patient
is going to help their healing process
so I mean this is just kind of recapping
why heart based medicine matters right
and then I don't think any of that
answered your question
your question was out we will constitute
the relation between the health care
provider and the patient and so you
mentioned quality of care and we started
at kind of avoiding mistakes but we made
just as we look at disease on a systemic
level we look at mistakes in terms of
heart based medicine we want to look at
kind of shift the attention a little bit
away from disease towards health so on
that systemic level we may want to ask
what is quality of care yeah when we
when we shift it towards the positive
outcome towards the potential and how
might that be a constituent of the
relationship between so let me do a
long-range version of this and not gonna
try and specify the time line it'll just
do a it will generally be hopefully
trending in this direction if it's on
the right path so let's say we look at
the trend of technological automation to
automate things that we can procedural
eyes that'll affect some things in
medicine and hopefully it will because
that would be great there are some
things that machines can do as well or
better and it won't affect other things
and if it does I'd be a bummer because
they do it less well
but outside of medicine most of the jobs
that people like the least are some of
the ones that are most available to
technological automation because it's
the more procedural something is the
easier it is to automate the more
procedural it is also the less
creativity and learning is involved it
means we have the less less intrinsic
motive for a human to feel like they can
self actualize there and so as we
progress to more technological
automation and more categories we also
start to change a lot of the underlying
assumptions within market theory that we
need people to do the jobs so we need to
make it to where the people need the
jobs well we don't need people to do a
lot of the jobs then we can also start
to create more of Commonwealth resources
that take care of people's needs to have
a system that is more focused on the
intrinsic incentive of people than the
extrinsic incentives when you want to
get people to when you have to get
people to do shitty labor stuff you have
to extrinsic lis and sent them when more
of that's automated then we get to
facilitate what is actually
intrinsically interesting and meaningful
for people and it's not just playing
video games all the time if they get to
be facilitated to recognize that their
short time here can actually mean
something and I think the things that
people will most want to do have to do
with connection creativity and healing
and so I think there will be a lot more
people in the healing professions and I
think as we think less and less in terms
of how do I think of this as a way to
financially support myself and more in
terms of if finances were already
supported what would I want to do a lot
of people want to do things that involve
connecting with other people in ways
that contribute to the quality of their
life and that's everything from like
music therapy and art therapy and
psycho-spiritual practice to training
people's physical bodies and like that
so I think the role of the doctor will
become largely decentralized to a lot of
other things that are promoting
well-being more than just dealing with
the after-effects of not promoting well
and similarly to our when we say
removing iatrogenic disease requires not
just change on the doctor part but also
the structural incentives that lead to
higher trajectories if we want to
obsolete as much of Medicine as possible
we have to look at what the upstream
causes of the problems are so obviously
if we if we don't just look at
healthcare but we look at the embedding
environment of things that affect
people's health and we're pumping
billions of tons of glyphosate and other
pesticides and herbicides and
petrochemical toxins into the atmosphere
and into people's food supply and water
supply continuously and embedding them
in the manufacturing process in the
carpet and the paint and where all of
our environments are actually toxic to
the way we genetically evolved we
genetically evolved to an environment
that didn't have organophosphates and
you know neo- know it's being able to
change those things also obsolete so
much of the things that are upstream
contributing to so much of the chronic
complex illness then you start to think
about the changes in agriculture to
actually remineralize top soils and
affect the microbiome of the top soils
and the quality of the you know food
that's coming out and again we have to
ask can we have healthy people and in a
society where almost everyone is
stressed out due to macroeconomic
pressures and due to socio political
instability continuously and so there's
there's still gonna be situations where
no matter how well we design it somebody
falls and hits their head and we have to
deal with that or something that we
haven't been able to tend to comes up
but with most of the causes of illness
are actually structurally induced at
scale in ways that are affecting
everyone and you actually can't even
avoid currently so I'm answering the
question about the relationship between
the practitioner partly saying
most of the things practitioners are
currently looking at I would like to not
exist at all because we're dealing with
them upstream both by doing health
promotion and by stopping the things
that are doing health degra
datian so that's the first part then we
can get into what the when disease is
manifesting and we need to deal with it
what that looks like but we would like
to mostly just shrink that category hmm
thank you so before we go we will
definitely need to talk about the the
wider picture of healthcare or healthy
life and the question of how might we
and if we were to be able to redesign
the healthcare system and just
completely kind of clean the table start
out-of-the-box what would it could it
look like and those will be questions
that we would need to answer and and
let's come back to those so if you allow
let's stay a little bit longer with with
the environment that is kind of closer
to us right now before we redesign
everything yeah so when I look at the
the relation between the health care
provider and and the patient one of the
obvious changes right now and you
alluded to this is the automation of
healthcare so more and more processes
that you know just take knowledge
there's all the things that I learned in
medical school in terms of data to be
you know memorized all the effort it
took in in the initial years of my
existence to go through paper cards and
finding that paper in Paris and filling
out a form and ordering it from this
library in Paris in four weeks later
that paper would arrive and now
everything is available online and we
have search engines and text mining and
we can integrate all of this and some
fantastic new technologies already
collecting information and processing
this information for me so there's
that's one element so how am I going to
deal with data now I sometimes feel like
I'm in a data crisis actually I yeah in
the beginning it was a problem to find
information now I feel like I have
enough I can't process more so that's
that's a huge development and another
huge development is that the the
technological impact so all the devices
that we have all the techniques and
technologies that we have
that actually seem like seem to have
more authority than my own clinical
assessment so I used to you know
actually do a crazy thing and examine
patients you know now when I examine a
patient and if there's something I would
have to validate my finding by some kind
of technology so if I feel that there's
some you know something you know I feel
the liver is a little bit larger than I
would expect and the next step would be
to get an ultrasound to validate that
that's the case
and it used to be that that that was the
finding so somehow this the technology
is becoming is is becoming the reference
point is the kind of the objective
measure and whatever we do as human
beings is measured against technology
this is worrying to me do you see that
you know the the profession of the
physician will be replaced by technology
at some point are we going to have a
robot where I just you know like the
little photo cameras that you had at
stations or you sit in you get four
pictures and so I just walk into some
station or some office and then I put my
finger in there take a bit of blood and
maybe you take a little swallow of my my
epithelium in the mouth and and there
you go and two minutes later I get some
report is this the future of medicine
hopefully yes and now there are things
that machine learning can do really
better than human cognition there are
things a human cognition do that machine
learning can do at all whether we get to
artificial general intelligence or not
obviously change is that story of it
because then we're talking about things
that are less like machines and more
like other kinds of beings I don't think
we're close to that so we're just
talking about machine learning and
machine learning mostly that is narrow
in type and so what I think that means
is that
the machine learning and the Diagnostics
augment our capacity radically in good
ways in the way already your stethoscope
and your microscope and your you know
whatever tools your glasses you're
wearing right now are augmenting your
capacity and it's just continued tools
that can do that so we learn new metrics
new biometrics all the time parts of the
body we didn't even know existed or
parts of physiology or new types of
proteins and then they're like the
center of everything and they're super
important we can anticipate that that
continues for a long time that 10 years
from now Nobel Prizes will be one about
like breakthrough stuff that we don't
even know about right now that will be
the main stuff to look out and so
there's no way we're testing that right
now and there's no way that the machine
learning is paying attention to that and
yet some of it still comes through a
kind of heuristic or intuitive
sensibility where you're feeling the
liver and you have some sense even if
the liver enzymes don't indicate it or
whatever some other test that we don't
currently have does so I think that the
human capacity for general intelligence
which includes intuition and things
beyond what we currently have metrics on
becomes increasingly important as we're
able to offload more of the specialized
narrow intelligence so then the role of
the doctor the practitioner is largely
one that intermediates between really
being able to connect with the patient
and a holistic generalized intuitive and
obviously enough cognitive knowledge to
even know how to use this database way
but then it doesn't depend exclusively
on their own memory we already don't we
already offload it to books it's just
much better versions of books and papers
and you know when we think about the
idea of the information singularity
there can be so much information that no
one can be a specialist in any topic
there's a hundred thousand journal
articles a year in the topic of my
specialty so already humans are
irrelevant in the information ecology we
don't really need to like the data isn't
what informs our choices there the
meaning of being a
put the data of lots of things together
does and the and the meaningfulness is a
second or third derivative of the data
if we can have the machines not just
data mine and find the articles but also
be able to make sense of what a lot of
those articles together and form as far
as treatment goes so one of the things I
want to see the technology get a lot
better at doing is being able to do the
kind of processing it can so that what
you're studying is a higher-order
synthesis of the information out there
that you actually can keep up with so I
see an information singularity much
faster than I see a meaningfulness which
is a derivative of the information
singularity which then the doctors are
going to be paying attention to and the
researchers are working on helping to
make sense of factoring general
intelligence so the fact that we will be
able to use increasingly good cameras on
an iPhone to look at a skin condition
use image recognition to automatically
diagnose the thing at a distance like
that's awesome and there there are both
things that that won't do in terms of
physiologic diagnosis and in terms of
the quality of connection and so and
both of those are very important so I
think we were talking the other day a
little bit about how important it is
that we don't automate in ways that lead
to more isolation especially in the name
of health care when isolation is one of
the number one causes of health care
issues in the first place thank you so
when you when you talk about the
availability of technology and how this
technology may kind of support our
decision-making and we'll make it easier
for us to provide meaningful healthcare
and we talked about the temple as in the
center of the hospital if you like is
there a sacred space for the human being
as a healer a space that can
structurally not be taken on by
automation
yes I think it's I think it's obvious
again we have to question like let's
separate the topic of artificial general
intelligence or silica-based life
because now we're talking about life and
whether that is possible ever or not in
terms of the theoretical possibility of
it and what the negative implications of
silica-based life trying to share a
biosphere with a hydrocarbon based life
might be like that that's so not near if
ever we can take that off and so really
then we're talking about human
connection and being able to connect
with someone who can actually care about
you and machines that are simply doing
input-output processing we obviously
want to extend our capacity with
machines and the healthcare the center
of it is actually care hmm so this care
so we have the temple or the sacred
space we have care as the primary
ingredient of the relation between the
health care provider and the patient
something that remains a human
environment something that remains a
human capacity and quality so if this is
this is something that can be
established already in can be promoted
already in the existing healthcare
system now you were alluding already to
well yeah but health care is not limited
or confined to either the consultation
room or the hospital as really whenever
a doctor is needed we're too late when
we talk about health so we've already
reached a threshold where several
nonlinear processes have have scaled up
and a threshold has been reached and now
the dis-ease has become symptomatic so
we're way too far downstream so what we
really wish to see is if we want to
promote health is to address these
health issues more upstream you already
alluded to agriculture finances social
interactions so what are these areas so
if we are if we're kind of moving from
what is an ideal Hospital to what is an
ideal healthcare system how would that
change our perspective what are these
elements as we think about moving
forward we need to think about our
actual evolutionary environment in terms
of what our genes were selected to
actually do well in because our future
environment will be different than that
but it has to not be misaligned with
that right we've created a world in
which we're actually genetically misfit
in really important ways so so we have
to consider this when we think about the
evolutionary environment of humans the
first thing is we're social primates and
we for all of our evolutionary history
were in bands and tribes with extremely
close high trust interaction with lots
of other humans and I mean we can look
at how that effects via physical touch
and microbiome sharing and pheromone
sharing to the actual attachment theory
of it but and it's going to go beyond
any of those specific mechanisms that's
foundational to physical and
psychological health and so we're not
just talking about how the
infrastructure will work we're also
talking about how the social structures
work I think it's really insightful to
contemplate how many people you trust as
much as anyone and a tribe would have
trusted everyone they knew because most
people don't have anyone that they feel
like they know as well or knows them as
well or they can trust as much as humans
evolved being able to trust all the
people they knew and I don't want to
over romanticize it's not that they
weren't difficulties that were
associated but the kind of fierce
egalitarianism tribes had to have to be
able to function together well like in a
tribe you can't have
of right/left antipathy and stay
together right you can't have internal
defection you actually can't even get
away with lying because everyone's gonna
tell there's a forced transparency at
that small scale and so we actually need
extraordinarily high trust environments
for psychological health and we need
psychological health for physiological
health so that's one example so when we
just stay with the social interaction
for now and that's one of your favorite
topics
how do what is the impact of a societal
development on the on various factors so
if in this conversation we focus on
health what would be key societal
developments that we would like to see
again kind of time or being forwards
through 2050 what would we like to see
in place in in our societies that would
reduce the health care the attention in
health care facilities as we have them
today so could we kind of address some
of the problems that we see in hospitals
now already upstream
yeah it's funny to kind of think about
what examples to use because it's pretty
much everything it's like every building
material we use almost every building
material out gases volatile organic
compounds from petrol derivatives that
are either neurotoxins and de Krynn
disruptors or carcinogens so it's the
restructuring of the entire materials
economy and material supply chain to not
be polluting the indoor and outdoor
environment it's that the that the
actual photic spectrum of the light that
we're in is unhealthy for us because we
don't just photosynthesize vitamin d
nitric oxide and cortisol and so many
other things are regulated by not just
the total amount of light but specific
frequencies of light and timing of light
it's like the the nuclear family home
structure the nature of economies of
scale moving agriculture far away where
even if it was organic which it
generally isn't it's old it's been
actually undergoing entropy since being
picked for a pretty long time which
means new nutrient decay let alone lack
of interaction with the soil that not
only has a kind of psychological
regeneration but microbiotic effects
like we can see that market forces move
the world to a place that optimizes for
market forces and they optimize for
addiction and comfort rather than health
or well-being and I think this is a
really important thing is that yeah
comfort and happiness or are not the
same thing but as soon as we one of them
one of the effects of kind of the
Enlightenment was moving into the domain
of Objectivism and things we could
measure well we can actually measure
metrics of comfort like how bouncy the
shocks in a car are or whatever more
than we can measure subjectivity which
we can't measure at all and it gets into
existentialism of what is a meaningful
human experience and so we start
optimizing for
and you actually make shitty people when
you optimize for comfort because
psychologically good people are people
that can actually hold a certain
resilience in the presence of discomfort
so you look at the wisdom traditions
that had sweat lodges and ayahuasca
ceremonies and combo ceremonies and Sun
dances and vision quests which were all
actually induced really intense
discomfort to be able to find a self
transcendence in the presence of it in
the same way that you don't get strong
people by not lifting weights right you
actually have to whore matically stress
the system to upregulate its regulatory
capacity you have to psychologically
stress the emotional system to learn
emotional intelligence and so there's so
much of the in the name of comfort that
is just actually making maximally
entropic humans and the same was like
supposedly market theory says people
will demand real things that are
actually going to enrich the quality of
their life like food and whatever and
then that will create a basis for people
to create supply and the best supply
will end up getting upregulated but of
course as soon as we start recognizing
economies of scale on the supply side
and the supply side becomes much bigger
organism than the demand side and it is
going to benefit from more profit now it
wants to figure out how to manufacture
artificial demand that wasn't there so
then the business has the goal of
maximize lifetime revenue of a customer
and I maximize lifetime revenue of a
customer by driving addiction starting
in childhood so if I can have social
media and entertainment that's maximally
addictive it figures out psychologically
exactly how to have the right type of
dings to get you back on and make you
feel miserable if you don't have it and
do the same thing with food and etc then
we can have the plausible deniability
I'm providing what people want yes after
you drove addiction in them using
asymmetric information and narratives
and technology warfare to drive that
addiction but this does not create
healthy or happy people or a good
Society so you actually have to change
the whole nature of perverse incentive
and market dynamics writ large to be
producing goods and services that are
actually supporting the health and
well-being and integrity of people in
society the
the redesign is pretty much everything
so if I if I just you know put this into
a pediatrician this kind of way making
it simple then what I understand from
you is that the entire concept of health
care as a service that is being paid for
including all the products that are
being that are part of this service have
come along with this service is not in
line with the with with the concept of
health as you're describing it so all of
this works as long as we have disease so
if we have a problem to be solved if we
have a disease and we give it a name and
we give it a label that allows us then
to say if you have that disease then you
need this kind of Diagnostics and
therefore you need these sort of
machines and therefore you need these
sort of treatments congratulations
you're sincerely thank you very much so
that is that is one there's one aspect
and the other is when we actually want
health rather than the absence of
disease then all of this is is a misfit
so whatever we have constructed in terms
of health care system trying to overcome
disease as a system is not useful if if
we're actually turning our focus towards
health stop I mean it's funny even if we
just think about disease diagnosis I
think most of the actual diseases that
we have Diagnostics for are made up
there fit their fictions
so obviously ADHD is a fiction that is
just making childhood a disease and that
is
take take kids have parents pay no
attention to them pay if you think about
what the school is the way that we
have it structured it's these these
little people don't make money yet and
so they are possibly future assets in
the financial system but right now their
liabilities or or debts on the future
system so we want the least number of
productive class people to monitor the
most of them possible so one teacher to
thirty of them typically a low paid
person because someone that could do
something more profitable we'd rather
than generating more profit to get them
to the point where they're part of the
productive class then as soon as they're
too old to be the productive class and
again we want to ship them off somewhere
where one low paid person takes care of
lots of them like so we start with that
and the school system that doesn't
facilitate their interest in anything
forces them to be interested and totally
uninteresting breaks their interest
in life as a result so then they want to
play video games and watch porn or
whatever and then we say that's the way
that's what human nature is is only
human nature after we broke it right so
then we medicate that as a disease
because that's also a super profitable
thing to do and then that creates the
beginning of an iatrogenic cascade where
the riddlin the side effects of the
riddlin are going to need an SSRI later
and then are gonna need a benzo and then
that person's for life but the
profitability is quite high in terms of
lifetime revenue because if I Drive
rather than helping people be healthy if
I override their system in a way that's
going to cause ongoing addiction because
they can't get off that benzo because
they're gonna have rolling panic attacks
if they do way worse than their anxiety
initially ever was but the side effects
of that or another drug that we also
sell that's just called an upsell or
cross-sell which is just good business
so like obviously ADHD is a
disease most psychiatric diagnoses it
would be way more useful to think about
it differently but also like every
complex chronic disease their
diseases in terms of rheumatoid
arthritis we call it a disease or MS or
Alzheimer's they don't have the same
calls
if I see 10 different people with MS
there and I actually found out what's
going on because right now we don't know
what's going on at all so the disease
just allows us to know what symptomatic
drugs were a million of drugs were going
to do but we can't cure any of them but
if I want to say what's actually going
on the patho ideology is different in
every case because they're
multifactorial and they're not the same
set of factors and so the fact that
there's a cluster of biomarkers and a
cluster of symptoms that I can make a a
disease title for to then know what drug
to prescribe and insurance can do that
thing doesn't mean that that tells me
anything about the pathophysiology of it
so even insofar as I'm thinking about
the disease ICMS I don't I don't know
 when I hear Ms all I know is okay
so there's some kind of autoimmune
neurodegenerative stuff going on this
system was exposed to some things that
created dysregulation deviations from
homeo dynamics it probably led to more
susceptibility to more dysregulation
that eventually reached a threshold that
had symptom ology where there was
probably pathophysiology going on for
years or decades ahead of time and for
this person with a massive it was a mold
exposure 30 years ago that left
mycotoxins that changed cytokine
profiles and whatever that then ten
years later they had a micro TBI from a
car accident and then a divorce dress
that threw them over and now it's MS and
in somebody else it was a tick-borne
Lyme exposure and then some food
poisoning in Guatemala and some
glyphosate and then some other emotional
stressor so to actually be able to cure
it I need to know that stuff which the
title ms doesn't give me so not only do
we want to move to health promotion like
we want to even think about disease in a
reasonable way that is so interesting
it's so interesting because there's the
way we do studies at least when when I
look at the studies that this is a
classic type of clinical studies what we
what we see is that that there's that
they're basically two observations so
there's there's a starting point and an
end point and then we assume that
there's a linear association between the
two and it seems that as we are as we
are learning more
as there's an there's more insight into
how we might be able to calculate
nonlinear associations and we're
recognizing that that probably a lot of
what is happening during this time of
observation in a classic clinical trial
what we observe there is is very much
dependent on what happened before this
trial and all the things that you're
actually describing and the
heterogeneity that that is is real it's
not usually captured in the kind of
typical table one in a paper saying you
know what is the distribution of sex and
gender and ethnicity so this is way way
more complex than that and we haven't
even started to come to grips with the
complexity of what what the regulatory
mechanisms are before we start to
observe something right so a lot of what
I hear from you is that a lot of the
science that that we look at so there's
a lot of clinical science is based on a
syndromic diagnosis so we're saying that
this this this patient group shares a
certain set of signs and symptoms and if
it's that then we give it a name and
that's a useful thing to give it a name
so we have a working hypothesis and can
talk about it but along the line of this
process of discovering what is actually
going on we are kind of taking this
diagnosis as something set as something
that exists as in as an entity rather
than a working hypothesis so then we
start to developing drugs to fix a
problem so to fix the signs and symptoms
which is a good idea for those who do
have the signs and symptoms so it's at
least very promising if you do suffer of
emesis the example you gave if there are
solutions to the problem that I
experienced to the signs and symptoms
that's a useful thing but we could
recognize that this is like a painkiller
rather than something that really
addresses the cause of disease so what
might be the steps for us what would be
the structural approach to take in the
future so that we're actually turning
our direction and we really drill down
to the cause of disease rather than
trying to fix signs and symptoms yeah
and you know don't get me wrong
symptomatic medicine and palliative care
and you know ameliorating some of the
the advancement of pathology like this
awesome no novocaine is one of the best
inventions ever dentistry totally sucked
before novocaine so that's not
addressing something in a causal level
but it's awesome right so but we can do
so much better and there's a place where
okay so let's say I'm looking at the
relationship between the regulatory
bodies so in the US the FDA in
particular other bodies AMA and whatever
but let's look at the FDA for is this a
treatment that can actually a doctor can
give to treat a disease right so the
disease has been recognized the
treatments been recognized and otherwise
the doctor is not allowed to use it
insurance won't cover it whatever rain
so we look at what it takes to get the
regulatory status which also means then
that it will get trained to new people
in medical school well so phase three
clinical trials are gonna cost a billion
dollars most of a billion dollars but
now factoring all the things that don't
make it through matriculating that right
a billion dollars and so the only way to
ever be able to recoup that money is if
I can patent the thing because otherwise
someone else is just competing on cost
of goods and they didn't put the billion
dollars up that was just going to beat
me and so if I'm looking at patentable
stuff then I look at the regulatory
dynamics around patenting I can only
patent synthetic molecules and that
means that the things I'm looking at are
not part of how your body worked when it
was healthy and are not part of the
evolutionary environments that make
humans in the first place at all ever so
what's the chance we're gonna be able to
do health promotion was weird synthetic
molecules that were never part of the
original picture because the
intersection of the regulatory landscape
and IP law and the financialization of
the research make it to where we can't
even study the right stuff so let's say
I looked at when the same person with
the same genome didn't have cancer and
they were super healthy and now that
they have cancer what was different in
their body or before the autoimmune
disease and I see that there are certain
cell types and certain peptides
are much more prevalent and other ones
that are less prevalent and I would
start to think about types of biological
endogenous medicine they could do what
like I can't even research most of X
I'll never be able to patent it which
means there's no money for the research
to ever be able to get it through
clinical approval so basically the
epistemology that looks for sick one
drug I mean one disease set of symptoms
one drug it's totally dumb epistemology
but the there is no incentive to be able
to try and do better complex
epistemology from a finance regulatory
point of view so the epistemic Tsar
actually straight forward which is acute
causation acute singular causation is
straightforward you got a physical
injury that was an acute injury we're
going to sew it up don't do that thing
again
right or you had an acute infectious
exposure we're gonna give you the
antibiotic for it even that starts
getting questionable because did
everyone who has exposed get the same
thing and do you actually have
underlying immune weakness and is the
antibiotic actually necessary and are
you breeding antibiotic resistance and
the whole population by using it
unnecessarily there's questions there
but let's just say there are times where
that's true in acute thing but most
disease does not have a single cause and
the causes so they're multifactorial
they're different for different people
and many of them are radically
time-delayed and so to actually be able
to do curative work we've actually got
to be able to assess how the regulatory
systems of the body are doing and what
the deviations to homeo dynamics the
person has been exposed to our find the
unique set be able to specially reverse
that unique set and generally support
the homeo dynamic systems of the body
it's a totally different way of thinking
about medicine hmm so one of the so when
you're talking about in a way you talk
about personalized medicine precision
medicine terms that have been used in
different ways but let's say N equals
one medicine yeah part of how research
is done right now is is to understand
what is going
a single case by looking at similar
cases and comparing them and trying to
understand the pattern so what we do the
approach to research is to kind of look
at the disease from the outside and
recognize patterns of disease that are
similar come in a group of people that
we observe that is essentially different
to the disease experience of the person
who had this threshold this
multifactorial threshold experience how
do we so it's basically the way we
conduct research today is completely
missing the point it's not useless right
like clinical trials aren't totally
useless being able to do variable
isolation and seeing what that variable
does across the distribution of all the
other variables gives us an insight
right so when we do a clinical trial on
a drug compared to a placebo and we're
trying to see is there some effect
beyond the placebo and we see there is
versus there isn't there is indicates
that there is some mechanism that's
occurring that's kind of all it tells us
that there's some mechanism but the fact
that there's a Gaussian distribution of
the response curve where some people
have great responses and said maybe have
terrible responses is a result of lots
of other things that are going on that
we don't recognize where they just get
put under a bell curve and it would be
much more interesting if we could start
to figure that stuff out well you can't
do that with looking with variable
isolation on a large population so now
when I moved all the way to N equals one
where I'm looking at a population of one
and trying to look at all the variables
and look at how they make sense together
I've got it now I've got to use
complexity science I've got to use much
more advanced kind of statistical
modeling but there are ways of
simplifying it because we know that if I
just try and do the brute force
computation there are things we can't
measure right so I can I can put a qejy
on you but I can't see several cortical
structures there's no good way to see
that in real time there's lots of
proteins we can't measure they and you
and there's that we just don't even
know that we don't know about yet that
is a huge part of it and if I tried to
run optimization on it it's not
computable
these are np-hard problems but I can I
can collapse that entire space two ways
of thinking about it that make
sentence which is is the system not
getting enough of something it needs is
it getting too much of something to be
able to process well like this is kind
of Chinese medicine and Ayurvedic
medicine basics but that we can
modernize so is it not getting enough of
something is it not getting enough
exercise rest love affection sunlight
micronutrients macronutrients so let's
say we look at micronutrients we need to
think about subclinical deficiency as
opposed to clinical deficiency so most
people don't have scurvy right that's
awesome that they don't have scurvy but
if we look at optimal vitamin C and then
we look at scurvy there's a pretty big
range in here that is don't yet have
scurvy but that is suboptimal so we'd
call that subclinical deficiency where
being able to augment those levels would
make a difference now because I've got
so many micronutrients look at if I just
try to control that one variable and
look at decreased all cause mortality or
whatever it's gonna be really hard to
tell because that one thing also needs
bioflavonoids synergistically to work
and it's going to interact like this so
many other things going on so if I start
to look overarching Liat are we
providing good nutrition and is this
person absorbing and assimilating it and
dealing with subclinical deficiency also
toxicity so until we have reengineered
our supply chains do I want to look at
the exposure people have - heavy metals
- VOCs - mycotoxins also - infections
that are subclinical meaning they're not
creating acute medical symptom ology but
this is not a normal part of the human
microbiome and when we look at in h
pylori or an HPV or an EBV that we know
have statistical correlations with
diseases that are chronic infections
there's a gazillion other things that do
functional medicine and kind of
functional infectious explorative
medicine are starting to pioneer this
more than general medicine but this is
too much of something that the body
shouldn't have we can do stuff about
that so there's a way of taking this
entire search space in optimization
space and having some kind of heuristic
Diagnostics that are able to get do a
lot of the work more simply we can also
think about the primary regulatory
mechanisms of the body and how to look
at
robustness of them which indicates
everything that's going on so like I
want to be able to look not just at the
homeostatic state is your vitamin D your
heart rate your cholesterol within a
level I want to look at the homeo
dynamic capacity that when I stress it
how far out does it go and how quickly
does it come back because if we don't
just want to define disease we want to
define health in a way we can measure if
we want to start to think about the
objectivity of it then I would define
health as related to the robustness of
the homeo dynamic regulatory mechanisms
how much stress the being can be exposed
to without going into pathophysiology
without deviating from the homeo
dynamics so we that's a different set of
tests we need to stress test stuff right
and so I would like to see more of those
things then we can define disease as
some of those homeo dynamic markers are
actually out of range and
pathophysiology is occurring aging is
not yet disease they're in range but
there's less robustness which means more
susceptibility to disease meaning
smaller stresses can cause larger strain
and so then the kind of anti-aging
prevented the preventative health
promotion work is just increasing the
robustness of the regulatory mechanism
so we both want to measure and think
about the body's regulatory dynamics and
how to promote those generally as well
as look at the specific causes of
pathology and how to reverse them
specifically hmm beautiful thank you so
when we you're talking about homeo
dynamic systems so basically the
regulations all the different regulatory
processes going on within a body that
maintain some sort of range of what we
perceive within the realm of ease rather
than this ease which is probably then
that the outliers of the bells curve so
when we look at
when we look at these regulatory
mechanisms within a system we still
assume that body is a closed system and
I wonder from what you said before
whether that's actually an assumption we
should take oh whether we should also
look at a perspective that assumes that
this body has probably some mechanisms
that run within but probably also it is
at least susceptible to or interfering
with mechanisms that that are around
that body Jonas okay so let's look at
layers of holistic Ness and or
comprehensive 'ti and consideration
so we can't just do the vertical slices
called neurology gastroenterology
Rheumatology oncology because most of
the complex things occur across those
yeah right if we look at gut brain
access dynamics that's gastroenterology
neurology immunology Rheumatology all
mixed together we're no specialists is
gonna see the thing right so we have to
look at the interaction of all the body
systems we also have to look at the
horizontal slices the ah mix of it's not
just what's happening at the genomic
level and the epigenetic and the
proteomic but also how the top-down
connectomics stuff and neuro endocrine
stuff is affecting the bottom-up stuff
so we want to think about all the body
systems together but then it's not just
the body systems of the individual to
the body and mind psyche emotion spirit
of the individual right so we want to be
thinking about how all of those interact
but then it's not just the individuals
the individual interacting with the
greater world and universe they're part
of both physically and psychologically
right metaphysically so physically I
find the person has micro toxins and I
send them home to a house that still has
mold in it like obviously we have to
address the physical environment therein
or we know very clearly that the
lifestyle of people is going to be
affected by the lifestyle of the people
they're spending a lot of time around
more than almost anything else so the
person has illnesses associated with
obesity and I send them home to an
environment and a community in which the
health habits of everyone suck and are
self reinforcing and would be
ostracizing if they did something
different or where the person's really
lonely and loneliness we know drives
that
so I've got to think about the
physiological and psychological
interactions of the being with their
environment and what's necessary so we
think about a integrative or a holistic
medicine or healthcare it has to factor
all that so to what degree is a sense of
isolation or separation the cause of
disease whether it's the subjective
experience of feeling separated because
that's is that a statement you could go
along with that that the the sense of
separation is is a sense that I may
create but it is an illusionary sense
whilst there is nothing but a connect an
interconnectedness so as soon as I
perceive myself as separate from that
one interconnectedness this is a cause
of disease when you say that the
disconnection is illusory while that is
true on some levels it's also switching
the burden to the individual perception
where maybe they actually have social
dynamics that really are ostracizing or
really are don't have real connection
and of course insofar as I'm talking to
the individual I want to help them
figure out how they can take more agency
to change their life but insofar as I'm
think about how to change systems I want
to say how do we make systems and
support individuals more that's kind of
the classically right and left
perspective individual or collective
focus you have to do both and pay
attention to the virtuous cycle between
them when you look at work of people
like gob or Mateo and others on
attachment theory and how much the sense
of isolation drives addiction which then
drives so many other things from a
health perspective I think this is huge
but it's also like when we look at mass
shooters none of them that I'm aware of
had healthy meaningful relationships
before being mass shooters so
News goes and interviews and says they
were all the neighbors the neighbors say
the person was a loner they totally kept
themselves nobody ever saw them which
means that person was getting per to
progress and they're how disenfranchised
they felt how depressed how misanthropic
they were with nobody knowing and
checking which is also why I don't want
a world that allows people that makes it
very easy for people to be isolated that
much so if Amazon is gonna come deliver
the stuff at the door and my doctor on
the phone can do that people can be
progressing in their psychopathology
radically and then having access to more
destructive tools and you earlier humans
had right now ar-15s and beyond that
weaponized drones right so it's not just
that the isolation is bad for the person
it's that the isolation makes those
people very dangerous to the health of
the society as a whole and so it's
actually important that as we're
thinking about redesigning civilization
we're making the processes by which
people get their basic resources
provisioned and needs met involve
interacting with other humans in healthy
enriching ways otherwise the
intersection of people that are
progressing in psychopathology with
decentralized catastrophic technology is
a major problem for the world yeah thank
you thank you for all your insights that
you've shared with us it's become very
clear to me that when we change when we
direct our attention towards health and
less on disease there's no way we can
limit it to an individual we have to
think systemically there's no way we get
we can limit it to the consultation room
we have to think about the environment
the immediate environment the social
environment and and all the other major
parameters that we that constitute
health in terms of social environments
in terms of agriculture in terms of
environmental pollution and we didn't we
you only touched on the financial
aspects and how the
how markets driving the health care
system as it is at the moment having a
major impact thank you very much for
giving us such an extraordinary for all
over the world
thank you very much thinking what a
great pleasure to have you here
[Applause]
[Music]
this has been art based medicine
production thanks for listening