hello everybody thanks for tuning in
again in case you didn't listen to the
first video of my conversation with with
you Woodson you has got a ton of degrees
and he's written a ton of poetry books
books on theology and philosophy
he's quite prolific and I really got the
sense in talking with him
and I'm and I met him after reading one
of his books his uh his high daguerreian
theological I would say investigations
in reaching I reached out to him after I
read the book because I was quite
impressed with his thoughts and the
unique view that he had on things and to
me spoke very directly to the notion of
the meaning crisis and in our particular
time so I reached out to him it knees
bent and he's so friendly and so open to
talking and I really I really got the
sense of the source from which he writes
write is really not one of trying to
figure something out or or find out any
kind of final final conclusion around
anything will defend anything but rather
like he's really an artist and you can
really feel that in this conversation
the first video was a lot about getting
to just to know him and his you know his
views and where you know why he's
interested in the things of the
instrument and then he had some
technical difficulties and the video cut
off and then he came back on and then I
forgot to press the record button for
about the first 10 minutes so this video
picks up from the point where I pressed
record button my adventures in becoming
a host I guess some kind so just so you
know this one this is that first 10
minutes is is we were for the most part
just really kind of getting into the
process of thought itself and what
thinking is right in the deeper sense of
the word and especially him being a
Haida garyun scholar and a theologian
what the movement of thoughts and the
way that Heidegger knew opened up in his
work what that's done to him and what
that's done historically and what
differently allowed like different
theologians have have taken that and
integrated that into their theologies
and what became possible with that so
this is where we start to get a little
bit more into dialogue oh swear I
definitely was lightbulbs were going off
for me and I think for him too in the
conversation and I think it's just the
beginning and I'm really glad that he's
part of the conversation the dialogue
really enjoyed him and I'll be joined
his spirit a lot so uh thanks for tuning
in and enjoy the conversation
moving beyond that these are terms of
constantly circling back circling back
trying to figure out a better way to say
this word better we articulated so then
as he begins that book by going at
Plato's and the sophist by talking about
we for God would be his and the opening
part of that book he eventually starts
going back to pre-socratic so looking at
Heraclitus and Parmenides and you know
and saying wait a minute so there's a
listening to this that is always always
already a part of what I'm doing yes
after to myself to that because that's
the only way I can know logos yes I
could Alethea is by allowing myself to
catch up with a late year realizing that
tradition metaphysics humanism are
things that are pulling me away from it
even though the idea was that these
things were meant to make being human
easier over time yeah but it became
easier but it also had hollowed out to
you yes everything is to human right the
service thing so did you want to get rid
of that and figure out how to how to
keep things out like it was so empty
display or something yeah so and so then
you can be primed and attune to these
logos and be able to see things and a
truer you know sort of a concealed
fashion because could they write a good
you know the world is full of
concealment
yeah language itself is a consumer so
then you have to figure out how can I
say things or get to things in a way
that yeah
reduces what naturally wants to conceal
itself yeah so they can be on conceal
and be ready for me to grasp with and be
able to understand in the
phenomenological way like right moving
into my ruling the my like you mentioned
the ideal the foreground I'm like the
foreground for knowledge all those
things are there you have to figure out
how do I get myself position so then I
can really see that in a very in a way
that and this is kind of what he
mentions like we're here at claims I
here class is already knowing this my
great that he requires Parmenides and
Plato comes in he just turns the table
over different right it's not being true
that someone was really think you know
that's why
goes back to me right yeah that said
that I think it's like was it Nietzsche
I think for cities like back the
philosopher the philosopher doesn't just
kind of original orig like out of
nothing think anew yeah what he knows it
or not he actually is the one in the in
the big philosophers little ones then
because we're on to--they ology comes
from my they're able to think that the
emerging thought that or the emergent or
movement or change in the understanding
of being and they're able to like mink
it decisive right this des pr√©s like the
Anto the innermost ring and the oh right
yeah yes yeah yes able to do it in a way
that's tangible they really mean
something and this goes to like how
you'd have certain certain people that
love what Bart is doing because Bart is
not doing what they want someone to stay
true to you know the scriptures nature
the tradition and say screwed to take
you to what all the doctors are trying
to do at the level they're doing it but
then you have to look in Baltimore and
Rahner
they're saying I can still talk about
those things those doctrines Christology
and I can talk about soteriology
salvation and stayed and all those
things but then route throws in a way
that is not ain't concealed in the human
understanding of yeah but he's trying to
pull out of the things that what was
controller yeah what was concealed
that's what they're more concerned with
and that that's why that's what Roger
ends up getting to a support which made
him so huge and because think about this
he's a Catholic thinker and he's pretty
much probably the only one maybe there's
even doing this within that sort of camp
and that sort of approach is looked as
being well you have a lane to be you
have to stand at Lane with and he's
someone that says well I'm gonna create
a different Lane that includes all these
other great it Rogers it's not inclusive
there's something that's exclusive
probably includes both the two things at
the same time which I think runners
fascinating is he wrote so many works in
his career of his er if you ever seen
like is a huge volume of working me he
wrote his
higher life articles is his major book
of course that is very highly influenced
with very kind of postural influence but
he wanted to write about every single
thing you could possibly think of in
terms of biology he pretty much did so
he is unsurpassed in terms of his body
of work that way and until it of course
going to create a real systematic
theology that is using existence as the
centerpiece is almost as if it's like
some sort of doctor yeah anyway yeah
that becomes a thing that ties
everything together yeah and then
Beaumont of course with language and
tradition and you'll robot start off
trying to figure out about synoptic
tradition synoptic problem with the
gospel but he moves from there said we
made him maybe all these things are all
mythology maybe we have to figure out
how to take the mythology out of it so
mythology then becomes something that
conceals so that we don't understand it
can never get to what Jesus really means
yeah outside of that so tradition and
all these things have to be kind of yes
they're stripped down so then everything
can come up in Oakland steel fashion so
they they're doing some things that are
carving paths that are raised
they wouldn't have happened here not
good variety you had a group dinner
piece of that and you know I think some
of them eventually tried to resist that
over time I think kind of maybe maybe
kind of minimizing a certain extent I me
to the rights only a couple of instances
where he says yeah I he got rid
Heidegger and I know you really didn't
talk about him a lot right no he does
well he keeps it to the you know to the
way you know even even runners like you
know yeah those other things there by
those runners dissertations they do they
figure Taddy was toxic and they want to
move away from great place is separable
from other very separable
you know what you're talking about like
listen so just going back and I realize
like when you came back on I forgot to
put undo the pause button so we met we
miss a little a little bit of it I just
wanted I follow that but what
things you talked about was really
caught my attention when you talked
about your mentors right no your or
actually he called them that you're the
people apprenticed you or what did your
mentors right yeah yeah called him I
called him dr. Baltar's you said you
said something like in your
conversations with with them your what
you were interested in what your asking
questions about really had them remember
that they like Heidegger yeah exactly
yeah the the one I mentioned I talked I
talked to him on Thursdays he's a James
Duke he teaches that a bride Divinity
School
he's a church historian he specialized
in hermeneutics and he specializes in a
Freddie sly marker and you know he and I
had so many conversations when I was in
grass and she started kind of thinking
back to his early time his early careers
early you know studies in Heidegger and
German thinkers and German idealism agle
and so it started to wake him his early
interested so viciously I all they were
talking about how to go with him that he
you know would not have been able to do
otherwise I you know he he of course he
he wrote a blurp on a second book that I
did from diligence guided and you know I
think that he really helped me really
hash out some of these interests these
sort of connection points I want to make
with Heidegger in theology by way of him
remembering cuz he often would tell me
that you know he said you know if you
you you know there's so much I know I'm
basically forgotten so much you remind
me of things that I didn't realize are
actually already do they kind of
reawaken thanks for him you know and
even mother that mother another mentor
David Galan's who has since retired he
retired a year I finished my second
master's in theology over-bright he
specializing gripper guard and yeah
kirkegaard was used to hide a groom it
was a huge influence but he wasn't
missing a whole lot though he keeps
kind of suppressed but I talked with him
McGowan was a lot about Heidegger that
was something that we spent lots of time
now we talk every Saturday now when you
talk about you know different things I'm
working on with whatever and so we
constantly come back to those days it is
amazing how both of them they really are
not I mean they definitely say they're
not hi to Gary ins and and I often kind
of hesitate to call anybody how to
guaran because it has a lot of
connotations that are kind of tricky you
talk about that Gary Heidegger widow I'm
somebody Gary what do you say thinking
think spats exactly why one might say
that I'm doing this but what might be
wrong you know I sort of yeah it's like
he's not a hi to Gary so I think it's
kind of like you you have a way of
thinking that happens to be articulated
by Heidegger in a way you know that you
go to to build what you're doing so then
you become someone that is in hiding
your studies the day of course you know
that term is controversial and that's
why I like to use it for the first book
cause either you know I think Bob on
Tillich Ron and will never ever want to
be considered hi to Gary they they come
from a school of thought that just is
inseparable from even just a sense of
what you were talking about like ya know
then it was then it occurred to Rainer
going like okay music slain he's like
alright I'll just like I'll do anything
whatever it was that but like that then
intelligibility that could have it even
show up the world show up like that is
sense or that flavor of the awakening of
thought right is that whatever other
sheathing of this is just oh yeah this
is it's interesting because of one of
the things that kind I've noticed as
I've gotten older I mean then I was born
in Chicago like I didn't have any kind
of religious like
other than you know you can't other in
the ways that you can't not be religious
all kind of Christians you know in a
Marriott yeah of course there's yeah
yeah giggling Brody we all kind of have
Remus on and of course there's like the
subtle things that are differences but
yeah there are the things that there's
more.they that combines us and freezers
together separate yes and like a lot of
the positive philosophers the New
Atheists and stuff they want to like
take these their sense of intellectual
morality right and then they don't want
it it's like it's like the hand if the
hand didn't understand Phyllis but but
when things I've noticed and I think I
just got this in what you're saying and
what you were describing what opens up
when Heidegger you could say kind of
broke the traditions right or broken and
use terms because that's what a lot of
what he was doing right when the terms
birds and bringing things together is
he's trying to mix like break the
traditional way yeah we're we're thought
has become like lost lost its sense it's
an amazing thing that's right yeah and
so that it wasn't like he was a don't I
never got this sense that he was
rebelling
I always got this sense that actually he
resented yeah that's xfinity of their
traditions from more than anybody yeah I
think so yeah he understands that you
have I mean you can't create a counter
tradition without having the tradition
to counter from you knows I think he's a
very much aware of that he looks at as
kind of a louder than as if you kicked
away you can't depend on that completely
yeah and it doesn't advance the
conversation if you're still working
within these boundaries you kind of
moving to be on a future projected and
that's what that was his big beef I
think of metaphysics and adversity
humanism is that it's not doing enough
to address the issue which I think he
had the destined beefy eros Artemis
Archer try to you know reorder things
between you know instead of SS over
existence you know existence precedes
essence how you like you still work
thank you more credit than do marketing
you're more Cartesian than two car I
think it's something to that I think
that is definitely now I'm really
discounts Archer does some great things
but and I think that's a good point that
I think becomes part of this sort of way
and that how you realize is when a lot
of Sartre students were then going back
and say well if sorry we start to wrote
this text existentialism a humanism and
then they say well Heidegger you don't
humanism to because you seem like you're
a thinker as well so I'm like no no let
me write my literal humanism and I'll
show you that I'm not doing that I'm
doing something to be different you know
some might say is the ego thing you know
he just doesn't want to be you know
gathered together that way but I think
he's he's rebelling against society one
who does emitters which i think is you
know obviously a humorous standard
anthropocentric view of the world where
everything is logo centric to the human
he's trying to get beyond that so all
his work even be at a time I think be
being at tired yeah he's big he's
putting time on a level playing field
with me in a way that no one had done
before you know the temporality is
important great and man doesn't exist
without time yeah is something that
becomes the the framework that allows me
to be in a lot of ways you know so I
think he's the tradition thing I think
for him was always tricky because when
you're rebelling is tradition it's kind
of like you have to do so in a way that
is nuanced yeah but then realizes that
you wouldn't be able to do what you were
doing had it not been for these fakers
and these people you know DJ is like the
big person that kind of starts yeah the
last bit of physician you know that sort
of thing yeah going back to other
thinkers I mean those become people that
I think for him speak to what we're each
a ends and what needs to be done after
Nietzsche yeah there's always a sort of
after sort of post me change sort of
approach which I
think becomes the you know the big wheel
house that you see a gum but operate in
and Derrida operate their dr. Railly
against traditions and figuring out how
can i carve my way Foucault same thing
he's looking at knowledge and Krishna
biology in a way that is nuanced you
know so they all are old what they're
doing I had agreed here's the one that
kind of opens up this foot game right
then no one had really thought about
before I think I'm gonna focal : you
know in a lot of ways is brilliant as a
baker you know and he Stevie was hiding
over there Dom knows it very well yeah
you do not using abused Heidegger lots
of ways of course but he doesn't really
will like his work I'm reading a work by
him aporia actually yeah right I'm like
his later works like Exeter he starts to
bump up against we're gonna deconstruct
anymore and it is that right yeah
there's something see I think in many
ways where I could imagine like that
where I really get this sense of like
Heidegger and theology right some ways
Heidegger never and this is where this
is where the sense of where we're
Heidegger kind of um broke the tradition
right but he was but he had his eye on
right just over it there was a say that
that there were inside of the tradition
was concealed the intelligibility of
being yeah right so you have Tillich and
they go they relook at all the symbols
and then they they draw out right the
the ability that was concealed in the in
in its nearness of the church and all
the traditions right in here he figure
Eight's it and I and I think that's kind
of maybe where some of the
post-modernism like health or tray is
they just took that they just
breaking it yeah they didn't have the
sense of the emergence of the new ground
of the new annum
mating because it made sense right and
so like and all that is part of a bigger
movement but this is the thing that I
which is really interesting and I think
you probably interested in to this is I
think that where we may be looking at
for the first time in what anything is
technology makes it possible where we're
having this conversation and there's
people that are gonna listen
conversation and have conversations
about this conversation in or tolerable
Heidegger they've never went to college
yes oh yeah for sure yeah yeah there's a
movement of you know one of the things
that I think Peterson really reveals
right yeah fears is that people actually
have an attention span a like they do
really do want to think about deep
things and they will at them like and
they'll consider really be into it and
it changes lives right yeah there
Peterson is easy debate I mean that was
like if you usually watch things at the
time who had thought that right it would
be a big like something it was like wow
you know look at it like you know but of
course it didn't play out like I thought
it would you know but I'm looking at
like he talks because I I mean I love
these days work to them yeah I've
written about him multiple times he kind
of is someone who is trying to make
philosophy be more than just philosophy
like he's really yeah using it in ways
they can this speak to people he writes
books that are not necessarily for
academics they're for anybody that's
interested a builder or Heidegger or you
know look on you know a psychoanalysis
so he's really popularizing things and
of course Peterson the same way I mean
he he's doing a lot for his field but
also becoming part of a pop culture of a
public intellectual that we don't have
as many of these days you know kid out
there talking and people are coming to
see them talk and they are like the
centerpieces of how
there's there's not all tears I mean you
know those guys are missed I mean you
used to be a time or like hiding or
going these interviews and in the
interview for days but you don't see
that too much anymore geez you know it's
not the same you know yeah and but they
better yeah they get Peterson I think
yeah he's other Stoops that have come to
me they've asked me questions about
Peterson and psychoanalysis and Marxism
for example I think the other week a
student asked about parts of the
computer on my will you might want to
you might you might want to read Marx
although more carefully I mean I'm not
saying Peter said it wrong I mean that's
a take and his multiple take you can
have before that's not the only take
yeah and so much to go back to that you
can get a better handle of what exactly
he's talking about and see where you
stand on it which I think important
right I think it Hank my friend Doug
Chris who you'd really like a lot he's
but he says about Peterson he says you
know he I think he says thing more than
a psychologist more than a bit like a
cultural commentator more than all eight
he's a pretty yeah definitely he he is
yeah he sermonize is what he's saying
that's me in the watch in many ways like
it's great he's revealing the need for
father ship that's yeah right yeah yeah
he makes a lot of you know good sort of
assessments that I think open up
conversations about things in ways that
would never have happened before right
but I think we need more of I mean you
know the idea having the intellectual is
someone that is not necessarily how you
think how to think but there's someone
that just opens questions like Socrates
does I mean Socrates tells theaetetus
you know you know I'm not here to to be
someone to tell you what the answers are
I'm here to be a midwife right each on
the path toward thinking which i think
is what we really need I think in terms
of intellectual progression doctor I
think when you're talking about this I'm
just getting a sense of
this is what I think that people are
starting to understand is that to really
do philosophy oh right yeah it takes
it's an act of courage yeah for sure
yeah
yeah there's there's a dignity in in the
act of questioning which is not a badass
right yeah because it's you're opening
up or you're opening up in yeah and the
awestruck in the Wonder but it's you
gotta confront it's like II it's messy
business you know it's like if you're
not fronting things like what no and
that actually take courage so there's
this kind of feedback this hotter poetic
feedback loop of where where it's really
can be it's really an adventurous yeah
yeah I think that's the excitement is
just being at the edge of somewhere and
yeah there's something about us there's
something about does not write about
yeah yeah yeah it is that did I think
that there's like just I think both are
important but it seems like the didn't
one the guy known as I often I think
everybody kind of knows this is probably
just like the existential fact of our
ontology right is which we always have
it's kind of background sense of
pressure right yeah right yeah like like
this sense of like you know it's all
given given a gift they can't repay but
yeah I'm thrown to feel a sense of guilt
like a deep sense of conch like my
conscience is tuned into mm-hmm like am
I am I done enough am i right if I
become as somebody right like that right
can justify the fact of my existence
that I can't account for right my
burdened with that kind of gift right
yeah well sure of like like right Who am
I gonna be right and I be the one right
and of course offenses
yeah it's like do you like you use your
existence to do whatever it is that you
do so it's like it's a it's like a like
an unpayable debt right exactly yeah
yeah the other way which is I think this
other part which is I think that I think
as I've gotten older and where this
other part where it's there's like and
there's this other way where like it's
like like you already are more than you
can ever accomplish right sure yeah
right it's kind of way where just the
fact of a viewer of our particular kind
of beingness right that it can actually
bear witness right here at our existence
and we we get to we need to we get to be
the site of it and we were and we get to
give testimony to it and you hear about
it like there's this other part where
it's like just the the it's almost like
an ethics a sense of ethics about I some
love like I think there's a lot of times
I'm like how the hell I don't like the
Big Bang growing nervous system what way
you could talk about it like it's like
there is this sense like way in the
background that unsolvable I kind of
feel like our whole thing is is just to
take a really a very finite limited
first glimpse as far as we know that
like all that is open his eyes for like
just a fraction of a second to go mm-hmm
there's that sensibility about like even
more than saving the world and more than
like making sure that we still exist and
making sure that we're doing good you
know all those things are important too
of course oh yeah art which is like the
holder to it our being here is just
absolutely you can't get you can't
underneath that mystery it's fun
mm-hmm and that's the thing that seems
to be so near and that's one of these
kinds of conversations bring alive to me
oh and it's so purging but I was
wondering about what you think about
this because I think this sense of like
where where you have an insight and the
insight is usually is usually reveals
the ground of what you were in but it
was concealer and there's something kind
of insight that this already always miss
mm-hmm that being prone to those kinds
of things I think seems to be spilling
I've noticed how encouraging it is
mm-hmm and it doesn't even have to have
to be like a great good news insight it
could be like things I've been
pretending but like I just Epiphany of
some sort something yeah yeah yeah
something that just kind of achieved you
in some way that you hadn't been before
calibrates me yes it realizes like oh
being was right here the whole time
and looking for it but like it was
already here and that already always
nest I feel like there's some kind of
faith mmm but I feel about there's like
an index of like a trust of uh that no
that's like an awakening of like know
there's an intelligibility that doesn't
that doesn't need even my a piston
piston a right here right where bigger
than I am that I'm inside of it I'm of
it and that I can recognize myself
having it already
yeah I'm Lovell there's something about
that and I think is a kind of faith that
I that that just can kind of awaken yeah
nothing Heidegger for sure I mean I
think he's definitely there and being in
time and I've often wondered you know
there's a lot of debates on why he never
finished he gave his own reason why he
never finished it but I think that it
could be that either he the the way the
path he was taking that book was to a
point that he felt like he could not he
could no longer articulated anyway
because it was something that was too
head of all rays all readiness to
something that was already there so how
are you going to articulate something
away which language reduces and language
confines or something like that is
beyond anything they went like what
language to fuck what is this thing
called language or something you have a
good handle of like what this is where a
lot of theologians you know really turn
to it I do because they see in him De
Stijl article underpinnings to his work
that's very obvious even though he's
never saying theology he's never seen
God but it's something that's underneath
it that is always speaking to things
that exist in a way that make the human
be what it is but then is something that
requires us to think about the
transcendent way like we have to think
about it outside of the body in a
certain way and that's why I mean he
that's why he's never really you know
here's really he's not concerned with
the body that same way he's were
concerned with these transcendent things
so of course Marla Ponte comes in and he
tries to including the body but I mean
that's that's his own take but
Heidegger's are concerned with what
makes the body the body and it would mix
makes them makes the thing that makes
the body he's concerned with the levels
removed beyond that ya know the body is
just the throne is what makes this
throne this happen you know if it makes
this anxiety happen what makes
temporality happen yeah he's looking at
that on a more deeper level right which
speak would speak to this idea so he
does who has whole career he says he's
touching different pieces and he so you
see a trajectory his career where often
some peepers have said well there's a
early Heidegger later that sort of thing
to say he's doing something different
later period versus really how did he
throw the same thing you know this is
something that I've talked about with
you know with my mentors like he's never
he's never taken his eye off the ball
and he's just that he's trying to figure
out how can I circle back and get
another
that I didn't have before and then and
then once I learned some more come back
again and again and then include this
thinker go to the Hegel's
he go his career he's going to think
we're trying to figure out how to you
know I say this better and of course you
got the Nazism thing which was a circle
attached to he was trying to figure out
how is this pure principle gonna be
something that's gonna help awaken this
on concealment oh it's not and when he
come back around again and you know he's
just constantly going through these
paths do you know when he gets the end
of his career he's he arrives at poetry
and language you know and thinking is
the big thinker in literal God you know
it's so funny because it's like on some
level this is so I think that people can
just really relate to just I think I'm
doing X Y & Z because of this but I
actually kind of moved towards it and I
get to this and I realized the whole
time what I really was doing was this
and so change history right but
constantly happening this somehow it's
bigger than us but it and it constants
ahead of us behind us but like it's the
the matter is never settled exactly it's
constantly like he's constantly trying
to settle those things and I think
that's why sometimes he looked at as a
you know some people that are detractors
of Heidegger might say oh whoa he's just
a Frankenstein philosopher and she was
putting pieces together I mean he's
using he's Jews enough reggae he's using
our deal tie and these different people
are putting together but he's trying to
then hone in on something that they
didn't own and yet he's using them as a
stepping stool but it becomes a step
until he pushes away these were served
with how do I circle back and how do I
keep figuring out race and I'm better
way and that's basically is words you
know like dials on is something that
nobody's existence but it has a much
more nuance it has the idea of fairness
going on and as a side deal of being in
terms of lower case B upper case B and
then this idea of a sign in the sense of
having a sort of a maybe a musicality to
an aesthetic to that I think is beneath
that which I think he's playing into too
so that all these things are kind of on
the phone the forefront of what he's
doing so then by the time he gets the
end of his career and he started looking
at all the pre-socratics he's thinking
that they are the ones that have already
been doing this well before Plato so now
if I can go back to them then I can
figure out where we've gone wrong since
Plato in a way that I didn't do it yeah
what's the thought what's the thought
that parameters did you that he didn't
think a new beginning right the other
beginning words like it kind of goes
back in the atmosphere before that
thought got crystallized he kind of like
no and it could have gone this way any
good he goes all right so let's replay
all of history we get the sense of like
yeah he has no idea where he's gonna end
up in the musicality in the tone us of
like I think I'm really getting what you
mean by the aesthetic that it's yeah
it's like when a it's it's the it's the
beauty of it it's the intelligibility of
it it's it's not the proposition right
decisions are just the weave the fabric
yeah he's always just kind of right
there and that's the thing I thought one
of the most interesting things is when I
heard someone say that like Heidegger
refuse and his collecting works he
refused to put an index yeah true I
think that is that is this there's a lot
there's a lot because it says what he
he's like in it sometimes people kind of
write me in the last me what was
Heidegger's view on done it a lot I
don't think Heidegger had Jews I hear a
really yeah I think for him I mean he
his directive for the collective works
were that they be ways not works yes I
heard was so he's conserved that so how
are these ways of thinking that lead for
different paths and not about titles and
works and things like that so that's why
you see the dem order in a way where he
has like being a time is number two and
then he's got like his early stuff
number one and then everything he does
after that are all like
other things and then you get to the
very end where he's got journals and
stuff like this and diary like that
where he is the journal entries are just
healed constantly retooling constantly
we articulate and constantly retreading
past he's had before in order to get new
thinking in new ways of approaching
things he did wanted stuff to be
codified that was right yeah I think
it's like when he talked about like
people make fun of him a lot because he
said you know he's he never says I well
I thought that he says thinking exactly
yeah
what is that think about like he's
actually this is this is why what he's
there's a there's something that being
communicated in just that move right
here I think it's like almost like a
practice of like like I I think there's
actually general semantics has this
thing about consciousness abstraction
where they're like don't use is and you
know it's this practice that forces you
to distinguish back from territory right
and lately that territory is Nitin is
like you're looking to the territory for
that right yes
he's like embedded philosophical kind of
practices that I think that he was
constantly doing mmm-hmm that was a way
to do it to say that you know instead of
saying that I have a question that I
want to ask you say there's a question
that wish to be asked when you talked
about this like really abstract way like
right like the question is is its own
thing in his own entity you know that
then begs to ask its own question and
leaving the human out of it so it's
always this sort of a yeah compartment I
mean severe because it's beautiful you
hear it but it's kind of jarring for the
first time what I did say I asked the
question it's more to than that he's
trying to articulate in the way that is
honing in on the question and not
letting the question be superseded or be
controlled by the I the subject the
subject obviously stations are very
important for him he's trying to get
beyond that right he's this Descartes
problem that they cart kind of yeah
pushes out in the world he's kind of
gonna be on that by saying that
everything is its own entity and every
entity has its own voice yeah its own
sort of the static its own
presented his own being in the world
within the temporality which is exist
that like like yeah unconcealed but
conceals at the same time like next day
I think I really kind of got it yeah
like we're like after being I know he
talked about he wanted to develop a
fundamental ontology but I got this he's
like wait a minute
there ain't nothing fundamental here
yeah yeah yeah I'm still using ontology
I'm still using ontology that's not
that's the problem so you know move away
from that yeah so then he starts saying
well let me look at in terms of maybe
maybe we're talking about metaphysics
maybe that's the problem
well I don't really use that either
because that's still ruin it ideas with
metaphysics are then you know then we go
to human ears we go to a lathe you like
a seelman and that for him but those
more of a pure path right a pure
reservoir that does can't be more heavy
lifting than what he's doing before
nothing yeah in a very different way do
you think about that just in your like I
just admit just imagine just think about
your life right like what it would take
you start this book being in time it's
your dissertation it's like yeah yeah
job and you're as you're writing it it
writes itself beyond itself in all of a
sudden yeah you can't complete and
you're like I can't do this what it must
take yeah follow the thing that he's
actually listening to right yeah yeah
like if that's not a like a metaphor an
example of the way that we could live
our lives like yeah allegiance to like
am i because I think that's always the
sense of like a your identity is that
kind of that can Kinki there's ways in
which it it crystallizes and it's it's
good there's other ways your attention
needs to see something or something
speak to you what listen to it really is
to be somewhat could it was you happen
to be the
then that's right that takes something
actually here that does it once you hear
it the way he hears it he's like why
continue to write this book because now
it's obsolete it doesn't he says that
he's like he said being in time he says
never lived up to the task
reached his full fruition because he
realized as he wrote it that I'm the way
I'm trying to articulate is never gonna
be calculated in this this is never
going to get there so so he I mean he
leaves I mean there's a whole half of it
every rope so he wrote he has lectures
that people have often looked at as
being ways to fill in when he left out
of the book but he's well beyond the
book by the time we get to the you know
late twenties early thirties well he's
doing with other things about it he's
concerned with truth and you concerned
with you know how to how to make
National Socialism have a philosophical
underpinning you know they realized oh
I'm being used by Hitler's now I got to
get away from that you know these has
other issues in our state and so be at a
time becomes a one of the I think one of
the most interesting unfinished books of
philosophy that's out there every you
know to have a complete or complete and
then like world what would he have done
what was news a closes purpose he
doesn't write anything else I mean after
he has another book later on called
existence and be the age I think is
trying to talk about the problems with
me anytime but it doesn't really try to
go any further than that you know I have
to have a copy all right on it's always
always like it's always go by be I've I
just always have this sense like when I
start thinking about like ecstatic time
right and then you know he talked about
right in the beginning of the reckoning
of being a time he talks about where you
know and I think he's responding
he's breaking open Hegel right Hegel is
complete you can't like everything big
Hegel is a system is just about anything
that was right yeah Hegel's tries to
categorize everything that's like well
it's like that's what happens when he
put at like
actualities as as the king in Hydra he
says right like in the first couple of
pages I think he said talks about like
no it's possibility is above xx like
talks about like actually it's
everything that's concealed that we
can't do in hand that is drawing Meade
move in this direction it's not that I
went this arm in some determiners way
it's this there's a space that drew it
right it's exactly in this year sense of
intelligibility is distributed man
historical in fact every single thing
that we do right every every single
thing is like is animated and historical
miss and I was like and I'm curious cuz
you because you you teach a lot right
yes do you teach college and yeah yeah
schooler
why well you I teach them dual credit
classes now so I taught high school only
a few years ago and then now I've been
teaching on the college so I'll go to
high school campuses and teach two
classes right okay good there's a tall
college course on me I'm teaching Plato
and I'm teaching like Aristotle or take
our first rule to high school kids and
then I come to campus and I'm teaching
the same thing here with Shakespeare
other things
hey Ray Knight is curious from your
perspective right working like an
imagine that like you know and I heard
it in the way that you talked about with
your mentor is that like so much this is
awakened and awakened through your your
interest your your mentors that it's
that I can feel that that that sense of
the Living nosov the dialogue owes right
that probably like you're not trying to
like it clear on propositions whoa
like let's get closer to this mystery
right that something students have a lot
of problems with I think because we read
these philosophers they will know what's
the answer like would ya
what's the neatly packaged way of
understanding
what kirkegaard means or Schopenhauer
means and I'm like well that's not the
point really the point is is like what
path are they opening up for you and
then how you take that path opens up
another way I thought they just become
just you know hath openers that they
kind of begin it but they aren't the end
of you and it cuz you can disagree with
them to you have to think the
Aristotle's correct he could be wrong
yeah you know he's right at a time it is
rule from our time and so there doesn't
mean that he's correct he can be missing
something
so they they have an issue with trying
to actually counter these thinkers in a
way that right Breen's what they think
to the folds and the more fundamental
way I think we have an issue with that
some okay so I I have I have taught I
thought they get just perplexed by the
language I think and that throws them
off I'm like well don't worry about the
language just look at what words do you
know yeah and then how is he using these
words in a way they're different from
what you would use where that beat you
and then go from there
yeah I mean you know what you know what
time it is you know a being means so
where's the why is he time those to go
that way and what is at stake what's the
what sort of impact does that have on
how we look at these two words right now
you know I think they become gives more
insight to them that way yeah totally
I've noticed like in teaching and to
wait first of all you just don't have
any control like I've just noticed that
like a waiter the stuff you have about a
hill that's notice like there's no
methods but like there's this kind of
wild thing about people's freedom but I
I get I think one of the things that I
think with social media it's almost it's
almost impossible to comprehend
to what degree we are going to buy it
right imagine it's just it's you know I
you know it's only been 15 years that
yeah yeah hey but we're now having kids
that don't have a memory before the
Internet and so what the real brain mmm
different yeah
he's just and there's no way to
understand it but it passionately like
these new technological structures
aren't just like it is inside of your
talked about they're not just the
gadgets but then they're that there's an
understanding of being right it's a
scale deserve right here right so it's
more like it's like it's like I get the
senses at our time in technology and the
dominance of it kind of figure eise's
all ground right it's it just the moment
the moment there's background it's
figure eise's and it is it doesn't sway
that doesn't it all point to the
background sure yeah I think that's
pretty background and seeing that it
it's interesting because it's like this
this sense especially with with with
with philosophy at this level to spend
time at something that's difficult right
that isn't immediately useful
yeah right right it's just almost to the
point where I think I think is it's
almost to the point where I think kids
probably can't even perceive their minds
are just not able to teach channel at
the abstract way like that because they
have I guess that muscle just isn't
there not is prefigured and then this
transfigured so it's like prefiguring
and then like all the work is done so
then they don't have to do anything
their their reality is given versus
constructing your own reality by a stop
on what you encounter you know they just
don't have this so when they read like
Aristotle or Plato he like world
well what is he saying like today he's
saying there's a gap can't you just like
there's no right or wrong answer I'm
like dude ask people how many different
ways can you interpret Aristotle but
they're like well I mean any number of
ways depend upon what you bring to the
table when you read it yeah course you
understand the language so it could be
millions of different ways no there's
not growing waiting I say so you have to
figure out what way speaks to you based
on what you know and they'd be able to
get something from this that's me you
know and so I think even I say that some
students I mean you can tell me that
they're sweating I mean you see the
smoke coming off their hands and this
this is like really yeah heavy lifting
we think about like read this text and
then tell me what you think of it I'm
just gonna sit back I'm just gonna give
you some brief kind of frame you know
this is playlist there is foul and kind
of Facebook you have to do all the work
yeah that stuff is like really taxing
for them to do that - anything - and I
guess I you know I mean I know you could
think of this - you speak of this as
well was like you know when when I was
growing up on me you know I mean I was
reading all these other thinkers I mean
reading uh looking at Leonardo da
Vinci's work and dealing with work you
know and slide
you know I did all it on my own I'd have
anybody telling me like you know hey
this is what you think this is this is
the piata this is like architects look
at my order you know figured out a
moment and then it became a more organic
experience than one that is packaged and
you know prefigured and that sort of
thing I think these tools Nadi's don't
have right whatever don't have you know
yeah and then and then the attention
span is a whole different thing like
your attention span really short so
you're looking for sound bytes looking
for things that are easily digestible
which I think if you're gonna read
Heidegger you're not gonna get him and
just you know two minutes you have to
tell me I know people in red being in
tired you know I bet I would be probably
hundreds of times make it something
different every time and I thing it's
like it's like that's the thing that's a
little scary
yes it's the challenge of like you know
it's like I mean human beings will do
well you know go through anything if
they like a good enough reason to do it
yeah yeah right he's like people go
through some enormous amount of pain
well apparently if it's meaningful
enough however I'm just afraid that
there's something about the way phones
and n this this is some this way of
collapsing all distances right yes right
yeah yeah we're paradox were when you
like it so so what I do sometimes is
like if I want to really get a like a
kick and a rise out of people on my iPad
I'll like all right hand write and email
oh and people are like what do you what
are you doing me does is it really
introduces the sense of like this
difference between technology and a that
that to read my handwriting is to
actually be to have some distance
between you and it's in the distance and
overcoming that distance is a is is a
process and a ride in it in
and it involves a kind of participation
yeah we don't even see that that is it
is such is an option like that's like
something that you could even do yes so
many of those things that are innately
scary and it's becoming like optional
like it you don't even have to talk to
anybody anymore
exactly yes Demi internet connection a
computer and you can become millionaire
you can become famous you can start a
company and you don't have to ever talk
to another person right yeah yeah this
is it is that the personal is gone out
of lies just gone people are just yeah
mr. technology be like new students that
don't even know how to read cursive
anymore really you know it's like they
they can't read and there used to be
where that was the staple of early
education which is no matter I'd
encourage you know these don't have that
brand you know right and then did I uh
Mitchell I have the things kind of
package where they understand things
have been so prefigured that everything
is prefabbed
and everything is just there for you
already there's nothing really they have
to do right and they could I talk I
taught English in high school as well
and ap is one of these things where like
it's all about building right thought
and do the original ways of looking at
the world but an even AP itself I mean
you have to teach to a test and the test
then prefigures them again into some you
know some I've always said well let me
give you some some skills here that are
more than just test the skills that then
lets you have access to you know college
in a way that you can think on your own
and be able to question on your own in a
way that means something which I think a
lot of them it was it was hard I mean
for students like that you haven't done
that in a while I mean it's it's like
running a marathon
you haven't even run a step yet it's
very difficult but it's necessary you
know and Stewart asked me I want to go
to grasp blow into this with you go to
grad school I mean that's been really
you know putting some work it's not
gonna be ready made ya know you have to
actually read some books and learn
something they don't want they don't
want to read it they get it you know by
Wikipedia look it up that way tell me
what you say you know I don't even see
it it's one thing to like
know that if I did the hard thing it
would probably good for me not people is
one thing reckon I can be all I'm here
okay not everyday but like it's a
totally different universe though when
it doesn't even occur to me that there's
any there's any there's any good didn't
you come out of difficulty yeah right
like that is like I'm watching it it's
like it's like if I'm hearing it it's
like that's a vanishing horizon right
different world right there's a
different way of thinking yes different
yeah to say that it's not like oh I
don't want to do it but I know if I
could and I feel guilty if it's more
like it's not even it's totally
concealed wasn't it easier way out
parents like Heidegger I think was
really right on them eerily right on the
way cuz he's like saying like the the
thing about this age is that what's
concealed is concealment yes because
doesn't reveal that it's concealed
instead the only thing that we call real
are things that we can organize position
optimize extreme distances and now let's
look at just in the last couple of years
it used to like a few years ago it would
have been weird to like think about your
body and hack it
yeah right how what it's like the most
popular way of thinking about things and
here it's really interesting like the
that that that has happened so quickly
and no one's walking around really going
god this is really uncanny for a change
boom right because it's there that
there's that kind of quality where the
strangeness becomes that the lack of
home miss be comes concealed right yeah
it's kind of concealed with this
happening in a way that you'll realize
it's gonna see you like it just
constantly happening yeah and you don't
realize that you're actually at a
disadvantage yet every step first is
being it I mean it's kind of like a it's
almost like a boss sense of fun
concealment like his it's a concealed on
concealment like it seems like it's
really there but really is distance
that's giving between what we actually
are having access so we think we're
having access to right you know we with
social medias like well I've got all my
friends here and I've got your back to
talk to all around the world but like
there's nothing really actual about any
of it it's all based on manufactured
understands of on concealment
yeah there's not anything really there
you know I mean I'll be like I have a
you know I know students that you know
have 2,000 3,000 4,000 Facebook friends
and they're all the other parts the
world don't know how are they really
your friends at least like you can
where's the word friend mean if it means
that you don't know these people enable
in another part of the world right and
you'll even know if they're really who
they are they could be a manufactured
brain existence of something you know or
instant yeah yeah you all really know
yeah it's something that's very I mean
it's tricky so friendship that would be
something different now you know when I
was growing up I mean it's like you saw
the person in real life yeah did heal
with the other Ness and the other yes
but there was any other choice
yeah you're fighting but if you have a
choice your nervous system isn't gonna
go oh why would I why would I call
somebody when I can just text him like
exactly all that other nurse right like
do you think about it that other Ness is
how we come to realize that we are right
here I relationality which i think is I
think that there's something about that
that is the thing that like I feel
pretty motivated to just keep looking at
right you're right it's a philosophy is
there's a one level it is cut you can go
into these abstractions but it it
reveals the thing that's most near and I
think happens through a relationship and
conversation right um
and and kind of allowing people to start
to touch in on it is what I like is it
these kinds of conversations just
listening to them right swaggin like
like hearing this all the time we're
like oh I listen to this conversation
and I didn't even realize like it just
opened up this whole world right here
right about this whole thing and all of
a sudden they're engaged in in a
dialogue because I think it's very much
like our lives you can very it's very
easy to run oh it's easy but it's it's
um you can look at a dialogue is like
you can look at your relationship to the
world as a conversation right yeah
that's a so it's this constant sort of a
linguistic interpolation of each other
like you costly like interpolate and
language and then you become the subject
and object of language becomes something
that then compartmentalizes and you can
hear you converse it's all about you
know the back and forth you know
yeah right well it's getting dark I have
to ask back for a long time I have to I
have to start getting ready for my wife
to come home speaking of really I really
appreciate having this conversation this
has been really yeah yeah I mean I would
definitely love to you know talk to you
again yeah better stuff you know and
maybe collaborate on you know here there
yeah yeah and just I you know I wanted
to just and I also wanted one of the
reasons why I brought you on is because
I just wanted to give you like also
connect you into a sense of all of this
conversation is I mean really be it's
really it's it's it's gathering mm-hmm
there's something there's something here
right I mean there's something so I
think I think you got I think be the
gathering is I think essential yeah to
figure it out all the questions that I
think we looked at in terms of hey what
does it mean to the gathering I think is
the state-based distinction between
philosophy and philosophy yeah right I
mean I mean your head
you know Eagles gathering things but I
mean that because philosophy is not
philosophy right right you know I think
Heidegger then gets a hold of like will
he focus on the phenomena whose spirit
is being kind of the way he acts this is
Hegel but then Hegel then is something
that is to philosophy is to rooted in
tradition yeah
even though tradition is nothing wrong
with that but then we can't be so locked
in that when we lose the interpersonal
the sort of concealment that's there
that we need to get yeah absolutely
absolutely
yeah yeah right now great talking with
you my friend yeah great talking to you
a lot of fun yeah and I you I said I it
sounds like you're thinking about
starting your own podcast or you're
doing your own videos yeah I wouldn't
mind I've been thinking about it for a
while now I wouldn't mind yeah you know
I think probably uh I might be back
maybe I can lean on you for some for
some advice or some sort of creative
tools because I know you've been doing
it for a while you know how those things
go yeah yes like last August but the
yeah I would say that you know that what
I think what you got your eye on what's
been wrong right ray in the philosophy
and the poetry and the you know the
nurse I think you got a beat on I think
you got the beat on the the center of
this thing that's that's actually
becoming more and more necessary to get
close to and distinguish alt that in
your writing and this is what I got a
hold of you because it just seemed like
what your natural interest in is
speaking directly to to the meaning
crisis