[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis last time we took a look
at Martin Luther and the deep impact in
our culture of grammar made by the
Protestant Reformation and we talked
about things like cultural training for
narcissism Sapientia obsolescence the
division of church and state which
furthers secularism and the rise of the
Protestant work ethic and how that's got
integrated with emergent corporate
capitalism that we then took a look some
initial responses by Pascal to this
change and the loss of the cosmos and
being replaced by the infinite spaces
that terrify we looked at an individual
who tried to respond to that a brilliant
genius from the heart of the Scientific
Revolution and that's Rene Descartes he
creates a new psycho technology the
psycho technology that is at the core of
the scientific enterprise as understood
today and that's Cartesian graphing and
the whole proposal is that we could
render everything into equations and
that if we mathematically manipulate
those abstract symbolic propositions we
can compute reality and that Descartes
saw in that a method for how we could
achieve certainty and that he understood
the anxiety of his time as being
provoked by a lack of certainty and the
search for it and this method of making
the mind computational in nature would
alleviate the anxiety that was prevalent
at the time and so I noted that we had
we had two different elements in our
grammar that are in significant tension
with each other from and they and they
both they share that's that's what's so
interesting about them I think they
share they overlap significantly in the
idea of the isolated individual mind
whereas Luther's going to put an
emphasis on conscience
well des cartes going to put in emphasis
as we'll see we began to see last time I
will now call consciousness although of
course these two words are highly
related in nature but on one side we
have the the grammar from Luther telling
us that we need to accept without
question without evidence without
argumentation and then Descartes is we
should only accept that when we have
certainty and neither one of those is
viable for us they're both pathological
in a very deep way but we saw that
Descartes nevertheless proposes this new
method a method again it's similar in so
many ways to essential features of the
Protestant Reformation a method cut off
from tradition a method cut off from
institution a method that relies just on
the individual mind in relationship to
itself so although in some one way in
one sense these two grammars the
Lutheran grammar and the Cartesian
grammar seems so opposed in our culture
and these grammars are at war in our
current culture war the war between an
idea an understanding of faith as a
radical acceptance and knowledge as the
pursuit of logically derived certainty
although they are that that grammatical
tension is at the core of a lot of our
cultural Wars
nevertheless these two views are so
deeply bound together because of their
mutual influence and their shared
commitment to the isolated individual
self Descartes has a couple of
contemporaries as I mentioned Pascal
will come back to Pascal in a bit but we
also talked about Hobbes right and
Hobbes comes up with the radical
proposal that following on Descartes if
cognition is computation and if matter
is real then we can build a material
computer and we could artificially make
Nishan artificial intelligence is a
product of the Scientific Revolution and
is part and parcel of right the advent
of the meaning crisis in modernity now
what I want to do is take some time to
look at these two interactions that I've
mentioned draw them out a bit we have
Descartes versus Hobbes and then we have
Descartes and Pascal what we can learn
from these interactions because they're
pivotal and we are now going to remind
ourselves that the idea of artificial
intelligence is deeply relevant to both
the Scientific Revolution and the
meaning crisis I've shown you how it's
relevant to the Scientific Revolution
and I pointed out last time that it is
deeply relevant to the meaning crisis
because Hobbes with the proposal of
artificial intelligence proposes to
finish the swath of death that has been
created by Galileo killing the universe
for example and what Hobbes is doing is
killing the human soul and of course
that's going to exacerbate the cultural
narcissism because if we no longer have
souls then finding our uniqueness and
our true self the self that we're going
to be true to becomes extremely
paradoxical in problematic if you don't
have a soul what is it to be true to
your true self and what is it that makes
you really unique and special from the
rest of the purposeless meaningless
cosmos so these are going to be crucial
questions now I want to take a look at
how Descartes responds to Hobbes because
that's going to make clear to us again
both the scientific import and the
existential relevance of the AI project
and it'll also make clear deeper
problems that we are now facing in the
meaning crisis
alright now here's where it's important
to make make clear how we should treat
Descartes so it's very fashionable
philosophically and cognitive
scientifically to blame Descartes for
many many mistakes there's a famous book
by DiMaggio a book that in other
respects I think very highly of des
cartes
error right and we'll talk about all
this stuff later
however I mean if I were to put it in a
sentence I wish I had made des cartes
mistakes Descartes is titanically
brilliant and the mistakes he makes are
so foundational to our culture so woven
into our cultural grammar that
overcoming them is not going to be an
easy task why I say this is because I
want to look at how Descartes actually
rejects Hobbes's proposal of artificial
intelligence and why that rejection is
still scientifically philosophically
relevant to us today but how it makes
our existence problematic what I want to
say is there is often a claim made that
Descartes rejects hobbes materialism
because descartes is Catholic and that
his motivation is religious and then
there is the innuendo that Descartes is
actually operating sorry for this pun in
bad faith he's merely trying to preserve
his religious beliefs
I think this completely misrepresents
and is a disservice to des cartes
intellectual integrity Descartes does
not respond to hobbes
out of his religious faith descartes
responds to hobbes out of the
fundamental machinery and central claims
of the scientific revolution and i want
to take a look at that because i want to
show you how problematic our worldview
is becoming and has become so
Hobbs proposes basically right this idea
of artificial intelligence Descartes
says that that's wrong and he has a
series of arguments against Hobbes that
are very telling and what Descartes
basically does is argue about the
central claims that are being made by
the Scientific Revolution the central
claims that are being made are claims
that matter is real and reality is
mathematically measured and that the
meaning and value of things is not in
the things themselves so let's go
through this very carefully okay so
Descartes says well Hobbes if you are
making an argument if you're engaging in
reasoning as opposed to just computation
you actually care right you have a goal
you're held to a standard of truth
because whatever I'm doing when I'm
reasoning I'm working towards the goal
of truth which means I'm acting on
purpose and secondly truth depends on
meaning if I ask you is the following
claim true to rip Nick Nick peeking
bucka bucka is that true you presumably
can't tell me if it's true or false
because you first need to know what I
just meant truth depends on meaning so
reasoning acts on purpose it acts in
terms of meaning and it cares about
standards or goals
it works according to a normative
standard of how we ought to behave
okay notice this this is at the heart of
reasoning this goes centrally to a lot
of useless time I would say I'm just
going to be somewhat harsh here but a
lot of useless time in the current
culture wars of discussions of
rationality I actually a scientist who
scientifically studies rationality in
human reasoning and it is often
surprising to me how little of the
science of rationality advocates of
rationality make use of how difficult
and this is what I'm going to show you
it is to integrate notions of
rationality with a scientific
materialism I'm not anti materialistic
that's not what I'm doing here I'm
trying to show you that people who
advocate a model of rationality that is
ultimately Cartesian that rationality is
about behaving purely logically in an
attempt to get certainty in our truths
sam harris for example comes to mind are
not paying attention to their criticisms
of that model made by the very self same
descartes do not advocate one side of a
phenomena without paying attention to
central criticisms made about it by its
progenitor because what's descartes
saying to hobbes he's saying well look
look what's central to reasoning
normativity how things ought to be
meaning and purpose and hobbes and i'm
gonna i'm gonna act on de cartes but
behalf here and we I can do this I think
in all integrity and legitimacy because
we have Hobbes as letters to de cartes
and de cartes response and de cartes
response are often contemptuous so you
can almost hear Descartes saying ha
you idiot you can't have a material
reasoner because what is the scientific
revolution saying about matter it's
saying that matter is inert it has no
purpose right there is no meaning in
matter we've already been doubting that
since akhom Occam's razor remember what
it actually cuts and it acts in terms of
ought to be not how things are no
science doesn't act in terms of how
things ought to be it acts only in
describing and explaining how things
actually are it has no values so science
it's teaching us that the world is
purposeless matter is meaningless
there's no normative standard or
structure in matter it's just actually
how it is and how it actually is is
valueless so hobbes matter lacks meaning
purpose normativity it's inert how could
you possibly get all of those things out
of matter
how could you if you're a reasoner you
care about the truth and yet truth
depends on meaning purpose at least the
pursuit of truth and normative standards
of how things ought to be and none of
those are in matter
well Hobbes responds and says well you
know what it's life what I can have is I
can have little I have like my abacus
and it's automated and I have little
pieces of paper on them and write the
pieces of paper are manipulated much
like the letters on your computer screen
and if they're manipulated in the right
way I get a meaningful sentence the cat
is on the mat and then Descartes says
Hobbes you're being an idiot because
you're making a fundamental mistake here
first of all you're English I'm French I
don't have this I have this physically
these are two very different things yet
we're both thinking about the same miaow
miaow creature there's no meaning
there's no intrinsic meaning in these
material marks if waves on a shore
happen to mark scratch the pebbles right
so that this word appears on the beach
would you think the ocean is talking to
you that'd be ridiculous
it's just random grooves cut in the sand
by the water it has no intrinsic meaning
these things only have meaning because
they are associated with ideas in your
mind and those ideas actually possess
meaning see do you see what Descartes
saying he's saying look you have a view
of matter that makes the rationality
that you're holding out to be so central
actually deeply deeply problematic see
this is what we need to pay attention to
when we invoke rationality as a standard
of course we should invoke rationality
as a standard but first of all two
things we should note the
idea that rationality is just the
logical manipulation of propositions is
something we should question because
I've shown you already Lee already
that's not historically accurate that's
a particular view that we see from
Descartes secondly Descartes himself
rejects that because he realizes that
rationality is caring about the truth on
purpose according to normative standards
and values and none of that machinery
can actually be found in the scientific
model of matter so you know what is
actually deeply mysterious in our
culture right now although it is invoked
religiously and I mean that is exactly
the notion of rationality itself this is
not me advocating irrationality not at
all
I am against the ad vacations of it as
if it is a philosophically unproblematic
phenomenon that is irresponsible
and seriously misleading okay is that it
no there's more des cartes going to say
more in order to say that we need to go
back to Galileo what more does Descartes
say to Hobbes what more does Descartes
say to Hobbes Hobbes says well look
Galileo had this problem alright and
we've talked about it but let's go over
it again mathematics is the language of
reality ultimately a platonic idea right
and then you get the idea that there are
two kinds of properties there are the
properties that are immeasurable by math
those are the primary properties the
primary qualities the ones that are
mathematically measurable and although
the term isn't quite used this way in de
cartes time shortly thereafter it's
going to come to take on this meaning
the mathematical properties or
properties that are in the object
regardless of whether or not anybody is
paying attention to them looking at them
involved with them so if I can measure
it mathematically it's in the object its
objective but of course Galileo faced
the fact that many qualities of
experience and notice how this is you
know part and parcel of this whole
scientific revolution and the calling
into question of experience
Galileo noted that many qualities are
not mathematically describable how
beautiful something is right how sweet
the honey tastes how wonderful the Rose
smells and then he has an important idea
here the these are these were called
secondary qualities and the idea here is
and notice how this follows on
procurement Copernicus these don't exist
in the object they
exist in my mind they're part of that
veil that might the experience places
between me and the world a part of the
way in which my mind doesn't touch the
world these are purely subjective
qualities purely in the subject object
thrown against thrown against object
thrown against because matter resists me
subjective I can throw it under me I can
dominate it now notice what des cartes
saying des cartes going to pick up on
this right philosophers have a nice way
of talking about these secondary
qualities they have invented this term
called qualia that's plural the
secondary qualities and the idea here is
they're purely subjective they exist
only in the mind and that these make up
an important part and there's all kinds
of debate about this I'm not going to
try and resolve that here but somehow
these qualia are central to
consciousness they're part of the fabric
and/or the content or and/or the nature
of consciousness remember I said that
Descartes is emphasizing consciousness
now here's the idea what the Scientific
Revolution showed it one of its big
insights is this is in the world in
matter and this is not in the world it
is only in mind and then what you can
say to Hobbes is the following and many
philosophers I've said it repeatedly
Thomas Nagel comes to mind and many
others right matter does not possess
these properties the qualia
consciousness therefore there is no way
to manipulate matter to generate qualia
consciousness that's really really
devastating because it brings with it
the possibility that the AI not only
will the AI not have meaning not have
purpose not have any normative values
the AI will also not have any conscious
awareness of its cognition it will not
possess consciousness now Descartes
brings in one other important aspect to
this which isn't quite as explicit but
it was very quickly derived from other
people around him see what does this
happen in Descartes right by the time of
Descartes is we've seen this slow
withdrawal everything is withdrawing
from the world into the mind the mind is
getting isolated trapped inside of
itself and then Descartes right famously
worries about that he says I want to
doubt everything tried to find something
I cannot doubt he makes what I into my
mind other people that said this this
isn't original to me but I think it's
important he makes a mistake about this
notion of certainty there's two notions
of certainty there's a logical notion in
a psychological notion the logical
notion of certainty is something like
absolute deductive validity it's
impossible for the premises to be true
impossible and the conclusion false
that's different from psychological
certainty psychological certainty is an
inability to doubt so you find something
certain because you are incapable of
doubting it the problem is these are not
identical by any means think of the
radical bigot the radical bigot I am NOT
I hope such a person but they're radical
bigoted cannot doubt certain things they
cannot doubt this superiority of the
white race or some other such garbage
they're psychologically incapable of
doubting it precisely because of the
depth of their ignorance and bigotry so
they have psychological certainty but it
is certainly not logical certainty there
is no direct connection between
psychological certainty and logical
certainty but what Descartes does is he
thinks that if he pushes this far enough
it will somehow become identical to this
and it never does and that's part of the
problem we face because he realizes to
be honest I mean so what he does is he
says I'll doubt everything I can
possibly doubt and and then he even
doubts the math because he realizes that
his commitment to math is still
ultimately based on an aspect of
psychological certainty because there
could be some evil genius perhaps like
the matrix who's actually programming
his brain unbeknownst to him to make him
believe in the axioms of math and before
you say that's ridiculous come to
realize how much modern physics has
rejected the axioms of Euclidean
geometry even though they were once
taken to be absolutely unquestionable so
why am I saying all of this because what
Descartes comes to the point where the
point that he thinks he finds that
connects these two together is he cannot
doubt that he exists but cuz in order to
be subject to illusion his mind must
exist so even the most comprehensive set
of illusions guarantees to him the
existence of his mind this is the famous
cogito ergo sum I think therefore I am
it's not an argument there's no argument
there I think therefore I am
there's no that's not a logical argument
it's not a logical argument it's a
statement of where psychological
certainty becomes indistinguishable from
logical certainty because the idea is in
order to be suffering from an illusion I
must exist notice what's happening we
used to have the mind in touch with the
world then the mind is at least in touch
with the math and now all we have left
is this all that the mind actually
touches is itself
that's what consciousness is I notice
how weird consciousness is like that
when I tell you how do you know if I ask
you how do you know the cups there
you'll say well I see it I interact with
it if I ask you how do you know you're
conscious you just say I know I'm
conscious by being conscious what does
this mean with Hobbes
well Descartes saying that aspect that's
the touchstone of reality the mind
touching itself Hobbes is nothing that
matter has matter doesn't have because
what the Scientific Revolution did was
take all of that contact out of the
world and it took it I'm even willing to
say it's not even in the math it's just
here so these are devastating problems I
would put it this way if you are an
advocate and you should pay very serious
attention to artificial intelligence
because I'm trying to show you not only
is it going to change the world
socioeconomically politically culturally
trying to show you it's going to change
your understanding of who and what you
are and it is going to interact with the
meaning crisis in profound ways right
but if you're interested in this and if
you are doing something work on it and
some of the scientific theoretical work
I do is an attempt to contribute towards
the development of AI alright you need
to pay attention to a distinction a
distinction that was made famous by John
Searle between weak and strong AI I
don't like those terms because we ki
implies something defective because the
we never used the word weak as a
compliment why do I say that because we
ki is the project of just making
machines that can do things for us that
typically intelligent animals or human
being
could do your laptop computer is weak AI
and there is there is nothing weak about
this in a social or value sense it is a
legitimate and real pursuit that
computer revolution has transformed the
world right there is nothing deficient
or defective or people who want to make
weak AI you depend on weak AI we carry
around these Star Trek computers in our
phone and we go to automatic banking
machine all of this is profoundly
altered our lives okay so when I use
this word I am not using it a pejorative
sense perhaps sir Oh was I don't know
but I'm not but here's what is of value
in Sorrells distinction between weak and
strong AI weak AI does not really
advance our scientific understanding in
the following way and this is a way that
matters this is how you would succeed at
strong AI and when I say it right it
should make it should show you how
difficult strong eyes a lot of people
now talk use this term artificial
general intelligence to talk about
strong AI what is strong AI strong AI is
to make a computer that not does just
some intelligent things or models what
it's like but is actually an instance of
mind it's to succeed in Hobbes's project
it is to make a mind but that but to
succeed in Hobbes's project requires you
do the following if I'm actually making
a material mind how do I know I've
really succeeded if when I make this I
can give an answer if I can give an
explanation of how Descartes is wrong if
I can answer all of de cartes objections
in an explanatory fashion not just
yelling at him Descartes silly silly
silly but I build a machine in and then
I could say look
given how the machine is built and
operate here is my scientific
explanation for how you can get purpose
meaning normativity consciousness and
that contact with realness that they car
talked about that's strong AI and that's
a lot harder that's why people who are
invested in that project are a lot more
cautious about predicting when we will
have AGI the fact that computational
machines are going to change our society
in the next 10 to 20 years is undeniable
they're just some sort of intellectual
Luddite if you try to resist that but
the idea that that immediately
translates into a profound understanding
of the nature of the mind is a second
question and people the people I respect
the people I think are doing the best
work in strong AI people pursuing AGI
are a lot more cautious about whether or
not we're going to be able to answer
descartes and show in a deeply
explanatory evam evidence-based way how
Hobbs is right so we are still with that
problem now I'm I work in cognitive
science that we are still at that
problem we're still wrestling with this
problem right now and there are many
people on both sides of this issue I do
not want to misrepresent one side I mean
most people in the professional business
think that Hobbs is ultimately right
they take seriously de cartes challenge
if they're good scientists and most of
them are there are many at the minority
but it's not a small minority
there are many of these scientists who
think that Descartes might be
fundamentally right ok so this is still
very much an open an important question
that goes to the core of us now you may
think
some of you perhaps also if you have a
religious orientation and I'm not
insulting you here I am not insulting
you because you might think well Hobbes
tries to kill the soul and these
arguments from Descartes they sort of
preserve the notion of a soul and that's
great because if I have a soul then of
course then immortality is a real
possibility for me well be careful you
may not want the Cartesian baby okay
even though you're trying to throw out
the materialistic bathwater because the
problem with de cartes solution is it's
existential cost it's existential cost
because what Descartes was basically
arguing for is that mind and matter are
essentially different they share no
fundamental properties mind moves on
purpose it moves according to values it
works in terms of meaning and qualia it
cares about and pursues the truth and it
has this kind of contact with itself
that no material thing has whereas
matter is extended in space and time
displays force transfers energy so all
the properties that mind has matter
doesn't have and all the properties that
matter has mind doesn't have so
Descartes of course came to a plausible
conclusion that mind and matter are two
radically different kinds of things mind
is a completely immaterial substance
matter of course is a completely
material substance and you may say yay
here's the problem if mind and matter
share no properties how do they causally
interact
how do they causally interact here I'm
going to show you mind over matter I'm
thirsty
I desire water because water is good so
I'm going to move on purpose
so notice all these mental terms desire
and want and I value the water and I'm
gonna move on purpose and here I do I
move and I get some water that's mine
making matter change but how can I do
that
mind has no energy doesn't take up space
alright doesn't have any force what
about the reverse can matter ever a
cause mind here we go behold I'm going
to start with a completely material
event and it's going to end up in a
completely mental event ow two pieces of
matter slam into each other and the end
result is pain what's pain well that's a
qualia it's a quality about the value of
your experience how much does pain weigh
does it even mean make sense of what
color is it what's it's an
electromagnetic radiation what's its
chemical structure so look your
experience is moment-to-moment mind and
matter are intimately interacting in a
bi-directional matter mind and matter
intimately continuously doing this and
yet de cartes whole position the way he
responds to hobbes makes it impossible
that they can interact because they
share no properties in virtue of which
they can interact because he used that
gap to argue against hobbes because it's
the gap between matter scientific matter
and mind that de cartes uses against
hobbes
but the problem is that gap undermines
your whole existence because what does
it mean it
means you are radically cut off from
yourself your relationship between your
mind and your body is a complete and
utter mystery the most intimate aspects
of your experience the taste of this
water is absurd because there's no way
that the taste which is a mental thing
and the water which is a physical thing
could in any way be related to each
other but it's worse because look around
you there's another person how do you
know what's going on in their mind do
you directly see their mind of course
not
well how do I know are they utter words
well no they don't they make sounds when
we talked about remember what Descartes
says to Hobbes there's nothing in the
sounds that's meaningful their face
moves and they make gestures and they
express their emotions so what you're
saying is you get what's going on in
somebody's mind because of the way their
physical body moves and makes other
physical things like air move but if
there is no connection between mind and
matter and your body is a purely
material thing and I hope you don't
disagree with that then there's no way
by paying attention to body I can figure
out what's going on in mind because
there's no connection between them this
is called the problem of other minds how
do I know and Descartes seriously
worried about this how do I know that
the rest of you are not just mindless
automatons not just zombies how do I
know this because the only the only mind
that my mind touches according to
Descartes is itself
well at least the mind is still in
contact with the world with Descartes
right John because the math touches the
world aha be careful there des cartes
given us two different answers
he said the math tells us what's real
and it's objective but the mind touching
itself in consciousness is ultimately
the touchstone and I use that touchstone
of reality it's purely subjective and so
what we have are these two different
standards of realness subjective
consciousness objective math and so what
our society our culture has now done
historically is Carine back and forth
between them
you get you know the empiricists and the
positivist right no science tells me
what's real and then all you say well
how do you know it's not a dream
oh well haha silly silly silly nobody
really pays any attention of that and
what you get are insults you get insults
and ad hominem arguments it's like well
no no answer oh well you know it's and
then we invoke rationality and what do
you mean by rationality and how does
rationality fit into this mathematically
realized world when we don't have any
mathematical material way of talking
about purpose and truth etc it's very
problematic so you swing the other way
and you come over here and you're the
Romantics I don't mean the rock group
and I don't mean like romantic love
right we'll talk about these guys in a
bit right
so what's ultimately real is my spear
subjective experience right but then the
problem with that is well how is that to
be in touch with the world how is that
to be in touch with other people how's
that to be in touch with reality at all
it leaves me totally disconnected this
how would I know it it's not just all
that and so I go back and forth and back
and forth so what Descartes actually gay
wasn't a secure way of being in contact
with reality
he gives us a completely unstable
grammar of realness and our culture is
riven by these two demands and we swing
back and forth between a subjective and
an objective account of realness as we
swing back and forth between attempts to
understand the relationship between mind
and body and between mind and mind so
notice what we have here we have a loss
a perspectival and participatory knowing
we found we've seen a gradual loss of
contact with the world a loss of contact
with tradition and history loss of
contact with our own bodies loss of
contact with other people other Minds
loss of contact with reality and then
you say well that Leith Descartes gives
me contact with my own mind right least
I have that right I have my little tiny
Cartesian Lutheran Island and at least
that's where I can make my my last stand
well do you because you have to be
really consistent right if you're going
to be Cartesian and logical you have to
be consistent and here's the problem you
can't invoke historical cultural notions
of the self see when Descartes says
cogito ergo sum and he says and you may
say well therefore I know that I exist
what does what's this I that exists is
it is it all of john byrne vacay well
right because it kept that first of all
it can't be anything I'm introspect
because a lot of my introspection is
false are wrong right is it based on my
memories well my memory is certainly
capable of making all kinds of mistakes
it always does
in fact well what about my history
well what access do I have to my history
and how do I measure that history
mathematically my memories certainly not
trustworthy according to standards of
certainty and I don't have any
mathematical way of gaining access to my
past all that you have contact with is
this moment of self-awareness right now
isolated atomic moment now take that
completely isolated content lists having
no autobiography no contact with its
body no contact within the world no
contact with other minds and then place
it inside Pascal's infinite spaces that
terrify that completely atomic empty
self adrift in empty infinite spaces of
terror and that's what you get that's
where you are if you think through
things carefully according to the
fractured tortured tensions of our
current cultural grammar that's how you
get into the meaning crisis now Pascal
was aware of this and like I said he is
as great a mathematical genius as
Descartes he on his own rediscovers from
axioms forward recreates all of
Euclidean geometry as a as a adolescent
on his own he says brilliant he's part
of the Scientific Revolution he invents
the barometer as a way of merit
measuring air pressure but he has a
transformative experience we talked
about those and they convinced him
that what Descartes is trying to achieve
the certainty is not possible and that
the meaning crisis is powerful Pascal
makes a distinction but what he calls
the spirit of geometry we have to think
of that in cartesian terms I would say
today the spirit of math or the spirit
of computation and what he calls the
spirit of finesse and he is fear his
concern is that we have lost this and we
have come to think of all of knowing and
being in terms of the spirit of geometry
and this is a theme this Pascal Ian
theme as you've been seeing it running
through this history we have slowly lost
procedural know the importance of
procedural knowledge knowing how to do
things
we've lost perspective all knowing
knowing what it's like and we've lost
participatory knowing knowing that is
part and parcel of how we are bound up
with something else someone else in a
process of mutual transformation
reciprocal revelation because that's
what finesse is to do something with
finesse right
when if I do something with if I'm doing
a move in Tai Chi and I do it with
finesse right it's like jazz right
there's an element in there right that I
can't capture in terms of mathematical
propositions it's knowing how in terms
of knowing the right timing the right
placement when you're kissing someone
else right you have to do it with
finesse at the right timing the right
placement the sensitivity to the content
knowing what it is like to be you
knowing what it is like to be the other
person and then get that getting those
two perspectives to have a participatory
relation to be in a relation of mutual
revelation with each other
what's necessary to kissing someone well
and so Pascal is pointing out that what
has been lost in the Scientific
Revolution is all these other kinds of
knowing and being and these are the
kinds of knowing and being that he found
present in the transformative experience
that he had it was for him a religious
experience
but we've seen that these transformative
experiences are not necessarily
religious there are always spiritual but
they're not often sorry they're not
always officially I should be careful
they're not always things that reinforce
established religious beliefs or
propositions sometimes they challenge
the beliefs that the person has had as
we've seen sometimes they lead to entire
religious or at least non-religious
propositions nevertheless Pascal is onto
something to my mind when he argues that
the loss of the spirit of finesse has
left us bereft of the capacity for
transformative truth transformative
knowing and so we're now stuck where
Socrates was at the beginning of the
actual revolution we have scientific
knowledge but remember Socrates rejected
it because although it was rigorous and
even plausibly true it did not afford
transformation self transcendence into
wisdom but of course all that self
transcendence is gone because now I
don't believe in self transcendence
because of the Protestant Reformation
and I don't have to go through personal
transformation according to Descartes
look at what they could saying you do
not have to be transformed in order to
come into contact with ultimate reality
all you have to do is use the right
method do the right computation so all
of this part of the axial revolution is
being lost
that's what Pascal is putting his finger
on and he's doing it extremely well so
what I want to do next is to follow up a
little bit more on Descartes and take a
look at Conte
and the rise of the pseudo religious
ideologies and the main problem facing
us in the West today we face these
undeniable at least that we're being
rational crises environmental economic
socio-political cultural Wars we need
deep fundamental transformation
transformations of cognition
consciousness culture community but we
have lost the psycho technologies the
spirit of finesse the traditions in the
institutions for affording that because
what the thing that used to do that was
religion but we've lost religion and as
I'm going to show you next time we tried
secular or pseudo religious alternatives
and they drench the world in blood thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you