it's welcome to the solution raising on
packaging and materials we do a solution
raising live every Wednesday
today's on packaging materials next
week's the meadow one we're gonna talk
about how everything is interconnected
and if you fix one thing other things
break and so we're gonna see how that
works and then the week after we're
going to talk about energy so how do we
power our lives currently and in the
future so getting started with the first
segment we're talking for roughly 15
minutes on what packaging and materials
currently look like in our lives and in
our economies and we can kind of do it
like an idea cafe or we each take a turn
it seems to work
would anyone like to start I can start
on this one again all right I'm just
gonna get you guys that you guys can be
done we got there happen Erica I need it
and unmuted so materials and packaging
in our current economy today is garbage
slash compost slash recycling day and
every day every week I have to take my
bin and pour it into a neighbor's
because I have way too much recycling
and I don't know whether that's because
I'm using way too much material or
they're not recycling right like the
amount of berries and grapes and
everything that comes in in that like
soft plastic e material that's
recyclable but I don't even know if it's
like a little like they've changed the
regulations in their covet 19 of what's
recyclable and what's not because
they're kind of owning that recycling is
a bit of a farce and it's like well we
can't ship this stuff to China we can't
um do what we're normally doing with it
and there has to be another solution
like there's a lot of things like we can
we can grow we can make plastic-like
material out of kelp out of hemp out of
all the stuff but I don't have the
knowledge on whether that's better or
not how much energy goes into it how
much water goes into it can we create
and develop a material that is the best
of all worlds it's durable but can be
broken down and you know gets our
berries to market or do we need that we
have it rip
often paper right do we need things more
local and when there's people who are
able to truly come up with a new
material how do we trust it and how do
we get it to the people that that solves
a problem for these are the kind of
things that I would like us to do you
wanna grab our know and I'm getting on
to the other other topics the future the
other two but currently our materials
looks very wasteful and our solution to
that seems to be to recycle you don't
have to feel bad because it can be
turned into something new but with the
exception of glass very little is
actually can be recovered again and
again plastic is downgraded every time
and so yes we can recycle it and become
fluorine but what does that eat in fact
how in our body and it's in our oceans
and it's we have so much waste and yet
we're part of this ecosystem they
clearly works in a cycle everything is
an input everything is an output and
when we figure that piece out then we
can have all the packaging and all the
materials if we can figure out the
energy water and breaking down piece of
any of it then we can we can have
packaging and have the best of all
worlds but right now it looks very
wasteful and that's I won't stop
who would like to go next can unmute
themselves no well what we do now is
just downright irresponsible isn't it
it's it's just you know it's ridiculous
you going buy a packet of biscuits and
each four biscuits is individually
wrapped in a little thing and then
you've got a stack of six of those in a
box and then the box is wrapped in
plastic you know I mean it is absolutely
absurd what we do with packaging is
entirely I mean you could overnight Harv
I reckon the amount of packaging just
with a little bit of sensible we're just
with a little bit of sensible management
and planning you know so yeah it's just
downright I mean I've got a personal bug
race it's not exactly patching but it's
the same notion I've got a personal bug
bear about straws of 500 million straws
used and produced in the US alone every
single week 500 million little bits of
plastic every single week it's
ridiculous you know what I mean
and so yeah I mean I'm jumping ahead a
little bit as well but it seems to me
that a lot of this straws is an
excellent example right instead of
producing 500 million straws a week
who wants straws by a permanent straw
right a hard straw carry it around with
you if you want or need a straw you know
this and this kind of thing to be rolled
out in all kinds of packaging you know
why every time you bet people buy milk
every day or three or four times a week
or whatever it is right why do we have a
separate plastic bottle every time we
buy milk we can't use the same bottle
over and over and refill the milk from a
big fat kind of thing and pay do you
know things like this are really really
really easy to do they just require a
little bit of thought a little bit of
planning but yeah the the the will to do
it just doesn't seem to be there despite
what you believe said about this open
loops thing right there ecosystems close
all their loot and we've got giant open
loops we extract at one end and out
at the other end you know what I mean
and it's just the yeah that's it that's
all I have to say I'm pretty outraged by
the whole thing thanks Eric Shila do you
want to take a turn to share for meanie
week after we moved out here to the
country we decided not to do the garbage
service because we'd have to take kind
of a ways away we'd have to drag our
garbage can and we decided we just go
there's a transfer station probably
seven miles away from here eight miles
so not too far but because of that we've
become very aware of our waste so I'm
kind of like really a stickler about
using everything and as an artist I do
collect a lot of containers all sorts of
stuff and try to reuse them or put them
into an art project so I'm probably one
of the best recyclers that I know not
only do I recycle everything and take it
personally to the dump and make sure
it's all clean all these signs of the
dump are at the transfer station are
saying that they might have to just stop
having transportation there because
people won't clean up they're recycling
people won't put it in the right
container I mean it's there for it's
free we can just go there and take it
for free and people will not abide by
the rules I guess I guess I'm a rural
person but um I do I have noticed
because I also recycle so I I noticed
that if you
do get the same of the same products
over and over and over you have the same
containers over and over so there's like
you can kind of find ways to reuse them
yourself but I would you know my bigger
picture my meta project is kind of a
value system that actually values people
doing doing the recycling doing it
correctly so there's more incentive to
than just like oh now there's recycle
bins out there anyway I do a lot of
recycling I think it's really important
and even in the summer I go to forms
house and it was a big graduation party
or something I'm like we're walking
around beer cans I'm like where it is
where's the recycling they don't have
recycling in there just like 40 miles
from here
we're in Washington State with tons of
recycling and I was it's weird that even
more rural places don't even have it
available like I guess they could well
they're not so into City they're like
they look at me go what do you think I'm
gonna save the world I'm like yes you
can stop just throwing your recycling in
the trash but it's not very helpful
anyway a little rant I have lots of
ideas of what people can do with their
garbage but talk about it a little bit
more for an open discussion on what is
what is currently happening I know what
the like I grew up in a town that had
transfer a transfer station right and so
but it was the 90s you had to be pretty
committed to taking her stuff there and
it was basically only paper and
cardboard and the returnable type of
cans and bottles
the irony BCE where I am the province is
the environmental province or the you
know tree huggers and the
environmentalists and Alberta next to us
is an oil-producing province and they're
more like Texas yeah every time I go
there I'm astounded by how amazing their
recycling program is because they know
that people aren't committed to it so
you have to be able to put all of your
recycling in something and they sort it
rather than here where you need people
to have a degree and recycling into
nowhere to recycle things and so then
everyone's like oh it's plastic I don't
want for
notes they recycle it and then it
becomes someone else's problem for promo
right that it's actually no we only
recycle this portion so it's the like
the more and they said I've said a lot
we need to design recycling systems for
lazy non environmentalists not the pro
productive environmentalists right like
I will wash every container I will look
at the number on it I don't know its
container it goes into it's too much too
much for you oh and so and why are there
ten different kinds of plastics like why
do we have all of these in there if
they're not glass and they can't be
broken down and there are ways to turn
kelp and things into plastic lakes and
then if if those things are truly
compostable why aren't we doing that
instead of this petroleum by-product we
made all these uses from petroleum or
now we have to build pretty like yep
petroleum so we can have fertilizer so
we can have the plastics plastics are
great I mean they've helped us in a lot
of ways but there's alternatives there
are things we can do that can be the
pros of plastic without all of them the
bad things and of course we'll talk
about those in our next section what we
want the future to look like but second
opinion can I say one more quick thing
absolutely okay also we do or we have in
the past we don't think we are anymore
but we were just sending our recycling
to like China for them to sort through
and you do whatever and they had to stop
letting us because we're so terrible at
it was like dirty and we had the wrong
things and then so like you said I
totally agree we need new systems actual
at both ends okay I guess I'm moving
into the next area which is so there's a
store here which does is what we
currently do it's called the I don't
even know what it's called mystic oh
that one's the soap shop and then
there's one next to it and the idea is a
zero-waste grocery store that you can
bring your stuff to and they'll fill it
up and you're only paid for the cost of
what you're filling it up for great but
there's one in Vancouver which means I
have to go to it is that really helpful
right like if if I if everyone brings
their own container they have to weigh
in know every container if we do if
everyone used mason jars they're pretty
equivalent in
then we could you know like to have
Universal ones that that there is a cost
to what we currently do it just like the
environmental side it's all on the
environmentalists like we pay more so
that we can get recycled products why do
you pay more for recycled toilet paper
than non recyclable a paper when there
is enough paper products to be made into
recycled toilet paper it's not it's a
downgraded thing right you take paper
that you use that my kids room on and
make it into toilet paper you can't use
the toilet paper and keeping kids toilet
paper clearly but nothing but still we
have enough paper that we could we can
every all of it could be recycled or we
could make them locally right what did
you again next section future future
yeah I mean play papers the least of the
issues isn't it really I mean paper
thought itself out one way or another
right it's it's not that big a deal it's
the toxic stuff and it's the non
biodegradable stuff you know the stuff
that accumulates in the environment over
time this is I mean just just just one
more thing on the notion of recycling
I'm not trying to say I'm against
recycling but it's it's it's pissing in
the wind because what it is it's a it's
a it's been tacked on to a profoundly
flawed concept right in an attempt to
try and fix it but it can't right
because the thing that's been stuck onto
is a piece of poop in the first place
right and so there is no fixing it yeah
the thing though I think way too much
hope if you like is placed in the notion
of recycling it is nothing more than a
band-aid that's all it is and and and
yeah I don't there and I know this is
maybe this is a good sort of segue into
the next sections it's about time to
move into it anyway right but yeah the
the the recycle ability or reusability
of any given material whether its
packaging or not needs to be part of the
initial design process at the products
itself right yeah these these things
must go hand in hand and so you know
what you were saying before Jubilee is a
really interesting point about going
down with your own contains to the
grocery store everyone goes with their
own different containers and it's a
 mess right and so you need some
standardization of the containers that
people are bringing down there so but
again this is easily fixed right the
first time you buy corn flow
you pay an extra two bucks or something
you get a corn flakes container which is
a standardized thing and then from now
on every time you buy cornflakes you
fill up that container and if you ever
want to stop buying cornflakes you can
get your 2 bucks back at the other end
for the container if you want to you
know well or something like that you
know it's really really easy I don't get
why more of that isn't on it's super
super simple that is so now yeah good
segue let's talk about what our ideal
version of the future looks like for
packaging and materials and again they
don't have to match they can be
different we want you to be democratic
agree on our future before we start
moving towards it but what does your
future materials and packaging look like
in an ideal world I'd have to agree with
Eric it should start at the beginning
and I almost feel like manufacturers
should have to take back their packaging
because I think if that were the case
then they would find ways to reduce the
packaging I know we ship stuff overseas
to get it here or wherever and so they
need more packaging but seriously
sometimes you buy something and it's
like where's my camera you know just get
some little blocks like this and there's
so much styrofoam and plastic and and
then you have nowhere to take it so not
only do I think manufacturers need to
plan for the end or and and/or I think
it would be great for us to have
community projects where we decide ok
because I feel like we're on the verge
of changing from this wasteful Society
to a society that does have the loops
and does figure out ways to utilize what
we make but I think we're on the you
know we're kind of will we go that way
or will we just die in a pile of garbage
and I think it's possible through one of
the other isn't it only two options we
figure out were part of an ecosystem or
we dial in a pile of our own garbage I
was laughing at the beginning when Eric
was I think I said something about it
were crazy right and I was laughing
because I was like yeah we treat
like right like even what comes out
of our bodies which is part of the
natural ecosystem it's like toxic and
flush it away
it's like the amount that we like get or
even our nitrogen that we pee away when
we have very little like poop is
actually gross it is actually deadly to
us at the same time that it's helpful
for crops but P is like our urine is
that one of the best sources of nitrogen
and that's what we get from fossil fuels
and so in my version of the future I
would like to see everybody have access
to that knowledge of like that we're all
collecting RP and putting it in our
Gardens if you're not taking
pharmaceuticals um to be able to know
what materials are being used where
because right now in the for-profit
system it's not designed for closely you
don't have to take back your packaging
and so you're going to design it so that
it just goes out into the world and
doesn't come back and that's you if your
competitors unless that is your price
point right there's there's a milk
company here called Avalon and they have
glass bottles if every glass bottle is a
dollar so you take it back and you you
know they keep reusing it they don't
recycle them they wash them and it's
like old-fashioned oh I'm really sorry
to interrupt but that used to be really
widespread that was great it was simple
and why did that stop and yet their milk
containers are kind of like baby
they leak right when you take the lid
off and put it back on you can't reuse
it but there's a like that's when
there's an improvement in the way that a
packaging can be like let's say I'm an
inventor and I come up with the best
packaging this is you know this glass
that's actually got a screw on cap
without Avalon's gotta trade their
change their entire Factory and so
unless I can manage if I'm just doing a
Babylon it's not going to work I'm doing
it for the entire milk industry so with
narrow same advancement in materials
that were actually looking at is it an
advancement what is the energy that went
into it what is the water what is the
production that comes out right what is
the waste products and when there's the
best idea how do we move forward I would
love something like James Jones's cube
spawn which the idea is we're recycling
right here you're taking your plastic
water bottle and turning it into a 3d
printable material and although that's
not a closed loop because you're never
going to get
like plastic isn't designed like that we
click like health might be I don't know
if we can if something costs very little
energy to create and can be either
recycled or composted and the new things
made we could have the packaging right
but a combination between actual
packaging that closes the loop there's
like an ends reusable containers that
are standardized right that are hey we
all have this cereal thing they all fit
beautifully in my cupboard they all I
don't need to have a brand on there
because the brand isn't what's important
it's then I like cornflakes right or
then I like corn pops or whatever it is
actually and then how do we make that
better and better but you can go get the
stuff recited refilled and then bring it
back where it's not we're looking at
this in this plastic and looking at the
actual numbers and data is my ideal
version of the future I'm sorry Eric yes
no no no apologies I just I just had
something right now the second I was
very happy that you finished so if I was
looking in patient be patient when I do
that so I assume so ya know two things
firstly the reusable packaging right
plastic is actually ideal for that the
fact that it doesn't break down is is
great for that right you you actually
want you know for things like piping
water pipes you know I mean I I live in
the mountains and that water pipe
connects us to the mountain spring and
so you know it's really good that those
things don't degrade Rio what water
coming out of my taps every day so but
there is no need for that level of
durability in most packaging right I
mean packaging is primarily disposable
and hemp I didn't actually know about
kelp but I do know a little bit about
hemp polymers and hemp polymers are
exactly that they're not very durable
but they're good enough for a couple of
weeks to get stuff from you know planter
shelf at home kind of thing and then it
rots away in the space of a few weeks a
couple of months kind of thing you know
it means you can just throw it away in
your garden you can put it on your
compost heap you know what I mean it's
it's it's yeah and it's a little bit
more expensive this is the thing and as
I can't remember which one of you
sitting identify the necessity for the
use of petroleum products right and
under our current industrial model but
hemp has all kinds of other benefits
apart from the polymers you can make
from it the growing of hemp rejuvenate
the soil in which it is growing while
it's growing there right so it's part of
the regeneration of all of the
disgusting that we've done to the
earth
planting large amounts of hemp using
that as a building material a clothing
material a polymer material and to
regenerate the environment that we have
toxified you know it leeches leeches all
that toxic straight out of the soil
it's brilliant so yeah I mean hemp is a
big big big part of a global answer to
all of this in my opinion and the other
so hemp is it like a freakin miracle
plant so it kelp is pretty cool and so
is mushrooms mycelium can also do a
bunch including breaking down like
cigarettes and stuff that is like which
people repeat we can probably solve
every packaging problem and corn but
just having that access to that
information
um like if I manufacture something I'm
not gonna be the best at knowing how to
package it right like if I'm a raspberry
grower I might grow the best raspberries
in the world but they need to get to you
in their pristine format so I need some
kind of packaging and that's where a
brad was was well I'll send this too
which is why we're doing this because
it's talking about packaging and he was
he's a nutritionist and he wants to do
his packaging in fruit what is it your
sir being a fruit right so you know that
like your strawberries are actually in
four servings because you've got four
servings I'm like that's pretty cool and
at the same time that need to have
something that niche makes it less
universal right which means that you
can't stack them and take up less room
and stuff but at the same time you can
have that if it's built into the system
right each one is 3d printed it doesn't
matter you can how how much do we need
to mass-produce this so it brings the
cost down right like hemp anything is
astronomical like it's like why does a
plastic thing of cutlery cost a dollar
for a hundred in most places it's
 nuts you know as you say it's a
gift from God this stuff and we're not
allowed to grow
just why right the paper and pulp
industry was like no which is also what
you had said earlier about the paper
industry right then it's kind of a like
it it's not the issue and yet it still
is right we go and cut down old-growth
forests and make phonebooks less phone
books now but like paper for whatever
stupid purpose we don't it's a reusable
resource right it's or sir every new
able resource we don't treat it as a
renewable resource we both cut down
old-growth forests make toilet paper
instead of reusing what we have we use
it beyond sustainability and then
pick plastic right like we don't even
know we created a new polymer we it's
like we don't do any of it right like as
a species and yet the informations there
and if we have access to the information
I think that is a big stuff
there are starch and cellulose polymers
as well that have been around for
decades I mean a really a long time
which are also going to grow they're not
as strong you can't carry much weight in
them they break you know but for certain
applications they'd be absolutely fine
yeah and it's like if you look at the
medical it like right now during Koba 19
we've a little bit thrown our
environmentalism out the window right
you go grocery shopping and it's like no
you can't even bring your own bags you
have to use the plastic ones like why
are we using paper then like plugging it
why we went for making it illegal to now
we're back to plastic and you know like
everyone throw plastic gloves and their
face masks and so you dirtiness found in
our know if you are watching but we
talked it we're talking about materials
and packaging and we talked about what
is currently wrong in the world we're
talking about our ideal version of the
future right now and then pretty soon
we're gonna go into the adjacent
possible what we can do right now with
10,000 people at $100,000 but let's
complain a little more and live in the
beautiful future we're kind of it's
interwove in' it's not working what we'd
like to see happen you know i was just
talk and
a story came to mind every year with my
wife we go to this this place in Wyoming
it's called Fort Bridger and it's called
a mountain man rendezvous and it's kind
of like a wannabe Burning Man for
mountain men reenactment and but what's
interesting about it is everything kind
of holds that ethos of what you're
talking about kind of this reusable
reusable packaging because you know if
you had to do things back then I mean
they didn't have all of these
technologies and you have to reuse every
single scrap material you have and so
what's interesting is for example
there's this there's this route there's
there's this famous root beer stand that
they make homemade root beer and they
have these beautiful glass bottles and
people have people still have their
glass bottles that they purchased from
from this root beer stand for like 20
years it's incredible and so it just
goes to show you know if you spend time
with packaging if you if you make it
beautiful if you make it reusable then
you kind of build that into the design
characteristics of where you don't want
to throw this thing away or you want to
find the different use for it and it's
not just that it's it's other products
that you would buy there I mean they
come in these kind of handmade totes or
you know that kind of thing so I just
wanted to share that with you I just
thought that was an interesting
interesting point to kind of you know I
think it's okay if we go old-school
over-the-top with packaging right make
the packaging itself a beautiful thing
yeah yeah I know I know that but it's
but it's a lovely it's a really lovely
notion just the the irony like I think
about reusable things in my life and the
Avalon bottles are usable are are pretty
they're like old old milk bottles so but
then does it cost Avalon a dollar to
make them because if everyone's keeping
them is not really 100 maybe
absolutely and then from box yeah
there's frog box which is like the green
boxes there's like a moving company here
and they you rent the box it's like a
plastic photo foldable box and when you
get your spud delivery they charge you
$5 but buying one of those is like $20
I'm like maybe I just don't return it's
like which wasn't a plan it was largest
I didn't get my next cut order and now
they're delivering in cardboard just
because there's so many people to comb
it 19 looking for grocery delivery but
it's like that price point if you make
it too much of a work of art people are
gonna keep it without returning it and
it's kind of defeats the purpose but
there is if it's beautiful it's nice to
have and that's where when you don't
have branding right this is just a
stupid Tupperware container but if we
weren't concerned about standardization
and I cared about the beautifulness of
my kitchen
I could have matching this right
everywhere in my kitchen didn't matter
whether those corn flakes or or kelp or
whatever is in it it's it looks a nice
right and that would be less and less
Saturdays hm but the size might be
staggered the size weight might be
standard and the colors numeron sort or
those kind of things I like
standardization I want my kitchen to
make sense like I want like the pots and
pans and lids to commitment like I want
standardization and other people like
diversity and uniqueness but yeah I
think it's just important to to build
that into the design because I you know
I I love if you could control people but
unfortunately you can't and and I think
we will all recycle we will all do our
part but we are not the majority and so
you kind of have to make the the
consumer not even think about this
process not make it a decision that's
gonna you know set them back even a few
bucks you just does that make sense it
needs to be kind of seamlessly
integrated into it where they're they're
not even making these decisions because
that make sense yeah yeah yeah I know I
said earlier stupidly
yeah to take us off in a slightly
different direction another story occurs
to me as Matt was talking there this was
on the news in England a few years back
there's a family somewhere in the
country is that a family of five right
two adults three kids
and they have a ceremony every year on
the 31st of December every year they
have a ceremony where they throw out
their rubbish for the year and they in
the course of one year they aqui they
they accumulate one black bag full of
rubbish that they can't in some way
reuse or I'm talking about recycling
within their household not dumping in
the recycling bin but but but actually
making use of so minimizing the amount
you know obviously when they when they
buy stuff they minimize the amount of
packaging and the stuff that they're
buying and they have loads of inventive
ways to do now what the reason I tell
this story is not just the story itself
which is kind of cool but also another
way of apart from making it like super
simple so people don't have to think
about it another way of doing it which
could be just as effective but in the
complete opposite direction is to make
it really really a big thing and make it
into a competition you know what I mean
like make it a game if I the notion of
waste reduction you know and and
motivate people in that direction
ironically slightly under on equate the
cohousing that I'm part of they are
amazing at recycling and they're
recycling like a lot of the stuff you
have to bring to the transfer station
they have there but one of the things
was they were like let's try to bring
this down right let's have less soft
recycling and I'm like how do you do
that in Vancouver because the option
that is people throw it out instead of
recycling it right it's like so that I
can feel good I'm recycling less like
it's a little bit like are you doing it
to produce less or to look like you
produce less and it's like those weird
incentives of like if you make this into
a contest then you know I remember there
was one of the TV shows did that where
they had to carry their trash around and
they would like throw it out at school
and do and it was like they were tried
as a family to see who had the least
about sand they've gotta win something
and they we kept talking to each other
and it's like that's basically solitaire
that kind of thing is exactly like
cheating solitaire or at gold yeah all
right we're in the 30 minute mark which
means now we go on to the portion of the
actual adjacent possible so what could
we do without necessarily changing
regulations in the government if we had
10,000 people and $100,000 how could we
improve packaging on materials
it seems often hard questions out here
good packaging I mean the vast vast vast
vast majority of packaging comes from
mass-produced goods right which are
produced in vast quantities in a very
few locations and so it seems to me that
the only sort of small-scale way of
combating that is localizing the
production of the goods which are then
going to get packaged and delivered
right and it's the only way the only way
that you then have any kind of control
over how those goods are packaged and
delivered and yeah I mean it you know
there is the motion of the only power we
have as consumer as consumers is where
we spend our money and there's and
there's a good deal of truth in that and
so but you know that's that's almost at
an individual level I supply here we go
ah this has just occurred to me so with
ten thousand people in ten thousand
dollars this will be right up your alley
Jubilee this is this this is your kind
of solution is to create an information
system that people could see you know
what kind of packaging is used in
particular goods that that sort of thing
right and and use that to inform the
choices that they make when they buy
things I mean some of its obvious right
I mean you can just look at two packets
of biscuits one of them is just you know
some biscuits is wrapped in thin plastic
just the two biscuits that's it another
one like I said before individual little
packet sets in a cardboard box which is
then wrapped in plaid do you know what I
mean it's so you can make these choices
at an individual level but but but
Jubilee mentioned before there are
whatever 810 different kinds of plastics
in packaging some of which are much
harder to disposable reuse or recycle
than others I don't know which are which
you know that kind of information would
be really useful to consumers you know
to know which kind of product that is
being used and okay it's not great but
at least I know it's better than that
one right that sort of thing so maybe
something like that there's something in
me and I don't know if this is a ten
doesn't know but I guarantee this is my
my assumption of the Union or world is
that every problem is already solved
it's just the person who already solved
it is sitting in there like basement
with no idea how to get
out into the world and I think in
packaging and materials that happens a
lot the people are like oh I came up
with this new thing right there like an
engineer in their hand they and I every
time I have these soft recycled things
I'm like if only like if there is a way
to make it out of callek a way to make
it but also make it infinitely
compostable right if it's just a plans
and we if we knew how much stuff went in
then it could be something that's
continually made because it is useful to
have biscuits wrapped right when I send
my kid to school if that ever happens
again then to have that that like it
like I end up otherwise I end up using a
bank right or like a reusable one but
then you have to wash it out if I don't
have to wash it I can just take this put
it in a machine and it comes back out to
wreath to wrap the next thing and the
next thing then like then we've closed
the loop and again not possible to end
those people but 10,000 people in
Vancouver could have The Container Store
right deliver to your house all the
cereal all the beans all the grains
everything you need in a standardized
container right mason jar like it's
already there it's glass it's expensive
to transport but if it's getting
transported to Vancouver under the
normal economy and plastic and boxes and
everything that it would normally get
shipped here because we don't grow it on
rice then it's it's doled out into it
into those it's not traveling very far
by by like bike and bus and whatever
else that there are solutions we can do
10,000 people in the center or what Eric
suggested right the information the data
what both what's happening in the
economy where did what why you might
have this plastic where does it come
from - I have a way to buy coffee that's
it it's not in this right or yeah the
information or what I buy right like
that information what I buy is that I
think we can look at well when can I
bulk buy it when can we if I'm buying
rice that's coming in all this packaging
when can we both buy it so it comes in
less packaging and put in mason jars
there's many things we can do at 10,000
people I just had another idea sorry I
know I'm talking you like if anyone else
has got anything I'm happy to stand off
but I did I have just had another
thought and this could be done at a
smaller scale than tent that although
you could scale it up to this right
instead of 25 people going to the
supermarket market buying 1 kilogram
bags of rice and bringing them home the
neighborhood buyers a 25 kilo sack of
rice and 24 people come around and help
themselves to a kilo each something
likes something like that and then
coordinating that yeah so a mechanism by
which you can coordinate that kind of
thing yeah another local hub of the
store right in someone's garage it seems
like it makes me think of this is
another kind of old timer example but
but you know like the concept of an old
general store and like you'd go down to
the general store and you buy I need 20
pounds of flour and you know 40 pounds
of rice and stuff in that kind of
dynamic if you think about it not like
if you come to the general store wanting
20 pounds of flour it's your
responsibility to figure out well how am
I gonna get this home you know what I
mean so it's almost like situations like
that putting the responsibility on the
consumer find your packaging find your
own bag this is why should this even be
the responsibility you know of the of
the corporation or whatever what I'm up
to the corporation it's left up to the
corporation otherwise we have like The
Container Store in Vancouver where those
that are environmentalists are gonna go
out of their way with their containers
to go there but most people are gonna
shop at Walmart in superstore and so
it's not gonna touch most people whereas
if you were like 10 then we found 10,000
people who care about the environment
but they're not willing to pay a surplus
and go across the city to get it how do
we get these things to you so that
you're more I'm not needing to recycle
all of this stuff so that I can monitor
how much recycling is going out so I can
hopefully bring it down more and more
yeah that makes sense I like both of
those kind of the idea of your well all
of what you've said kind of
into my big system idea where each
community has their hub or whatever and
people can go there to pick up like
you're saying they're part of the bulk
items that have been ordered when I was
a kid we lived in the country and my
parents
there weren't stores anywhere near my
parents would basically they were a
co-op but they would just order food
together and it would come once every
other month I think in a big truck and
we'd all meet at a different person's
house the kids would run around and give
me some fruit leather and the parents
would like dole out everybody's
different orders and then we'd have food
or whatever for a couple months and then
we do it again it was really fun it was
a good way to do bulk because multiple
people would order one large amount of
something and split it up when they were
there and their own packaging it was
pretty old-school but it was a fun thing
but I can see having that more modern
version of that where you do have both
that you get at your hub your Commons or
whatever you have like a bulk section of
whatever it is the neighborhood really
wants so every neighborhood gets dust
kind of order what they're used to
having and also um just on the side now
I don't know if you've seen this but
I've seen on I don't remember what
Science Channel or something anyway that
you can they're able to make energy like
a gasoline I think out of all of these
plastics all sorts of garbage have you
seen this where this guy like created
this huge contraption it's like on the
back of a giant trailer and it's like
three stories tall and he gets in there
he's just feeding it plastic and garbage
and stuff and then later he pulls out a
jug of like gasoline that you could run
your car on I mean that's what it was
before it was so I guess I guess it's
possible I'm wondering what processes
how many chemicals how much heat and so
on is required but when with that you
can and do other things like if you're
capturing the heat or double it you know
there's thermal I'm not a science
but there's a lot of different ways
where you can maximize that energy and
this was just like you could drive it to
your neighborhood it's kind of the the
DeLorean on Back to the Future he's just
feeding it garbage you just need a time
machine we can solve everything that's
gonna be the new section what can we do
time machine one of the things so like a
crowdsource platform to help companies
or help individuals like here's my
product how do I get it to you for the
least amount right to actually have the
consumer be part of it like and when
there's an inventor an engineer to
actually help them get their idea out
into the world right like to actually
know can we trust it what is the
transparency of it right like what is
the water energy and output that comes
into it and we working together we can
basically do anything like I love the
hub IG I also have a similar idea like
not every hub is gonna need the same
things and so there's a certain amount
of we're talk about resiliency and
something else I speak fragility and if
you have like you know you need six
months supply right for your entire
neighborhood so you can have six months
of flour and when you're open that six
month of flour you order the new one
right and so you're constantly turning
them over for things that are that are
that you know you use a lot of but
you're getting the best of both worlds
because you're getting freshness right
if our last four six months you're
getting freshness and you're getting
like you're not needing to have the
constant stream right like well we can
we we're on our last scoop now let's
order anyone right like you have that
you have enough storage capacity for six
months worth of your stuff but not not
ten years and not two days right you
have six months but you're also cycling
through it um could be and a
neighborhood could definitely you could
have many hubs right this guy's garages
flour and this per these people's
carriages rice and this one whatever
yeah absolutely absolutely a
distributors pub in the neighborhood I
love it I love it and as shiloh is
saying it builds relationship as well
right yeah it's a really beautiful thing
it's a really beautiful thing now how do
you get people to start actually
doing it
that's the which is like that is the
conversation right if you had 10,000
people together then you just and what
is the biggest priority right well we're
all over the place we're not going to
come up with a neighborhood hub right
but maybe we're like actually this is an
important enough thing I need to 500
neighbors and you need to find a hundred
neighbors and you do like we're doing
kind of micro projects all over the
place
10,000 right so you know I I came in
leading the conversation so I apologize
if you've already talked about this but
but we talking to be incentive
structures around around this whole
thing because the way I see it now I
mean you guys were talking about you
know mycelium and and kelp and all these
various things and to my knowledge we do
have the technology to solve these
problems already why don't we see it
because it's the barriers you know where
are the barriers to these things not
yeah not how do you do it but let it
happen I do think that you're right is
part the incentive on our end isn't
there and that's why I don't know
Jubilee and I've talked about like a
value system that actually value on our
end where the ones are showing our value
by what we're doing with the recycling
how were collectively ordering stuff
reducing and on the other end if we had
hubs in this value system we can also be
incentivizing what we're gonna do with
the waste that we can recycle locally
like into another product right there so
then there's this like whole loop but
it's also being valued so the value
isn't just at the top and they decide
but they aren't going to take on the
waste we deal with it they just give it
to us instead we're also where the
closed-loop end and we have to do
something with it so collectively it's
kind of a game in that way because each
community then has to figure out ways
collect
to do something with the recyclable
items or bits and hopefully it's
something that is another solution to
what they need in their community so
maybe they're making certain packaging
out of the old packaging that they're
reusing in their community to go to
their farmers market or I don't know I
do think is it not a little bit unfair
and don't get me wrong I'm not saying
I'm not disagreeing with anything you're
saying Shiro I'm just that is it not a
little bit unfair that the manufacturers
continue to can continue to produce
packaging which is you know wasteful and
destructive and it's left up to us as
the end users to figure out how to close
the loop right that's that's not a
reasonable burden to place on us right
and it needs it needs to be organized
higher up the chain it's not to say we
shouldn't do it right anything else of
course we should all do what we can
right but it's not actually fair in the
long run I completely agree with you and
I think that by having this value system
we have more power than to make them
change their ways because we're the ones
that are wanting less ways we don't have
anywhere to take it we can't do things
with it then we have more power because
we're collectively realizing it through
this these measurements then we're also
enabling them in a way right now yeah I
feel like if we did have the power to do
as much as we could then we also have
the power to get them to help on our
side like how can you make changes so
that we can make and then like we can
kind of devalue them if they're not hmm
trying to get into that system which is
something we could absolutely do with
10,000 people and $100,000 is to create
like I said with the packaging where we
are helping them figure out the
packaging but even more than that if
you're the inputs and outputs are
generally known or we can figure them
out for any product so knowing what is
inputted both energy water and materials
what the things are coming off of it and
what do you produce at the end right
because if we can close the loop if
you're like oh wait we have I mean
schools kind of do it right they'll be
like
oh we have it look left the bread ties
right that you tie and because they have
a project to do with them well if we
could close that loop if we were like
hey this school needs these twist ties
and this school needs needs toilet paper
rolls there are things that are more
useful as they are before they're
recycled I was laughing when you were
talking with art because my kid just
came out the other day like where's the
styrofoam like the neverending source of
styrofoam left and like oh it's actually
in our in our shed some couldn't take it
to transfer station but I was like I was
like it doesn't exist right now I just
took it in we're going to need to get
new ones and but anyway having that we
can use our intellectual labor right
like we can map the system where does
this stuff come from what package means
and what but also we can help close that
system of okay well this is a byproduct
where does it go right I know shipping
containers to be made into houses and
now shipping containers more expensive
whom they use because people are looking
to make them into houses like what's the
next shipping container what's the I
have friends who have a workers
cooperative called the wood shop here in
Vancouver and they use I don't know if
they still use it but the pallets that
everything shipped on there are never
shipped back so it's basically only one
way of shipping and when they're not
treated they use that one because it's
free wood right and they can make
beautiful furniture out of it it's just
their labors they're getting something
but one too many people use it then it
becomes an actual quantity but being
able to close those loops like I have
this thing who wants to take it from me
right now
oil weirdly is in that position where
it's at a negative per barrel because
they just want people to take it
produces it too fast but we have tons of
things like that in our in our actual
economy that like it's the end product
we don't like all the Amazon boxes right
they like just pile up because they
shipped to you you're not shipping them
back
Amazon needs to figure that the out
right we should be using frog boxes and
it should be getting shipped back to you
and if we had a hub that you had things
to go back there be reasons and
collapsible collapsible ships back to
them and then they reuse it but that's
there don't have the incentive to do
that because then that's another way
they have to move it yeah I mean on the
moment this is exactly what yeah I guess
this is kind of what Matt was asking
about because at the moment these
sensors are all stacked up on
externalize as many costs as you can to
the Commons right that's that's exactly
where the incentives currently line up
and yeah IIIi in a way it seems like
coming up with local solutions to deal
with the waste which are being produced
at you know these these giant
manufacturing plants is just increasing
their incentive to keep doing it if you
see I mean because they've externalized
their cost to us now do you know what I
mean it's not even to the environment
but we we are now but you know we have
stepped in bravely to save the
environment but for them
brilliant someone else to externalise
our costs on to what have we mean them
here well that's I love the notion I
don't know no idea how you go about
organizing it but I think the idea of
sending the packaging back to the
producers of it right so all those boxes
do go back to Amazon all those little
plastic yogurt pots go back to moolah
you know all of this kind of stuff and
then they have to deal with it
now how you actually organize that
logistically I have no idea but but that
that sorts it out right because they
can't they know it's piling up in their
factory yard whatever they call it I
there's this story that I have my head
since I was a teenager that I heard so I
don't know if it's actually true but I
don't care if it's true because it's
awesome that there's a European country
where when they went to the store and
there was all of that packaging they had
a protest what they did is as soon as
they walked out to their cars it took
off every bit of non-essential packaging
and threw it on the ground and I was
like if littering is ever a protest
because then that's the store was like
well we are not cleaning this up so they
made it so that there couldn't be accept
excess packaging and then no one had
excess packaging right you bought your
toothpaste in a tube you didn't buy it
with the box on it and and then
truthfully you would know what because
then then if you're getting it all
squished up and you're like wait no we
actually need that box back that's
actually not access or how do we
actually solve this problem like there
are ways we can come together I've
always wanted to have that protest it
sounds to danger of like just shutting
off the gravity soon as you get get out
of the supermarket like it was just so
brilliant yes restaurants where you
you know we throw the peak mats on the
ground you know those kinds of
restaurants yeah
it's like Ryan's me of that yeah it's a
protest it was like yes and it's what
it's like Sweden or Switzerland or one
of those countries that supposedly did
it of course but I mean like I said this
was pre-internet so I don't know if it
would be on that there is the best place
in like the early 90s late 80s actually
forced a reexamination of behavior right
the shot actually changed there so yeah
no it's great
that's great I love that like every
country has their own rules and
regulations right like here in Canada
you can't sell something less than us
French and English on it so in order to
sell something in Canada if you have to
put French on it like other countries
have packaging requirements or that you
can't have this type of plastic because
it's dangerous for the environment it's
like well why do different countries
have these different rules and why don't
we all adopt the best rule it's not
everyone needs not French in English
clearly but like how do we get the
minimal amount of packaging why are
things out lot in Europe but okay in
America what is the reason you're about
a lot it right what is the reason
America allows it like getting that just
that information a source of information
that you can trust it's also something
we could do and send out some people and
how does the dollars the different
regulations in different countries and
why I do love the I still want to go
back to the hem because hemp is such a
great environmental product or I want to
call it a product plant the fact that it
you know right now and I might have
mentioned this to this group I can't
remember but I know that there's people
some people I've interacted with on a
solution Club a radish they are very
actively trying to get people who have
land to grow hemp on their land for them
and they get carbon credits so it's kind
of a money-making thing just to grow
hemp on your land but then they the
people that are in charge of this then
they get to make CBD oil out of it
they're making hempcrete out of it there
re they're using the product then as a
green product for building or packaging
they could do the Hansel
plus they are getting money for the
carbon capturing that the plants
themselves do plus like you're saying
and also those plants pull pollutants
out of the ground just so many ways that
that's working you could easily have
people there manufacturer like packaging
for the fruit very easily we're like I
like the idea of the kelp and stuff but
like we need a lot of help in our oceans
we have such acidification and kelp is
the only thing that we know of that can
counteract that so I'd like to see more
kelp growing in the ocean and just
stayin in the ocean instead of using it
up like it becomes a really popular
product and then they're out there
farming it like crazy how great it could
be said that you grow in bats though
right that doesn't need to be from the
ocean but yeah taking stuff from the
ocean and not remember like fish fish is
great let's just eat all the fish it's
not a great a great solution even if
it's it's there but was a I think you
could even reuse a lot of like some hemp
you can make that's nearly disposable
but you could be we've you know
crocheting your own hemp bags for the
grocery or whatnot wash and reuse them
just like that's for transparency and
data and information come in cuz I know
I don't know if hemp falls in this
category might imagine it does that it's
with peanuts and pistachios where it is
a plant you grow in crap soil so that it
sucks out all of the contaminants but
because the incentive is I'm not gonna
grow peanuts and pistachios and hemp and
not sell it I clearly need to be able to
make money they sell it to us and so our
peanuts have crap in them because they
sucked it all out of the soil and so if
you are making profit because you're
taking hemp and sucking out and
making CBD oil if we it's our company
and we have access to that information
we're like no we processed it more look
it doesn't have the contaminants in it
but we can fully see that what did we do
with the contaminants that when you have
this profit incentive it means that
you're incentivized to hide things right
to say oh you get to know that hemp it's
good for the environment you don't get
to know all the that we do to it to
make it that way right like when I see
him clothing I'm like well what had
you'll be done to make it into is that
the state like hemp hard plastic like
what is the actual process the more we
can transparently know that than the
more we can trust it the more we can
come up with actual solutions otherwise
you crank the solution and you pass off
only the positive and not the negative
instead of dealing with the whole
picture that we can deal with together I
think that that whole that's part of the
mapping system that we have to create
and I think that that's like main part
of game B or whatever is gonna be this
mapping system that shows how
interconnected all these things are how
the processes are what the waste of
those processes are I totally agree and
you could have food-grade him
you could have pollutant grade hemp that
you're using specifically flat and then
put it in your cut your concrete or your
hempcrete that you make buildings out of
and it just stays there and the thing is
that there's a place for everything but
when you win it's your profit on the
line you're gonna hide things like
there's reasons there salts and every
one of our products was it taste good
right there's reasons there's
preservatives because it's profitable if
we are making those decisions together
we can we can have an informed decision
and in a trade off right who I want no
salt and then I want to add my own soul
because I can't take it out versus oh no
it just tastes good
well that's why they're putting it in
there to stop tricking your taste buds
just add more flavor add more something
that has nutrients on you know you need
more of but the more that we are part of
the process and it's not it's
transparent then we can make the choices
together for those things right we're
gonna have preservatives and things I
want a shelf-life on a lot of things I
want to be able to stock up on on tomato
sauce for six months but not if it's
causing cancer right so like what is the
impact of this ingredient and is it
worth it it's always worth it for the
for-profit company they're passing it
off they don't care right is it
profitable and they're ignorant Lee
truly their heads in the sand they don't
know it causes cancer sometimes
sometimes yeah no no but there's also
like it's not just evil doing evil for
evils sake it's like oh I'm just not
even no I couldn't possibly we've been
eating it for years it couldn't do that
because it's making them profit and it's
a lot easier to remain in the dark when
your money is in the dark one one thing
I wear wear my biggest issue with this
is is if you look as this whole thing as
a loop or a stack the the part that I
really don't like is okay let's say we
make it out of them let's say we make it
out of some great perfect material I
don't like throwing it in a trash can
putting my trash can on the street
waiting for this big dump truck to come
around once a week take it to a landfill
and then ship it to China China dumps it
off on you know pirates or whatever they
dump it off the coast of Africa which I
hear but that's that's what I don't like
I would like a solution where it ends
with me you know where I don't where I
don't have to externalize the
responsibility to all of these other
systems to take care of my garbage or my
trash because I don't know if they're
gonna do the right thing with it you
know and even if I know that okay now
all of a sudden my garbage and trash is
clean you know you're still putting it
out there and and and that's a big
mystery so I don't I don't know if that
relates to what we were talking about
but but but that's just kind of how I
see things
it absolutely relates producing waste
that is actually not waste right it's
about producing waste which can be the
input for some other system yeah so is
it you can't eliminate waste I mean all
systems produce waste through this but
it's it's waste that can be processed by
the external environment in inner inner
in a positive way right that isn't
processed harmoniously so yeah that's
that that's the goal I think rather than
it and so if you if you were able to and
listen hemp is not the answer to all
problems right but I do think it's
certainly a component in in certain
domains it certainly has a role to play
but you know if you are throwing away
you know for example icon pops right and
I can't throw any plastic on my compost
now but if the thin plastic was made out
of hemp or out of kelp or something like
that it will compost right and I could
throw all the compost
a three-month slide it gets dug into the
soil and its nutrients for the plot you
know what I mean and that's it Luke
closes now back to nature again you said
I mean and I trust nature to close her
loops right and so we need to extract in
a way that is that is taking what is
waste for nature if you see what I mean
in some way and then reinsert it back
into nature in such a way that its food
poor some way it Venegas or elemina and
and and dusty close our loops I saw in
Alan Watts video recently I'm just gonna
quote a couple of little lines from it
because I think it captures this so nice
I'm baiting but the the key is to let
nature dictate the course of nature and
not us try to dictate the course of
nature and then he goes on to say you're
trying to straighten out a wiggly world
no wonder you've got problems we're at
the our mark so it's time to wrap it up
if anyone has any closing statements and
I keep forgetting to do it but the point
of like closing it is also to say if
you're invited to say what you think is
the best solution that we came up with
like that you would most want to put
your time and energy towards again they
don't need to match right because the
idea is if you have ten thousand people
we're gonna be doing all of these things
but what do you think is the most
powerful thing that you see us doing
with 10,000 people and $100,000 either
that we talked about or brand-new thing
it start a whole new I could start I'm
gonna have to say I think that we need
to make all of this conscious didn't
like people thinking about where these
hidden things are so I do think that a
value system and I'm not saying value
guys and money but I am saying a
measurement system metrics of some sort
is a way to teach people how to be
conscious of these connections there or
like names I clean almost everything or
trying to I see what my things are and
then I'm like okay now I have a huge bag
of all of these items what can I do with
them and it is an art project proudly
but as a community or group or whatever
we could consciously see oh this is what
we have a lot of waste of what our
problem
how could we put these into solutions so
I think that mapping is a way to get
that consciousness I have to agree with
Shiloh I I think mapping is is is key to
this and I think people people don't
have a map to work with currently or
maybe they do but it's skewed or altered
in some way so creating an awareness
around that as this is crucial yeah
absolutely echo that and education it
comes back to education doesn't it
because we're not trained to map these
things in a you know open an honest way
where it's always biased the the the
training ecology the information ecology
it's all corrupted so yeah it's you're
right but it's a very difficult thing to
accomplish and yeah that's I agree that
a mapping system is some one of the most
powerful things we could do and I think
that the more were able to do it
internally that is just for the with ten
thousand people we don't need to
convince 7.5 billion to use it we only
need to create something that like we
would use and then invite people to use
if it's something that ten thousand of
us would trust and use then it's
something that the rest of the world
have used as well and so starting with
like what would be the most powerful
thing and right now under cope in
nineteen everyone's focused on like the
vaccine and the treatments but actually
mapping our supply chain is one of the
most powerful things we could be doing
right now so we have all of this time in
all of and like everything breaks down
to chemistry like everything breaks down
to there to the ingredients and so what
goes in what comes out and to the best
of our knowledge we could be mapping and
it could be something we did with 10,000
people and $100,000 well easily more
easily than than what like hoping this
works out hoping we somehow turn this
pile of garbage into like paradise and
it's not going to happen let's be like
actually put energy and equipment in so
we can say goodbye to YouTube and a
periscope and I will see you tomorrow