we live in a world where spending never
stopped you're gonna need to be
funneling this but why do we buy was he
sighs and how is our desire to spend
manipulated every other company on earth
is trying to get you to spend money and
they're putting all their effort into
getting you to spend your money on stuff
all the time
I'm Jack Caretti and in this series I'm
getting vestigation the men who've made
us spend a look at how children were
turned into consumerism greatest weapon
we're trying a generation of kids to
thank miss Desmond Fire Academy joy
revealed how play became a serious
business when targeted at grownups all
the money that have been generated for
these games I mean the money is
astounding within a week they are
talking about billions and how the
techniques first used to sell to kids
were used on adults giving us license to
behave like children all the trouble
with adult consumers as they think too
much that's the last thing that those
who sell to consumers want
they'd much rather have a dogs go on and
say oh look at that I want it I want it
now like a child
[Music]
in less than 50 years children have
become prized consumers with British and
American kids worth 700 billion pounds a
year open to selling an impulsive when
buying children are valued for their own
spending power as well as the unique
access they give to the family purse it
is through these young consumers the
business learned to sell using fun and
play techniques that are now being used
to sell billions of pounds worth of
products to all of us whether we need
them or not
[Music]
and when it comes to the very young the
key lies in creating a character which
if successful will be used to sell
hundreds of different products this
looks like a play center but it isn't
here dr. Alison Brian wrote tests new
characters for the toy industry right
now they're playing a Peppa Pig app
which they actually asked to play they
saw it on the iPad with a pig Peppa Pig
and then as I started to app they were
actually singing the theme song so they
really loved the character by ten
children can identify up to 400 brands
so it's vital for industry to target
them very young at what age do children
start to have these relationships with
characters oh we can start incredibly
early I mean we see children start to
identify with characters you know it
wanted to it's different than at that
age because they're sort of I like this
character as I get a little bit older if
I'm like this character if it's a hit
the character will appear on everything
from bedding to biscuits increasing the
price tag by 50% this is known as
licensing for adults it's just as
lucrative Peppa Pig replaced by David
Beckham or Kate Moss how valuable is
licensing who's selling product
I mean licensing really can make a
breaker product at this point in time I
mean if there's no way to create revenue
outside of a TV show or a movie or
whatever it is establishing the
characters very hard to make money in
the kids media space and now of course
we see it with Marvel which was just
purchased by Disney and every kid even
if they haven't seen the movies they
want the products it wasn't always like
this but later the 60s only a few toys
were advertised directly to children
Barbie was one of the first to be widely
marketed there wasn't the endless range
of licensed products we see today
whew toy makers saw children as spenders
it was the parents that held the purse
strings and it was they that needed
persuading to buy new toys for their
children to change this mindset the toy
industry needed not just a new product
but a cultural phenomenon that would
change the way we were sold to
great shot kid that was one in a million
remember the force will be with you
always
[Music]
Star Wars was a singular vision of one
man George Lucas a sci-fi trilogy
pitching Luke Skywalker in an epic
battle against the evil Darth Vader
Lucas may not have been a toy maker but
he was about to turn children into
voracious consumer
[Music]
I've come to California where in 1977
the filmmaker was struggling to find a
studio to back the unpromising sci-fi
project
he describes would-be investors as
cowboys and Indians and space
to raise money Lucas wanted to do
something unheard of create a toy
franchise not just for the hero
the entire world he'd invented babe
Zach how are you welcome to Rancho
everyone well thank you for having
wrestling your I've done Steve sansweet
works at Lucas Films for fifteen years
marketing Star Wars well this is Rancho
obi-wan I I am NOT often lot forward but
I am today so this Darth Vader this is
being dark moment a lot of it are parts
from the original movie custom from Star
Wars and The Empire Strikes Back where
it cuts yes absolutely it's like it's
like my generations equivalent of the
Turin Shroud you say the lie didn't
[Music]
when Star Wars opened in cinemas its
tale of good battling evil enthralled
children around the world including me
the franchise had been created and the
world of selling to children and adults
would never be the same again these are
the action figures and these are the
things that really cemented sans
appreciation for Star Wars I think so
this Luke Skywalker was the first
episode with 12 toys that came out and
so you can see on the back of the
package but even predating that there
had never been a successfully
merchandised movie until Star Wars for
the next six years Star Wars cemented
itself not as a movie or a toy but an
industry this is a ridiculously fit but
when Lucas took his idea to big toy
makers woosh Nunn spotted its potential
when he first came up with the idea of
Star Wars did he approach any toy
manufacturers they passed on it they
passed on it they weren't interested and
in fact the two guys from Fox and
Lucasfilm who went to Toy Fair
international that literally thrown out
of one of the toy showrooms of one of
the largest toy makers at the time
George Lucas's idea was finally picked
up by toy company Kanna
together they came up with a simple but
revolutionary idea that would
dramatically increase the volume of toys
sold at the time figures were either 7
inches or the 12-inch GI Joe figures but
having figures this size let you build
environments playset vehicles that was
really the key to Star Wars success
what's clever is that by selling these
small figures cheaply you're actually
creating rolling demands for much bigger
purchases which will be like the
Millennium Falcon or the big big set
piece yeah absolutely because the
originally these were priced in u.s.
stores at a dollar ninety seven and of
course the marketing was all collect
them all Star Wars set the template not
only for the toys but for all kinds of
merchandise apparel bedding you name it
profits increased as the range expanded
with Star Wars branding on everything
IDEO games clothing bubble bear
all of which showed just how much money
could be made through selling directly
to kids business also learned that
licensed products like this could be
sold to adult
since the launch of the first film 13
billion pounds worth of Star Wars
branded products have been sold
worldwide
[Music]
starwars heralded a new era in selling
to children film and TV would combine
with the toy industry to create brands
who would stay with us forever the 1970s
saw a new conduit for selling color
television the perfect medium for
marketers to drive home sales to a young
audience professor Benjamin barber
studied the politics of selling the
challenge for vendors the challenge for
producers was how to get to the children
because between them and the children
stood gatekeepers parents teachers
government regulators so how to bypass
them how to get around them was crucial
and one of the things that was very very
important was television because those
who controlled what was on the screens
were in a position to market directly to
the children that time quickly became
cluttered with ad selling sugary foods
and toys as children were targeted
increasingly aggressively there was a
backlash against this attempt to turn
kids into mini consumers as the
children's market began opening up in
ways previously undreamt stock in the US
the Federal Trade Commission began
lobbying lawmakers the curb advertising
for children the fallout with battle who
changed the way children across the
world were told to the FTC had been
urged into action by an unlikely
coalition of consumer lobbyists and
traditional family values routes they
pointed to research that showed children
leave a consumer group most susceptible
to TV advertising because their ideas
would still be informed kids are being
told the biggest lie they will ever hear
in their lives alive it says that they
should shove candy into their mouths
alive it says that twelve twenty and
thirty dollar toys work perfectly every
time
that all the other kids have them and
that they too must have them in order to
be happy but their attempt to protect
kids with do
to failure at hearings in Washington
industry fought back the man defending
big business was Fred Firth one of
America's leading lawyers third
represented Kellogg's a company that
advertised heavily around children's
programming an American democratic
capitalistic society we almost learned
top to bottom to care for ourselves and
what the last thing we need the next 20
years is a national manner the idea was
to ban foods which advertise to children
that had sugar in them and this was way
beyond the authority the FTC I mean the
FTC had it has substantial
responsibilities in regard to mergers
and acquisitions and other matters but
they're not a social agency that goes
out on liberal crusade the people who
are supposed to keep the children from
eating too much sugar are called parents
and grandparents and uncles and aunts
with such powerful opponents because
mint agency was soon in retreat it was
one of those ideas that cost millions
and millions of dollars to lots of
people across the FTC a lot of time made
them look foolish and it went nowhere
but those opposing advertising to kids
hadn't just lost the battle
at the end of the 1970s the US economy
was in recession and the proposed ban
was portrayed in Washington as an attack
on trade the resulting backlash gave
newly elected President Ronald Reagan a
mandate for huge deregulation you know
I've never liked big government and I
think you would agree there's no reason
to substitute the judgment of Washington
bureaucrats for that of professional
broadcasters the government sets about
dismantling the rules that protected
children from advertising looking back
now do you not have any qualms about
preventing legislation going through
that was designed to protect children
I never prevented any legislation from
going through if this was so such a
grievous affair certainly the Congress
of the United States would step forward
to protect five-year-old children if
that was the great issue
the way was clear for toy marketing to
set up another gear US television was
now free to screen programs that were
little more than advertising slots for
toys and these would be seen by children
across the world but the children's
market filling its infancy it was a gold
rush the world's largest toy makers
Hasbro Mattel were the first companies
to cash in
having seen the profit Lucas had made
they now wanted to use television in a
new ways to sell their toys their
cunning plan was to create the soy and
then invent a story the first and most
successful to use his strategy was
transformers Paul Carnac was one of the
team tasked with making it happen you
flip the Star Wars model didn't you in a
way well in a way because the product
came first we took it from the
three-dimensional toy that didn't have a
lot of meaning to a completely unique
storyline they could to get excited
about me we trained a generation of kids
to think this deadly product there's got
to be toys the transformers backstory
was to be developed by ad agency Griffon
becau my tube partners Tom Griffon and
Joe Bacall and the head of marketing for
Hasbro Steve Schwartz were driving back
to New York that night we got in the car
and just started talking and it was kind
of like being with your best buddies on
a schoolyard and just jamming Phil and
coming up with a story that had real
legs because in that free our car drive
we invented the entire story of
transformers by giving the toys
characters they could then script the TV
program around them
the paddock line was fixed there were
six cars six planes a truck and a gun we
started coming up with names right like
Autobots the cars Decepticons because
deceptive is not a good thing and so
once we had our Autobots and our
Decepticons we had the good versus evil
kind of storyline which in boys toy play
is is really rather classic there was an
aggressive campaign behind the
Transformers launch the TV mini-series a
range of toys and a Marvel comic book
but that was just the beginning
licensing opportunities became really
big where if a child loved transformers
the child would whine Transformers
bedding pillows blankets a child would
want to go as Optimus Prime or Megatron
on Halloween as their costume child
would want to carry a Transformers
lunchbox or thermos with them to school
within two years sales of the toy had
reached 300 million dollars but to its
critics the Transformers shows rad verts
masquerading as programs half an hour of
hard sell to young children how did you
get away with making 30-minute
commercials in a mini theory or maybe a
very controversial we did not feel they
were adverts we were very serious about
the work that we were doing and it was
quality television programming some of
the finest television programming for
children at the time but you don't feel
that it was a kind of more aggressive
naked way of selling a product I think
that is a cynical view and I think it
sells kids short I think that the idea
of creating worlds in which there is
open-ended play and understanding that
kids can breathe their own storyline
their own excitement into it is really a
joyful thing to do
meanwhile Mattel created he-man Masters
of the Universe a 65 part animated TV
series designed to promote a new line of
toys that would rival transformers
all right 3d haven't seen this for some
time years the hard sell of these shows
was frowned on in Britain but they were
attractive to TV executives as they were
cheap and popular in 1984 Teresa Plummer
Andrews was a program buyer for ITV by
the power of Grayskull you know pedalo
thanks to Wall Street it was very
different from the kind of shows that
was shown before wasn't it it was
brashley commercial hugely commercial
everybody was concerned but it was going
to happen with you you knew there was no
way we could hold the floodgates back
from this on source of American
materials so despite initial resistance
the need to attract viewers one out and
he-man was shown by ITV that year toy
sales in Britain rocketed by an
unprecedented 25% to 450 million pounds
with he-man leading the charge
isn't a part of you thinking these shows
really shouldn't be shown to kids
because they are ads for toys they're
not coming from a place that's about
imagination and creativity it's about
cynical selling if I'm an investor and
I'm investing in your program I'm not
going to give you two million quid to go
away and play with it I want my money
back and the only way you're going to
get your money back is toys books DVDs
apps nowadays etc etc it's it's
commercial children's programming was
now used the Prime kids to want the
latest licensed toy in time children
would help the market understand the
full power of narrative and franchising
in selling to all of us
but the project to develop them into the
super consumers of today was just
beginning it would be turbocharged
thanks to a kids TV channel now familiar
for its distinctive branding Nickelodeon
the US kids network launched in Britain
in 1993
Heidi diamond would help make this
aggressively commercial new channel a
success in the UK she was the executive
vice president tasked with winning over
the many critics of its brash approach
we got a lot of Yankee go home because
they thought that watch with mother time
was very sacrosanct and the idea of
children to be wild and children to be
loud and outspoken and effervescent that
was not what the British population was
used to at that time Heidi how valuable
was Nickelodeon to advertisers all of a
sudden there was a way to reach children
with a volume and frequency it meant a
lot and particularly when you're selling
cereal or sweets or toys took a little
while to catch on because certainly you
know the notion that oh my goodness all
of a sudden you're doing too much
programming to kids but advertisers
started to see the light and that care
was an opportunity to message to them
regularly before they went to school
after they came home from school before
they went to bed
by 2007 the average British child was
watching 10,000 TV adverts in a year
don't you think there's something
slightly immoral about the idea of
targeting people who really haven't the
capacity to judge whether it's right to
be wanting that object you know they're
not the question but kids are consumers
the same way as adults or consumers they
get pocket money they do chores they
earn money they want to go to the news 8
they want to buy their magazines they
want to buy their KitKat bars or their
Mars bars so why not talk to them on a
level that appreciates that their
consumer the same as you and I add some
Nickelodeon would not just aimed at
children but also at parents who it was
assumed would watch TV with their kids
but research by Nickelodeon found that
children watched alone and it was they
that saw the ads for holidays and cars
that were aimed event parents it became
evident to us that kids had such a firm
influence on their parents decisions
besides saying mommy mommy I want this
kind of ice cream when it came time to
purchased the family car the children's
voice was heard children were of course
primary targets for marketers and
advertisers but increasingly it was
apparent the kids also had considerable
influence on adults as well and they
were in a position to go to their
parents and not just say I want this
particular game I want this particular
video but to also say why don't we have
this kind of a television so the old
gatekeepers in a sense now became the
new targets of the very children they
were supposed to be gatekeeping in
influencing them from what they buy by
1996 it was estimated that British
children influenced around 31 million
pounds of adult spending each year
advertisers looked at children with
fresh eyes they now saw kids as a Trojan
horse get the message to the child and
they would take it straight into the
family home to the unsuspecting parent
ads for large family purchases would now
be targeted at the kids as well as
adults manufacturers didn't stop at
advertising to kids they began to
redesign the very product according to
what children wanted
the first to do this was the Japanese
car manufacturer Toyota in the late 90s
sales as a people carrier went into
sharp decline mum and dad thought it
looked boring when compared to the SUV
so engineers of this American plant in
Detroit came up with an idea if they
couldn't sell the people carrier to
parents why not try and sell it to the
kids
Andy lund came up with the new
child-friendly design you know we did
not think that the word cool and people
carrier had to be opposites we wanted to
make a cool van Toyota weren't sure what
cool might be for 7 to 14 year olds so
they traveled from coast to coast to
find out we decided that if we're going
to learn we have to go and listen to the
children and watch the children what
were the things that kids were saying
they wanted but there were several
features well let me show you - the
first one is a seat it is a captain's
chair it's designed after the driver's
seat so that the people that sits here
don't feel like they're stuck in the way
back there a key member of the other
vehicle and so that was the first thing
the second thing was our widescreen rear
seat entertainment yeah an advertising
campaign was launched to promote a new
child LED design ladies are you waiting
to get started surely I want a hundred
cupholders about 14 ok got a TV there
mrs. freer this is working Wow yeah how
did these changes affect sales or
focusing on what silver one did help
ourselves about minivan we always
believe that if you listen to the
customer if you give the customer what
they want they will reward you by
purchasing the vehicle
in fact and alums redesign led to a
rapid surge in orders reversing the
downward trend in sales of people carry
India thank you for all the time
it has everything kids want and
everything you need the children's
market approved to be hugely lucrative
kids were model consumers with untold
influence and the power to change the
fortunes of a product or brand one
fascinating consequence of the
increasing focus on children was that
marketers begin to realize if they could
get adults to behave more like children
they would become better buyers better
consumers in the early 90s business
began to encourage adults to channel
their inner child spend money and have
fun children and adults with swapping
places an idea explored in the Hollywood
comedy fig
[Music]
in this clever and prescient film Josh
Baskin is a boy who desires to become
big and wakes up the next day in the
body of a man played by Tom Hanks as a
grown-up he finds work in a toy company
but it is the child inside him impetuous
innocent and endlessly delighting in
toys and play that offers the key to the
market today we're all encouraged to
indulge the child within us those that
like me grew up with Star Wars have been
conditioned to consume from an early age
this is Comic Con where adults and
children come together to see the latest
in comic books games and toys
manufacturers now see an opportunity to
grow their market and increase their
profits by keeping us plain
do you think there isn't really a divide
between adults and children anymore that
we sort of to consume things that that
are childish but as adults in every
manner to avoid because well men never
truly gorillas - have Footwear my dog
photography what's the nigga myself a
verbal does play with living my parents
stopped playing a lot earlier than I
have I came here today to support my
kids because I've always made them
costumes since they were about our and
now they're very Antonio
[Laughter]
[Music]
they didn't work what we had we had to
grow up when you as I say the madness
Autoworks do it
the boundaries separating the adult and
children's markets are invisible here
 it just put it
it's equal to everyone 250 and you even
have itself multi-drop for an
increasingly adults and children find
pleasure in the same purchases one can
notice a gradual transformation and
convergence of desires last century
children wanted games and toys adults
wanted books and instruments that help
them live well and take care of their
families today everybody wants
smartphones everybody wants the new
video games today the gaming industry is
worth 40 billion pounds and adults
happily admit owning a gaming console
but in the 80s playing games with
something kids did say during Nintendo
led the market with games depicting
cartoon style characters like Mario and
Sonic
but everything was the change in the 90s
when large multinationals saw the real
cash possible in gaming if they could
extend the market to everyone that
create an entertainment industry to
rival Hollywood the hunt was now on for
games that adults would play one of the
men who pioneered this new multi-billion
pound market was Peter Molyneux now one
of the world's leading games developers
can I be the printer you can be the
prince or I'll try and remember you the
point of this game is that you are going
to become a king and so that's going to
venture Lee you can reap revenge on
every single person that is going to do
bad to you in this game that sounds
great yeah
among mala news biggest selling games
was fable which spawned two sequels
he was the game aimed at Peter when it
was aimed at 25 to 35 year old yeah how
successful was the game this sold almost
5 million units and how much did you
make out of that a lot well I mean
Microsoft Paint of money not personally
but you know in the hundreds of millions
here in the hundreds of millions later
Asia fader when Sony introduced the
PlayStation in 1994 its goal was to
create gaming for a mass market this was
a revolutionary new console for adult
ideal for the darker violent games being
developed and it had a rival in
Microsoft's Xbox the consoles were
powerful enough though the gun sounded
like guns and that blood you know looked
like blood and so all of those things
came together to create what is now an
entire genre the first-person action
genre when we're making games not for
kids
we're making them for adults and we're
making the for adults that like the
horror and the brutality of those
moments
it was almost as if we took a gun and
shot Mario that cute moustache that you
know the baggy plans a plumber we as
adults you know didn't want to play that
anymore we wanted to shoot things and it
was as if we blew Mario out of out of
the park
suddenly men spent hours playing games
like the all-conquering military shooter
series Call of Duty with violent action
games the industry had found of women
this was a new golden goose in the mid
90s and we had Microsoft they came out
with Halo that was set in space we had
Activision they came out with a Call of
Duty which we now got super super
successful we had EA with a Medal of
Honor they were all vying against each
other what was the money that was being
generated for these games I mean the
money is astounding within a week who
you're talking about billions of dollars
of revenue and over the Christmas period
ooh you know they were a huge success as
far more successful than almost every
Hollywood film the fantastic thing about
this is this is renewable franchise you
not talk about one year you were talking
about multiple year after year after
year the years have lived to double life
in the day I do my job well up my
sleeves with the hoi polloi
a little life of exhilaration miss can't
be nothing
Sony's unconventional appeal to an adult
audience of seen in this dramatic
PlayStation ad had paid off well and no
option games were increasingly dystopian
I have lived a third of all homes now
had a consult but the market was heavily
skewed towards men the problem we had
was that we were making these games they
were they were becoming more and more
dark more more brutal more horrific
they've got becoming more and more
challenging more hard they were actually
constraining the audience a little bit
and Nintendo came out and they said well
you forgot never help someone you
forgotten about the rest of the world
this is what Nintendo came up with the
way it was fun and easy for you there
were no dark shoot-'em-up games and
instead it was bowling dancing and
karaoke importantly for the console back
in the living room
this is gaining for all no matter what
your age Billy
Mario was alive and kicking and finding
a whole new audience of nine to ninety
five year olds men and women up to that
point when any consumers especially
women funnily enough picked up a game
the same thing would happen they would
use or something and their character
will run against the wall they'd feel
stupid
they'd feel foolish at playing a game
they just put down the control and save
games not for me Along Came that week
they picked up the controller and they
move this hand and the tennis racket
moved you didn't have to learn the X
button did did some Y button did that
and press read and press yellow and use
the thumb stick with that one moment we
drew millions of new consumers into this
market and at one segment of society
could start playing games for the first
time and that was women the Wii was an
instant success 600,000 were sold within
a week
launched a supply struggle to meet
demand playing games is now considered
acceptable to all generations from
children's of tensioners and last year
in the UK games outsold music and video
now companies outside gaming gathered to
exploit the opportunities it opened up
to sell other products and the people
who would do that
were two British students Adam and Donna
Powell the couple created the online
website neo pairs which would sow the
seeds for an entirely new way of doing
business worth billions so this is the
Neopets website and it might not look
like it could change the nature of
selling but these cute little characters
drew in 35 million players many of them
and here's the key things adult and the
reason Wireless simple it was fiendishly
compulsive in order to keep your virtual
pet alive you needed to visit the site
again and again to check on it they had
created something called stickiness and
it was about to change the way the world
who are sold to new pets was the
stickiest sites on on the web from buy
stickier site name this site where
people spent the longest period of time
on there we had people that were
spending hours and hours a day and were
returning on a daily basis and we had a
lot of players of lots of eyeballs we
had 50 million accounts 50 million yeah
it was huge in a state Australia we had
a lot of players in Australia and
Singapore it was hugely popular it was a
vast vast percentage of the population
played and simple half the population of
Singapore at one point of my were
playing me a pack yeah it was a yeah
pretty heavily insane
stickiness was a game's innovation the
business was about to exploit it to get
us to spend money within two years
global corporations like McDonald's
Disney and Colgate Gann to advertise on
neopets how important was it for these
companies to get in on something like me
okay it was hugely important for them
you know they never had an opportunity
before to reach such a captive audience
that they could present their their
brands to in a completely new way I mean
this was something that people were
going nuts for I mean it's the thing
that you know marketers dream of Neopets
offered big companies the chance to
integrate their branding into the site
content often as part of a game in this
way players engaged directly with the
brand it was called immersive
advertising what did they do in terms of
this immerseus advertising and basically
we made tailored mini games for them
which involved McDonald's products wares
like you would build a burger and things
like that
Colgate once is a we love brush which
I'm not kidding here and you basically
spun a wheel and it was a toothbrush and
he won a prize depending on where the
toothbrush head landed the Powell's say
they grew uncomfortable with the
increasing commercialization of the
website it kind of turns a little bit
you need to have a lead for this one
slide at one point we had five
developers working on sponsor games and
one developer working on our own content
in 2005 Neopets was sold the global
media corporation Viacom for a hundred
million pounds people have accused
Neopets have been quite cynical about
creating the stickiness about people
coming back to the game again and again
again so you know was that you know
deliberate when you design the game and
we didn't deliberately decide to make
something that would make people's lives
hell if they didn't look on a daily
basis we just wanted to make something
that any people would want to come back
and you know there would be new things
from to do
stickiness was something that other
people have picked up on and then have
you cynically to keep people going back
again and again um yeah I know I mean
you think you know that you you did you
did create those techniques you know
yeah yeah I mean we were very young
we're very naive and we we just wanted
to try to create the best game we
possibly could
business learned something profound from
Neopets consumers could be drawn back
more frequently if play combined
challenges with reward
Angry Birds put this into action this
led to games becoming increasingly
compulsive and involving we started to
realize if we compare scores then we can
give you a ranking how were you better
than your friends and that's how we
could get them make you play more
because it wasn't just about beating the
game it was beating your friends and
then we introduced something called
achievements and the cheap ones were
fantastic there were little bizarre
things that you did in the game you've
got a gold star for doing an achievement
and that again encouraged you to keep
playing if you're playing my game
you're not playing someone else's game
having tapped into our innate human
drive to seek out easy rewards gaming
was turning into selling our brains are
wired in a very specific way which is
called intrinsic reinforcement and how
it works is anytime you challenge
yourself to something and then you
achieve that thing your brain secretes a
little bit of this magical
neurotransmitter called dopamine and
dopamine is sort of like it's a little
bit of a high but it also makes you want
to do that thing again so challenge
achievement dopamine and experts like
gage zickerman began to proselytize
about how marketers could take the best
ideas from games and apply them to
shopping in a game setting that
challenge achievement loop has done
hundreds of times per hour in contrast
in the real world and most of the things
that people do where that's work or
buying stuff there's very little of that
was actually taken all the challenge out
of most things so we're not getting that
dopamine rush marketers realized that if
they could inject the same excitement
and compulsion into their products they
could dramatically increase sales so
they began to look at ways of using
gaming techniques such as rewards levels
and achievement to sell us everything
from running shoes to groceries this
cereal crave has its own gaming up
Pirates of the Caribbean comes with its
own reward scheme and these sausages
have their own Facebook page this
technique became known as gamification
manufacturers use it to create
stickiness with the products and the
brand loves estas monopoly is still on
one early and profitable example of this
is the McDonald's Monopoly promotion
which ran in the UK as well as the US
based on the popular board game shiny
ads like this cleverly lured customers
offering the chance to win wheelbarrows
of cash and want any food prizes or
instant win prizes yet but we got six
chances so here we go
it looks like a simple tear and wind
game but to make it more compulsive
players needed to collect all the
properties on the Monopoly board to win
the jackpot
McDonald's returned a visit to their
restaurants into a game in the United
States that game just played for one
month a year every year for the last ten
years is responsible single-handedly for
an increase of about 3% in themed store
sales in the United States alone so this
game alone is worth nearly
three-quarters of a billion dollars in
revenue to McDonald's guess what I am a
winner today that's right I just won a
medium order of french fries every other
company on earth is trying to get you to
spend money and they're putting all
their effort into getting you to spend
your money on stuff all the time and
gamification is one of the tools that
companies might use to accomplish their
goals just like they incorporated
television advertising 50 years ago
gamification is the new toolset so fun
isn't this frivolous being a tool it's
actually a hard-nose currency to selling
now make no mistake the house always
wins and that's a key thing for
consumers to understand this thing
that's fun and engaging and useful
they're paying for that one way or the
other whether that's in cash or time
business had learned from selling to
children how the adult market could be
turned into a game
but there was another childish trait his
business needed to tease out of adults
the trouble with adult consumers is they
think too much they walk down there and
they say I don't think I really need
that I think I'll put off that shoe
purchase till next week that's the last
thing that those who sell to consumers
want that kind of reflective
deliberative approach they'd much rather
have adults go in and say oh look at
that I want it I want it now like a
child the last 30 years of selling have
been about getting us to give in to this
instant gratification and the greatest
enabler of this is credit the consumer
merchandisers came up with a magic
bullet the credit card cards boomed
following the deregulation of credit in
the 1980s they transformed our attitude
to spending by infantilizing us we could
now buy whatever we want without saving
the credit card becomes the facilitator
of impetuous narcissistic by now
consumerism because you don't have to
wait a second you've always got that
credit card you can always make your
purchase like that
we bought on impulse knowing that we
could pay later but that wasn't all
studies of brain activity show that we
experience a discomfort akin to pain
when we hand over cash put simply when I
pay good cash I'll think more carefully
about what I'm spending when I spend the
cards I'm far more likely to spend more
up to 100% more
evidence of this was provided by dragon
college a professor of behavioral
economics he and fellow academic Duncan
sinister carried out an experiment they
set up an auction and students were
asked to bid for tickets to the
basketball game students were interested
in in basketball walking through the
door they received a bed sheet half of
the students were told that if their
bids won the auction they would have to
pay with a credit card the other half
were told they would pay for their
winning bid in cash the results were
extraordinary the visitor credit card
condition were about twice as high and
in fact that there were no cash bids up
to hundred dollars when the credit card
bids went to three or four dollars
somehow with a credit card your tendency
to purchase is released and you're more
comfortable with higher figures you lost
the tight connection between the
purchased and the actual payment itself
the tight connection how you can
actually mean by that if I collect what
a tight connection is when you take out
your wallet and you pay something in
cash because there is a purchase and
then there's the cash that you see that
you don't have anymore
try to pay for everything in cash for a
week and just watch how that feels
just just go for a cash system pay your
rent in cash if you can it it's it's
thankful it's painful so what you've
done with the credit card is you've
deferred the pain down the road you
would defer the pain and you have
diffused it you have disconnected it
from the purchases that's the important
very important thing by the late 90s an
entire shopping culture had been built
around credit and the glamorous life it
could by creating a new syndrome a green
scarf bleach the choice last one missing
in lively comedy confessions of a
shopaholic of smart successful woman
shops compulsively three on this card
[Music]
gentleman reflecting our growing
reliance on credit her shopping habits
run out of control as she continues to
spend money she doesn't have find really
could you just could you try it again
really declined for several years ages
Cardella was the real version struggling
to bring her own shopping habit under
control she wrote a book analyzing how
credit cards have fed our compulsion to
spend
I remember for me with my first credit
card it felt a little bit like magic how
many credit cards did you have I think
at one point I had eight or ten cards
but when I first got them I was this
very very serious responsible credit
card user I would keep a very strict
record of everything that I spent and
the payments I made so you started off
as a kind of responsible consumer then
you'd step and as you got more and more
credit you became for various reasons
less responsible I think by that point I
was indoctrinated into this way of
believing that that you know you had
these credit cards and you just continue
to use them
researchers found that credit cards play
to our innate tendency to believe the
future will be better so many of us
believe that by the time the bill
arrives we'll be able to pay it and in
allowing us to behave like children the
credit card industry has become
immensely profitable the adult might
want a BMW the child might want a
videogame but what's now the same is
that both wanted now neither deliberate
neither to further gratification neither
feel they have to earn it both feel they
can and should have it now and it's that
change in attitude that I think has
infantilized adults for me shopping was
really like a candy land it was a place
you could go and you'd see all these
fabulous things and there was like a
child you'd want to see things that were
shining your things that we want to hold
and possess ultimately Britain's now Oh
a record 1.4 trillion pounds far from
putting the brakes on spending the new
millennium saw the process speed it up
and made easier
[Music]
the internet brought the shopping mall
into our homes allowing us to pick and
choose whatever we desire with no
opening and closing times to delay our
purchasing two of the men behind this
new multi-billion dollar Candyland were
Max Levchin and Peter Thiel the Silicon
Valley pioneers recognized that whoever
created a speedy and secure way of
transferring money on the internet would
reinvent shopping at PayPal we securely
store your payment options all in one
place their solution was PayPal as its
ads emphasized there would be no need to
enter credit card numbers purchasing had
become instantaneous and with two clicks
PayPal had further disconnected the
consumer from the cash transaction and
pain of payment
now it's on apply this sandwich how do I
pay your paypal there you go so you
start the PayPal app PayPal's merrick
patel is finding ever newer pain-free
ways of getting us to paint great thank
them just paid the paypal perfect the
big thing about is you just needed an
email address to create a PayPal account
and the funding source behind everyone
was kind of marching in the same
direction which is quicker simpler yes
of course either the businesses are
trying to look at it from their
perspective how do I tell you more we're
looking at it from a shopping experience
how do we make it better and payment has
happens to be one of the parts of that
equation and we're doing around $5,500
per seconds going through our system and
you know as you give you an idea of the
scale and the amount of different
payments from different parts of the
world the year one-click shopping is
irresistible to Britain's the biggest
online shoppers in the world
our annual spending seem likely to hit a
hundred billion pounds it is a constant
backs on a constant war to try and make
purchase as easy as possible technology
is moving on at a time that enables us
to get more things more quickly so that
process is speeding up all the time and
that stops us from taking a moment to
think about what we're doing
yes I mean what you're doing is you're
taking away phases during which they may
doubt or question or consider
alternatives if you can make a purchase
process automatic if you can buy
something in one click without having to
put in lots of details without having to
go through some big process you will be
much more likely to make a purchase
merit PayPal slogan is wanted get it
yeah so it is really about instant
gratification isn't it yeah yes where we
see ourselves as sort of shortening that
distance between what you want and what
you get you know you can buy something
and to click it is quite magical
can be an advert for a product or
something so tricked by it and next days
it's at your house by removing any
moment at which we may pause to think
about a purchase consumerism now uses
tactics first developed on kids to sell
to all of us
it's the latest attempt to perfect the
machine that is consumerism as we've
seen in the series it began when
industry developed the idea of planned
obsolescence deliberately designing
items to break well plan obsolescence is
an open secret when I'm talking to
professional management people they are
said well we all know this it's an idea
which has evolved into the world of
almost instantaneous obsolescence we
inhabit today pushing us on to keep
spending we want the new thing it's hard
wearing your brandy looking for new
stuff the marketers are figure and taken
Angela the often irresistible urge to
buy is further driven by fear poor Marge
she'll never hold a man until she does
something about her breath as business
summons our deepest anxieties and then
offers us a solution every hinder fear I
really England Heidi and it's hardwired
interest by training the begins almost
from birth the british were once
disparagingly described as a nation of
shopkeepers but now we're a nation of
shoppers and it's through spending that
we are able to express who we are and
who we want to be with this entire world
of consumerism was actually the result
of cleverly crafted strategies by the
men who made us spend
but what's cleverest of all is that the
desires they creative can never be
satisfied
whatever we own there'll always be
something more something better and
that's what keeps us spending
what secret methods the shops used to
make you buy take a ride on the open
universe with shopping carousel and find
out what influences you while you're
shopping go to BBC doc co dot UK forward
slash menu made a spend and follow the
links to the Open University
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]