good morning welcome today 33 of
possibility in the pandemic where I set
my button the seat from 8:30 to 9:30
every day in hopes of creating a global
solutions cooperative that we can
participate in creating solutions
together and actually solve all of our
interconnected complex issues from
individual to the global and what that
looks like today usually on I usually
don't go live till 8:30 so until 20
minutes early today but on Saturdays we
have the together Tech and now Michael
on periscope good musi that it's on
youtube and periscope so talk to one
person and people don't see the comments
it's just saying hi I sew last yes any
news on Saturdays I skipped the update
on my five questions but today I wanted
to talk about what's in the title I
watched it's funny because two weeks ago
I watched the Michael Moore something
Gibbs Jeffery Gibbs documentary and it's
gotten the most views and interaction
from out of any of my videos so there
was something about that was like okay
use your the algorithm to the best of
your advantage and so I went out and
found something that I thought would be
popular which is that I also wanted to
watch which is a podcast by Russell
Brand's with Ricky Gervais and it just
wasn't that great okay it wasn't that it
wasn't great it just wasn't
thought-provoking it didn't ping
anything in me so there was nothing to
talk about so I think I'm just going to
live my life as as usual and then as
things ping I will I will then do one of
my morning sessions on that so
ironically of course it was a different
Russell Brand documentary podcast it's
the work not documentary this one with
Elizabeth Gilbert was funny because I
watched the the 20 minute conversation
with them it's like a segment out of the
longer one that I'm sure he'll release
and I didn't actually know who Elizabeth
Gilbert was she just talked so if you
did author of all time I was like so
before coming on life I googled her I
was like oh I do know her actually I've
read Eat Pray Love and I've seen her
interviews before
they just didn't understand my brain and
but it was actually better not knowing
who she was because I didn't know if I
had read her books and hearing what she
writes about I'm generally not a fiction
reader usually don't write other people
read other people's fiction that isn't
fantasy or I love fantasy and stuff that
set an alternative worlds with stuff
that is like could nonfiction that is
basically non fiction isn't really my
thing but I did like you Pray Love and
as a human being I like her but what she
had to say during this conversation the
title of which is in this one and hello
from YouTube anyway is it doesn't even
have her name in it it isn't is this
some of the best advice for creatives
and artists Russell Brand's and what she
talks about is what I refer to is the
magic and she's talking about it very in
cotton-like as a creative person coming
into contact with source and what that's
like
and although weirdly I wouldn't even
have clicked on that video because I
don't consider myself a creative and an
artist but I like Russell Brand so that
was like sure I'll hear what is the most
important and I think it's its relevance
everybody it's about this thing in
society but if I try to explain it go
watch it it's 20 minutes she does a much
better job she's about a writer she's a
better communicator in explaining that
but the pieces I wanted to bring into
this conversation because they are very
perfect so this is a basic quote I wrote
down it's basically a quote I may have
gotten a few words wrong as I was trying
to say but she says to be in constant
creative response and conversation with
a mystery I do not understand don't know
the source of will never know the source
of but I'm will I am willing to spend my
entire life engaged with it and that is
what I refer to when I'm referring to
the magic is this sense of source that I
don't understand I don't know where it
comes from but the conversation with it
the interaction I get to have with it
is enough like you don't it doesn't need
to be any more than what it is it's not
about what it looks like to the outside
and that is I mean she's Eat Pray Love
so she's got millions of dollars from
having written her her books but at the
same time that same advice can come from
any artist of being with that source for
obviously what like me to keep this in
the same way it was in my body
farmer Boyd live that this relationship
with art in particular that people who
are artists and consider themselves
artists are tortured artists that that
piece that tortured piece is so central
to art in our society and yet so they're
at war with art when really it's more of
a dance and it's the individual somewhat
choice to choose between those and I
love that different that imagery between
it being a war and it dance because of
the war as a soldier you need to listen
to Authority as a soldier you win or
lose a battle there kind of isn't any
in-between you can lose you can win and
still lose you can lose with me you
can't lose and still have some wins
though Oh like York you might still have
your life but having it be and yet a
dance is something anyone can do and
everyone should do it's not about being
the best and getting it right or wrong
it's just about the enjoyment of the
process of being in the dance and so
that was what was coming up for me
listening to her talk was like that
she's talking about reaching artists and
asking them to like put down the gun put
down the knife like this is to not be
the tortured artist right that instead
to invoke this dance to invoke that like
you get to play this and you don't end
Chuck's a lot about perfectionism as
well and how critics will say you know
that she had a character who is
two-dimensional
she's like yeah I know like you think I
don't know this I know it if I could
write better I would write better this
is what I have right now and in order
for you to improve I have to move on to
my next project change this one has to
get done and there's something very
profound in your own dance with your
creativity not needing it to be I mean
she's got a public actual AIDS for sure
if she ready play love but having an
isn't even the important piece like it's
for me anyway it is that that dance
right dance like nobody's watching and
it's like create like nobody's watching
for though creating is kind of for it I
doubt yet but this I have a bunch of um
of notes here oh really all over the
place is gonna be like everyday that
part of I think why people have this
antagonistic relationship with their
creativity or with their source of God
or whatever you want to call it the
universe is that and I know I
experienced this I want to be able to
tap into it it well I don't want to be
on and it's very much like it tells me
to do something I argue with it I'm very
much in a dialogue and and conflict but
not like fun conflict with it but it's a
dance it's allowing that process to
happen without I mean I'm trying to
showcase the outside world and trying to
bring people in to witness it so that
they can do it themselves as well and
she's doing it she's right than I am but
like um yes that this idea with art is
like basically like you kill it or it
kills you and that is the current
paradigm that like you have to suffer to
be an artist the epitome of being an
artist is is the committing suicide
eventually for it right killing yourself
for your art and how that's like
society's version of artistry and then
as it adds an artist we live in - can
you get - I have here written sacrifice
to access divinity then that is in every
nearly every religion that I know of
that you you have to suffer to get to
God you have to suffer and that that
it's like the suffering
self is what you're seeking out in order
to be an artist in order to think when
when you stop needing the suffering it
to look like what we think an artist
should look like then it actually opens
up into this dance and my word like the
internal reward that comes from that
pays for itself you don't need to be
Elizabeth Gilbert and write Eat Pray
Love it's just about writing it's just
about getting getting that piece out so
you don't see out here everyone's
tormented relationship with creativity
war versus death dance that it's a badge
of honor
how destroyed are you by this like that
is the badge of honor what else we have
why this when she sees other artists why
do you want to fight with something it
doesn't want to fight with you like
there's this entity that is giving you
your source of creativity it's teaching
you exactly what you're here to learn
and I do constantly argue with it but
knowing that it has my highest purpose
and the world's highest purpose as its
purpose and if I tell it to off and
I argue bet that it doesn't go away it
stays here to teach you my lessons it
stays here to give me the next piece in
a new way because I'm I've already told
it to off on that one write it like
so it has to keep kind of bringing
creativity and then my background is in
science
I remember in when taking science
University there was this clear
distinction between scientists and
artists that I mean there were some
weird categories like when you're a
science student at university you have
to take university art classes like
English take an English class that's a
university level English class there is
no dimmed down version of English for
the science students yet for this art
students to take science courses they're
dumbed down versions of the science it's
like I wouldn't that it it's like
volcanoes are hot it's like mmm that's
not science that's past grade 2 they
basically take elementary science like
this whatever so they can get their
science credit also there was this
distinction science and art and I'm just
getting into side talk here but like
that
artists will often state that they don't
understand science and or logic and and
that type of information in a way that
puts it on society that it's not on them
right like oh yeah who's Einstein oh
yeah who's where a scientist don't do
that with artists scientists generally
still have art in their life I still
know that the composers they still know
that like artists don't know scientific
history whereas scientists know artistic
history I don't know if I put myself in
that category but there's also this very
distinct thing that I have with science
versus art which is that nobody can make
your art whereas somebody will always
eventually make your science even the
great thinkers like Einstein if he
hadn't come up with a theory of
relativity we probably would still have
it today who we would know came up with
it
I don't know it would have been somebody
else because it's a discovery whereas if
I don't remember who painted the Mona
Lisa so we're going to go with
Michelangelo and David Michelangelo if
Michelangelo hadn't existed we wouldn't
have the the statue David that someone
else could have made a statue of
Davidson seems biblical but it wouldn't
be that one right we didn't have Mona
Lisa if that artists have you been alive
it's fun DaVinci DaVinci we wouldn't
have we wouldn't have the Mona Lisa
if the DaVinci had been had been here
but at the same time the sense of
creativity seems to like oh well if
you're not gonna write this then we'll
go to someone else if you're not because
in science because anyone can discover
it there's also this like Darwin and
Wallace at the same time and Edison and
Tesla and all of these we're like coming
up with either competing technologies or
the same discovery at the same time as
just who came to market who came first
who had more privilege of prestige and
more well known before this started is
the ones who get that's why Darwin was
chosen over Wallace for the theory of
relativity theory of evolution that one
the one I would go for it even though
there
very similar and came up around the same
time I'll be sacrificed access detached
oh that that when she looks at the world
and sees people struggling she's talking
about from their heart I can handle
people struggling in the art I have a
really hard time when it's like poverty
and things that I feel like that's a
society we should be dealing with but to
deal with people's individual lives and
the stuff that comes up for them I know
I have to deal with Amy she talks about
this detached gentle loving amusement
I'm like yes that's what I want to call
today it's like detached and yet gentle
loving amusement like I know what's
coming for you I know what struggle
means there are some that are never
right like you are stuck inside your
Cove at 19 I can have that I know what's
coming for you I know that you're gonna
get restless and I know that it'll also
be a time to sit with your emotions and
thoughts for the first time and that's
tumultuous it's chaotic and at the same
time the Epiphany is the creativity the
discoveries that come through that and
out of that I have excitement for it and
so I do have this detached gentle love
you muse meant I don't have that for the
possible ramifications that come down
the line for for people in poverty and
our healthcare and all of that but
that's not a guaranteed right we don't
that's the future and not necessarily
what is what is gonna come out of what
we are currently doing
that's just my anxiety and my and it is
a probabilistic logical anxiety of like
this is probably where we're headed but
it's not a guarantee so living now and
bringing that energy to now so what what
I'm doing oh no is good and the
abilities have not kind of oh did she
talks about this period of time where
she'll she knows what's good she knows
what good writing is you know what a
good artist is you know what a good a
scientist is and yet you can't do it
like you can't create it you know a good
sciences but you can't do the experiment
you know what a good book is but you
can't necessarily write like that and
this frustration that comes from that
then means you don't create and also
that your abilities
up with your tastes and that her
equivalent she talks about is having a
tantrum like a trial and I'm like yeah
because that is actually what a toddler
was going through right they have this
version of the world that's supposed to
exist the way they and it's not working
that way and they're separate from it
and they can't control it and they can't
it's like yeah that I can see what I
don't I go through this all this time I
can see what technology looks like when
it's in the world I can see what those
and my ability to create it isn't the
same my ability to be a game a
entrepreneur isn't the same as theirs
and it's not supposed to be but that
there is a lot of energy in tantra mean
that comes from that of like oh my god
this just work but knowing this dance
and being fairly in on this dance and
not being at war with it most of the
time is that's part of it like the
tangerine energy is part of the dance
like yeah that your skill is about where
your taste is and yet like there's this
chasm between and I know there's a chasm
between what I do what what is what is
perfect what is what is good that that
there's one ideal of perfection in most
things and so if you're perfect you're
identical and if you're in this is not
Ricci this is my thing that if she if
you're imperfect as we all are then
you're imperfect in unique beautiful
ways that actually come together and
create your art your science it's nobody
even if someone came up with a theory of
relativity wouldn't be Einsteins exactly
relativity he wouldn't have brought
Einstein to it thank God
alright so you've got some more notes
although follow your heart if I could
write a better book I would responding
to her critics like just but they want
it to be better right which is the least
helpful like once you've published a
book this characters two-dimensional and
this one's this because you're not going
to go back and change it so it is what
it is and I highly recommend this talk
with Russell Brand and Elizabeth Gilbert
where she talks about this dance versus
war with creativity and I invited two
people if they can to step into the
dance and out of the war because only
one is also that the war is like because
combative only one person can win it
right and so you win the war by being on
the bestseller list you win the war by
the critics seeing your good and finding
the one that says your bad and like just
really letting that torture you letting
that be the the sake because there's a
big part of our culture in our society
that demands torture that demands this
be difficult and that is what I am
struggling with is trying to create
something into the world that is easy
and fun to people who honestly want to
be tortured people who are like wait if
it's easy and fun to camp it can't be
good it can't be something that we're
actually actually seeking and figuring
figuring that out because it's when I
say easy and fun I mean this dance it
doesn't mean all of its easy you still
have the chasm and you still have your
own dance your own ego your own society
still exists it's still gonna have that
version of what it what a proper artist
looks like that they're tortured that
they're starving that they're like
sacrificing and dying for their art as
opposed to you know what if everyone's
just an artist what if everyone's
dancing right there you don't need to be
good at it to do it just move your body
you don't need to be good at it to do it
just create just invent just just be in
that and so that was a bit of my
discussion on the Russell Brent under
the skin podcast we had Elizabeth
Gilbert there talking about the dance
for just the war creativity now for my
quick update but I usually do it during
this time period now that it's 8:30 on
my five questions and my dance with my
creativity and that that like the
creativity the universe the whatever it
is that is God that I don't name God is
there something there
he's like the reason the five questions
exist but this dance is in answering
them the journey towards answering them
and knowing you're never actually gonna
get there there is never you don't
actually get the finished book actually
which is what she's talking about like
finishing the book and moving on to the
next one is how she grows she can't
really grow on this
this project whatever projects in front
of her it's about finding the next one
and I get that that is my projects are a
little less lucky a little more
technology projects that I'm never gonna
create myself and being part of it
because if you're a writer no one's
writing your book for you
which I always find ironic because again
TV shows you have a panel of writers why
don't we do that for novels because I
always a lot of areas of my life it's
been a repeating pattern that I am 70 70
percent of it that I mean I can't make
up that 30 percent which means I'm not
in at all then I'm a writer but I don't
write I can create characters and worlds
in my head but I can't actually write
out the story in a way that you would
you would want to read it and so I
wanted a panel of writers to write my
stories with same thing happens with the
technology company I can't be all that I
can't wear all the hats and be all the
things so I have to just be honest or
not and what and I don't even know how
to be honest about what it is exactly
that I'm looking for because if I could
write out a job description then I can
basically do it like it's it's very tied
together with the skill itself it's like
what what aren't I doing but that then a
perfect job stops you from doing it but
but what I try to say so there is what I
know this could look like being perfect
right if I had a crew people helping
better background better lighting better
sound the description looks professional
leads to a professional website because
that's not obtainable why do any of it
that's old me and it's like the
perfection there's this big chasm
between doing only what is easy and fun
and doing nothing that's outside of that
and the the perfect entity of what I
want it to look like and because that
chasms hard it's a zone chasm I can't
cross it I know I can't get to perfect
why even leave leave the beginning part
because I can't I know what a perfect
clean house looks like I know that's not
obtainable so how can I get to a medium
clearly clean house how can I get to
like what's the most powerful thing I
could do with it my my tasks which I am
doing I'm figuring out how
do thumbnails I mean I figured out how
to make thumbnails but I don't do them
for these these videos in the morning
only for the other ones which I'm not
really doing it the moment but those
little things like okay so Nick had
mentioned how do I get involved with
together tech which I know he knows I
think he knows anyway
but he's like right it shouldn't be this
hard I shouldn't have to ask this
question I'm like that is very true it
should be in the description of every
video that we do on together Tech how
you get involved in it and which is why
I'm trying on these videos to put in my
description in the description the link
to the document that is what I can do
which is like I am Jubilee and her start
him up to here's the five projects of a
lot of what those look like or you can
get involved and so for me these this
week it's really great sitting down on
Saturday answering these five questions
for myself because in just answering
them about what the last week has looked
like is my dance with God like is my
chance with the universe because I'm
answering these five questions and right
now these why questions kind of are my
spiritual journey my religion and I'm
above other people could join me on it
so Who am I this week that question I
got further in it's funny someone
commented I did a video earlier that
somebody had commented on an old video
of mine and so watching that old video
from seven or eight months was huge
because it's like watching beating me
right before getting in contact with TV
and I'm so desperate to find people to
work with and it's so funny because I'm
in the exact same place and yet so much
further on like I'm like right I just
want people to get together weekly and
talk about how we create a process to
create with 10,000 people um it's
different people I'm seeking and and I
found kind of what I was looking for
during that we have together attack or
meeting weekly having that conversation
but I wouldn't have known what the next
thing was until that was in place to be
able to have the solution raised and he
able to look for that much for a
particular group of people and the
person who commented on that video came
on our together Tech I believe it was
our roundtable last week the thing I'm
doing in less than half an hour I gotta
get off of this um and he was it was
great time it was part of the discussion
so he's found the community in whatever
way game be his own stuff but also he
act
we put me in contact he said he's a
practitioner of this personality test
called KNI I don't know what it sounds
for but he sent me the link for it and I
took the ki test and it wasn't that
groundbreaking it wasn't that much of an
epiphany because my outcome from it was
that I'm all for I'm 74 like if you're
really low in something then that's
obvious if you're really high in
something that's obvious
75 percent is like you're moderately
that I'm 75 percent I'm between 73 and
77 percent in all four areas so yeah
that sounds about right
like like that is I said that about the
before I did the quiz that I always end
up being a combination that is generally
rare and if there's like the combination
of two exists I'm a combination of all
three like it's like on the attachment
and so it's interesting just to get that
reiterate it's like yeah I did this test
and I actually don't know what the
outcome was at which one of these three
types am i I'm all of them as per usual
so that was interesting as well as just
sitting with my addiction in my
frustration with it that I know I if I
could manage to not smoke pot for the
day everyday then my house to be clean
then my kid would be taking care of it
at a higher level
I'd be more able to show up to these
things but the state of the world in the
state of my current it's like the two K
can't coincide I have the easiest task
and it's the hardest it's like just
don't smoke pot for the day it's proving
much harder than it is other and other
times in my kids not home what I have
and so on I know I'm on the edge of
figuring it out of feeling gross enough
to have a change where I cut it out
completely for a few weeks or figuring
out how to have it in my life without
without it it's taking over more this
last week than it was was before plus my
shower was broken which is nothing to do
with pot but I like to have a shower
anyway whatever um my showers back now
that's a bit of what how I answered that
Who am I
right now I'm someone who's got four
brains that are in whatever the forest
science or say good see your brain and
I'm at all four of them
and someone who is grappling with
dancing with my addiction and I'm where
I am with it but figuring out allowing
the process to happen to get to the next
place people who are my people is a
question this week and it's always a
question it's the point of the five
questions game it's not a question I
suggest so he sat with this week but
it's still sitting with it now trying to
write it up for this I
it gave me people are my people is very
obvious but that's set that's there I
have that in my life it's figure you
know the rest of my life around that
it's my in in real life community that
I'm not a part of because of copán 19
right now my friends circles like
actually having a conversation of them I
don't have the spoons I don't have the
capability to do that right now
and yet I have a real need for it so I
need to do something in that realm like
my game Pete be people's space is good I
need my real people's face even if you
can't be in real life right now like
making sure my kids social needs are met
making sure my social needs are met not
necessarily talking about world-changing
ideas just like hey what's up how are
you doing I don't have the spoons to do
that eh you leave that to other people
to do the emotional labor but a little
bit of it like I really connect with
people and just a person found good
person I was talking about putting pods
I quit the personality test found it
which it is Joe sees my people purpose
what is my purpose is the third question
and what my purpose is to create the
solutions cooperative and just walk
towards that is this is the purpose what
is my purpose was both the focus of the
idea cafe this week which was many was
cool I enjoyed it I enjoyed that part of
the idea cafe and the coaching I did on
Friday was like what is my purpose which
was cool because it's my childhood
traumas the same but my view to lend my
lens to view it with on what that means
has changed and so my life's mission
my purpose is like went from I don't
even know what it was before but it went
to being right to just showcase is
imperfectly as you can
process and that's becoming more more
salted in my purpose also that I did I
managed to come across the Russell
brought Brant brand podcast this morning
which was perfect you know he only put
up a few days ago and yesterday's
marketing meeting for together tech was
was also an epiphany towards my purpose
I was watching videos on the chasm
closing the chasm crossing the chasm my
brother had recommended and I just
watched the videos on it on the early
adopters and there's something there
that I'm both struggling with like no
this is not the same this is also
written ten years ago and so I'm just
gonna sit with that but it's definitely
bigger purpose it's like how do we cross
this chasm and not the early innovators
and for together tech and the world and
what we need is the is the mass adoption
but we need the early innovators it's
different early inventors it's more of
like the heart early innovators rather
than the tech the innovators my needs
what do I need what do I need realizing
that I do need those people in real life
that I need to communicate with the
people who cozy I need to reach I need
to make a list of the people I want to
contact and pick one a week and contact
them like that's not I can do that it's
that because there's like 10 people like
I can't contact my to conduct contact
any of them can't cross the chasm of
perfection don't even take a step I mean
that's there's there's my life's journey
you know we all and I need a clean house
like I do really need a clean house more
even I even need to give up pot like I
need to figure out how to get and keep
my house clean
anxiety's down my energies up when it's
not clean and yet it's one of those
things I shoot myself
I'll have it like 90 percent clean it's
never 100% clean and then it falls apart
it's like something happens and it falls
apart because I overdo my spoons and
then I fall apart and then I can't keep
it clean and so to just allow it to be
where it's at to just start and do it as
opposed to sit and figure out how
because that uses way too many spoons so
that's what I need I need my clean house
and I need people in real life real life
people and that is what I'm gonna just
just writing it down means that I'll
probably focus on this week
I'm willing to let go of this is the
fifth question was that it a couple what
weeks ago if can final question what am
I ready or willing to let go of and this
comes from the Russell Brand
conversation with Elizabeth Gilbert
Nunn question where her name is yeah is
um she talks about when she's arguing
with her guides that this is the book
she wrote right she never promised she'd
be a good writer she only promised that
she would write and although I'm not
writing that is also what am I willing
to let go of I never and this is the
hard perks yeah I kind of did promise I
would save the world um made some kind
of soul contract before getting here but
that just like being a writer that's a
lot of pressure that sounds like it's
like I have I can't just be a writer I
have to be on the on like number one on
the New York Times bestsellers list
have you never written you know words
upon a page and so in that same regard
like I don't need to save the world I
just need to sit my butt down right I
just need to show up and do these to do
what I am focused on do the parts of
together tech to these conversations and
let it go outside of that I didn't
promise I would save the world by
Tuesday I just said I would do it and
then I will move forward to the best of
my ability I will write I will do the
thing I will that's what I'm here to
serve then I have some notes here which
I think was writing around yeah die die
on the cross of perfectionism yes that's
when I'm willing to let go of and it's a
constant struggle because of that chasm
but can't be perfect why you can take a
step and and because the world needs
your step the world needs that it to be
out in the world and so that is what I'm
doing that is my journey that is my
purpose right now is showcasing this is
what it looks like just do it do the one
do the stuff write the book do the
imperfect thing don't die on the cross
seven of perfectionism you know yes
and all of this if you guys she talked
us about four guides her creativity is
like you guys this massive and I kind of
do too but guys it's not okay why do you
want me to do those
but I love it because there's this part
of like if you guys wanted me to write a
better book you should have given me
more talent and that say like if I'm not
doing this right and give me the word
like give me the tools to do it better
give me what actually what I can
actually use and so I am in a constant
journey of surrendering to what am I
willing to let go of what is my
surrender to balance and surrender look
like and that is what I'm hopefully
showcasing here
I'm gonna go cuz over on the together
tech channel in 15 minutes we have our
roundtable I'm gonna go up a shower
cuz I have a shower that works again and
I will see you if you want to follow
there is a link in the YouTube
description to the IM jus i'm jubilee
what is jubilee up to something like
that document and in there is a link to
put together tech YouTube channel on
Fridays and Saturdays and I will see
those of you over there that are that's
your jam the other tech crating the
technology that brings us together crits
all new in solutions alright thanks for
hanging out I am 5:00 every morning from
8:30 to 9:30 pacific standard time
except for Saturday's drive to get off
early so I came on a little early today
because I wanted to talk about this
Russo France interview I we are here
we're together or going to create a
world that works for everyone by which I
mean you're invited to come create a
world that works for you and if there's
enough use we get a creative world that
works for everyone
take care