[Music]
okay hi all day we are we've already
sort of spoken we've done the the
formalities so it's a little awkward and
- to see you do it all over again but
yeah great to see you
we met in northern Denmark
at the European men's gathering yes and
we had a chat and I found out that your
professor at the Copenhagen Business
School yes right and I don't know too
much about what your research is
involved in when I was looking a little
bit at apparently you you you research
money yes and what is money he asked
this question what is money so I'm kind
of interested in that but also we we
spoke about men's groups and their
importance and you talked about a
business you are going to create with
with with our friend Paul related to you
know bringing bringing men's groups into
companies and that kind of thing yeah
so anyway maybe you just want to say
something about yourself a little bit
what's your what's your what's your
vision what's your story I think you
call it a lot of it or some of it at
least it is true that I've been working
on money for the last yes into some
extent I still am working on money so
I'm not an economist I'm a sociology /
philosopher so that allows me to sort of
I've stepped into this field of
economics through the backdoor which has
allowed me to sort of open up very basic
questions which the field itself hasn't
really asked I or at least taught not to
a large degree and and one of these
questions is exactly what is money and
more importantly where does money come
from so that's something I've been
engaged with but then in recent years or
the last one or two years I've become
very interested in men's work which is
why we've met and this is something
that's that interests me both from a
personal point of view because I am a
man so and I like being a man and I
think that's a lot of there's a lot of
potential in being a man I think
sometimes we tend to think of you both
men and women or at least or in I don't
like to what gender but I'm gonna use it
anyway
but sometimes we think of gender as a as
a liability something it's better if we
don't have a gender and it's better if
our gender doesn't really count in in
the relations we into and I think that's
wrong I don't think I don't think gender
should be a liability I think it should
be an asset for me it's a nice asset and
it's something that I don't think we are
utilizing enough in our society in our
culture and certainly it's also
something that I found that the more I
can use utilize that asset in my own
life the banner in the mirror for me the
better for my wife the better for my
kids the better for my friends and
everything so that's and and that's
what's meant work is about for me okay
so so um masculinity as an asset that's
what I'm hearing you saying um I have a
kind of theory I want to just put
forward which I think is related okay
there's a Zen phrase that that says you
know first there are mountains and
rivers
and then there are no mountains and
rivers anymore and then mountains and
rivers or mountains and rivers again
have you heard that before
twosome phrase I think I've heard it but
I don't think I understood it so one way
to look at this as mountains and rivers
or is masculine and mescaline and the
masculine and the feminine right yes and
there is a sense that in our society
we've kind of lost that and that's the
hunt our mountains and rivers are not
mountains and rivers again right and
then it seems to be at this point in our
history or in this point in society
there seems to be an interest again in
in discovering this this distinction
between men and women and why that's
important and why it's not just
something to throw away or yeah that is
very true that is very true and I am but
I would add that I think um because I
also think about this philosophically I
think I've kind of figured out this one
of the reasons why I don't like the
would gender is because gender starts as
soon as you start talking about gender
you're invited to think about the
distinctions or the differences between
men and women and I do believe that
there are plenty of differences however
I'm not sure that the question of what
is the difference between men and women
is the best question to ask so I like to
ask more what does it mean to be a man
man could also be what does it mean to
be a woman I don't know too much about
that because I am a man so I'm more
interested in what does it mean to be a
man mhm and it's not the same question
I'm I'm also this is this is something
that I've become very unaware of in my
work on money the thing is when we
approach the question of money we
sometimes are in economics this attempt
you to ask the wrong questions about
money so we we tend to ask questions
about what is the price of this or what
are the relative prices between this and
there and how however why is this more
valuable than this and so forth but the
basic questions of money such as where
does money come from tends to get lost
in that and it's the same in the field
of
men and women I think when we start
talking about what are the differences
between men and women we sort of get
sidetracked in a way yes I think these
are the questions like so what is it
what does it mean to be a man
it's a puts us on another path and
having said that I mean again there are
differences between men and women but I
think if we approach the question from
another angle
we get to a different point yeah oh
that's interesting well obviously we we
define ourselves through difference in
some kind of a way I mean you know we're
a man we're even the word woman has the
word man inside of it so there's you
know I think there is a difference but
maybe what you're saying is that that
it's a more deeper question is when you
look at it in yourself or does that make
sense I'm not you said something about
so you said we identify ourselves
through differences mm-hmm and I know I
mean that's the Sociology that I've been
brought up with that this sort of
thinking in differences all the time I'm
not sure that's just I'm not sure that's
necessarily true how is it I mean what
what if I just I just identify as a main
periods and then regardless of and some
of the things I mean there's some of the
things in me that come out when I
identify as man which are probably the
same in women and then there's some that
aren't but it but still it kind of it
matters to me that I am I mean okay
so the way the way I've tried to work
with it I have I can show you this not
that it's important but it's just here
on my this is my just one of my favorite
books
this is Heidegger right I was gonna
bring Heidegger up because because I
know that you're a big fan of Heidegger
and so this sign on site is in this book
Heidegger he talks about he talks about
main or not man in the sense of main
woman but in the sense of human being
but he doesn't want use the word
human being uses the web design so which
is kind of like a it's a genderless
being in a sense right but he talks
about what does it mean to be a human
being what it was mean to be designed so
and one of the things that he says is
that design that the human being is
distinguished by through the fact that
our being is an issue for us so for me
as a design my own being is an issue for
me so it's my own being is something
that I kind of have to come to terms
with I have to investigate it understand
it but I also have to realize it and
live it so within a time right within
time and the fact of mortality and
exactly yeah so what I want to try and
do or what I'm trying to do in my work
at the moment is to say what does that
look like if we use these ideas concepts
to understand what it means to be a main
well what would that look like and so
what I've one of things I've come up
with is that I think what distinguishes
a man it is that he has to come to terms
with what it means to be a man yeah so
so that's that's that's basically what
defines or what what distinguishes me as
a man is that yeah I have to come to
terms with it and of course we can do
that in many different ways but we can't
get around this question we just you
need to figure out what kind of a man do
I want to be that's like our life task
in a way mm-hmm and then you can try and
escape this life task you can stay a boy
for all of your for your entire life
that's not a good strategy or at least I
don't think that's a good strategy you
can also try to say ah no no no I don't
want that I don't even want to identify
as a man I want to I could be any gender
whatever can be on dragonis or yeah
something like this and you say well
maybe that's one way then of being
man is to be whatever something but I
think there's certain sometimes they can
also be an element of trying to escape
yourself in that mm-hmm right because
because why is that Kinect gonna
interrupt why is that question so sort
of offensive to people right yeah at
this time it's like it's like people
want to if when you ask this question
you know what it means to be a man and
then people are almost offended by that
right yeah you know what I mean it's
like it's it seems to be no I'm a person
you know yeah why do I have to be you
know why do I have to distinguish myself
as a man right
I think excuse me I'm a little sick ya
know if we have it we have a deep sense
that so this being a person for instance
is not a it doesn't really come with
very many commitments or obligations
it's you being a person is something
wrong the minute you're born you are a
person hmm you don't have to do anything
to be a person it's free innocence so
being a man is something we need to
become right it's not something we're
just happens to us thank you
being a man has this duality yes it is
something you're born with a penis and
and then at some point you become a man
but at the same time we have this sense
that no it's also an ethical obligation
so there's something you need to fulfill
something you need to do something and
of course that's that can be like I
should kind of do that and what's good
it's terrifying in a way it's an anxiety
provoking because it may come with all
these obligations and responsibilities
and all these kind and also the
possibility of failure you can't as a
person you can't really fail I mean it's
not like yeah oh then I'm not opposed
but as a man you can fail well you could
be subhuman you could be less than human
yeah but would you be less than you mean
you wouldn't be less than human by
virtue of something you do yourself
isn't it something you become by virtue
of something that someone else does to
you
and of course I mean it's also I mean of
course you can be good personal no
that's just some semantic I I'm
following what you're saying you know
and I agree it has something to do also
with
what you were saying before about being
becoming right yeah in this high
daguerreian sense like yes yeah I think
it is true that people can offend it but
I think below this offense bill low this
and anger also I think below that
feeling there's another feeling which is
a feeling of anxiety or a feeling of oh
maybe I can't do this or maybe I'm not
good enough or maybe I can't live up to
this so I think so I think behind all
these feelings that come out that do
come out when when you say some of these
things sometimes come out when you say
some of these things there are actually
other kinds of feeling and I think we
should take these I mean I certainly
think that we should take these feelings
seriously I mean because they are
serious so and so maybe I just want to
it of course I mean when I say that that
there's a being a becoming a man is kind
of like an ethical obligation that
that's not to say that there's a
particular there's a specific formula of
the kind of man that you then have to
become I mean there's plenty of ways to
be a main force so so in that sense
there's a an openness in it but still it
is sort of a life challenge or something
like tasks you have to take upon
yourself I was thinking as you were
speaking um you know you know I need she
he talks about how philosophers ideas
are really there their biography in in
some kind of a way right so then I
wanted to I wanted to ask you about why
that's of interest to you
right why this becoming a man is of
interest to you and why why why do you
feel this need to
- let's say become a man or why do we
because you know I can relate to that as
well yeah I think I mean I think
everyone mmm I think all men and boys
certainly they also have that and
especially when they when boys when they
start becoming less I have two sons
they're 12 and 16 so they're right at
that age where they they feel that urge
or that calling to become min so they
compare yeah working on that so we have
that but it's also true as you sit or I
think there's also reasons why someone
like myself call you or I mean we all
have reasons for why we then become
perhaps extra interested in this and so
for me I think mmm I mean at least one
of things I mean I've some years ago I
was divorced and my oldest son he was
like I had a conflict with his mother
and and so what happened there was that
my role as a father sort of became was
challenged so I was I mean I was yeah so
there was challenges there and and and
also some kind of a crisis there so and
and I think so that's been part of it
that this has made me aware of yeah yeah
so the crisis that's interesting I it's
also think that Matt you know
discovering or growing into manhood is
always related to at least some kind of
a crisis yeah and in the beginning that
used to be dealt with through rites of
passage and and that kind of thing but
today we don't we don't have the same
kind of formal rites of passage so often
we we go through a crisis yeah yeah and
that that sort of makes us think that
that you know it's important for us to
be men rather than be just like our
wives are just like other people or
there's some kind of distinction and no
does that make sense yeah it does make
sense
and I I can notice I mean for me
actually I wanna add I just came just
two weeks ago I went on a rite of
passage with my son my oldest son all
right with her name on a Rubenstein you
also are familiar with I guess and it
was amazing I mean amazing it for three
days and for him and for me and for our
relation it was just one of the best
things I've done in my life really
amazing and it's true as you say that
mmm
I mean we need to what rites of passage
passages what they do is that they mark
sort of transitions in our lives and the
most important transition is the one
from being a boy to becoming a young man
but there's also other like and I think
for me I went from being a man to
becoming a father and in the process it
was a crisis and all these kind of and
me that became a rite of passage also
yeah really huge struggle so for me
becoming a father was not just something
it was something that I discovered that
this is something I also have to work on
or work for and struggle for so I've
done a lot of work on that mmm and as I
was doing it of course with these things
it was like it's hard work and it's even
more hard working if you have even if if
you don't have a conflict with the
mother it's hard work still but then if
you if you also have a conflict with the
mother so I've done a lot of very hard
work but I've also learned a lot of
things from that and one things I've
learned is the value of is how men how
we can help each other I mean if it
hadn't been for other men who helped me
mm-hmm know what I would have been crazy
I'm sure so I really also discovered the
value of friendship and yeah it seems
like that male friendship is something
extremely valuable and I also think that
it's something that is kind of mocked in
popular culture it's kind of made fun of
its kind of yes it's not
seen as a serious as a serious and
beautiful business right now it's often
seen as a you know caricature does a
bunch of you know dumbass dabs going to
the football game or drinking beer and
you know being could have dragged around
I think and I think the lives or
something like that so so so so I've
also I completely agree with you I think
that I think that this is something I
discovered late in life is is the value
and the importance you know sometimes
the difficulty but also the beauty of
male friendships mmm no that's true
that's I mean I've had throughout my
life I've had many close friendships and
most of the time I've actually always
had like one or a few very very close
friends so this is something I've always
valued but I think as I grow older I
just come to value it even more and then
you say that in a culture there's some I
think there's a suspicion or there sir I
think because there's a deep because
friendships are so powerful the things
that men can do together when they get
together they can do really really
powerful things and I think in our
joining society they said our society
knows that so here Anna knows well if we
want to control the population or if we
want to control Society let's not have
too many friendships friendships right
because that while that power can be
positive or negative right it can be yes
it can be tear a terrorist group or it
can be a band of brothers working
together to make you know something
something great or it could be all kinds
of things right and also just you could
say well some of the some of the
energies that men would put into French
chips I mean if they don't Francis maybe
they would put it into their work
instead and maybe that's better for the
corporation or whatever so they they
kind of want us to expend that energy
into that system Rob
then yeah for other purposes yeah that's
the conspiracy theory about friendships
but I think that just like I said in the
beginning for me being a man it's such a
powerful asset which were not utilizing
optimally and that also include
friendships friendships are also such
powerful relations assets which we could
also utilize much much better that's one
of the things I got out of this rite of
passage that I was doing this rite of
passage together with so there's my son
and seven other boys and seven other
fathers and then there was some
assistance for men em and this
experience of having all these men
helping each other raise these boys was
just so beautiful and so powerful and
with and there's so much potential in
that then we could utilize yeah there's
well it's it's almost a rediscovery of
of who we are as human beings right
because that always existed you know
yeah and it seems in modernity it's just
it's just been sort of destroyed or or
or turned into pathological forms of
itself or you know it's all many of
these things they've become
institutionalized right like so the male
friendship has become institutionalized
in the the corporation child care has
been institutionalized in the daycare
facility and and so forth
and of course I mean so these
institutions yes they're very efficient
I mean institutionalized take here's
very efficient the corporation very very
efficient however mmm something when we
move our human relations into these
institutions we also lose something and
I think that's kind of where we are
today we're kind of in the process of
discovering some of the things that
we've
lost in that transition and and and and
and and and and and because the
institutions are failing us on some
massive level I mean not not in keeping
the society together but in terms of
providing a meaningful yea existence yes
that's true but I also see a lot of good
efforts to recreate in new forms some of
these things that we've kind of lost
like the thing that where we met at the
European men's gathering is also like a
rediscovery and a reinvention of
something that used to be there but we
kind of lost and now we're recreating it
but in a modern setting right and I see
a lot of that going on fortunately so
did you see the film The Joker no it's
worth seeing because in some on some
levels for me I was I was watching this
movie and it's it's the overgrown man
whose stays with his mother and doesn't
and that and then the pathology of that
is there's a lot of realism to it I
guess I mentioned it just because I
because I was writing about it recently
and thinking and thinking about how the
postmodern sort of you know this
postmodern leveling of difference the
levelling of the distinctions and
qualities of everything and then and
then what's left is a kind of a parody
of yeah of society and this film was was
wind it was interesting because it had a
kind of realism to it it kind of killed
this whole superhero myths of good and
evil you know it kind of was destroying
this kind of you know pseudo mysticism
of the superhero myths where you're
always going to be saved by by this and
that person and then you saw this person
who was actually real you know and um
how that relates to what we're talking
about in
well I think I think there's a kind of a
caricature of masculinity that has to be
kind of like ya know that caricature of
all the roles in in fact and art you
know and and which you know because of I
guess because of Hollywood you know and
and and you know what all of all of this
all in an entertainment industry and so
so we have this caricature of view of
what does a man what is a woman and what
is a person and what is a where is this
actually something Dee all these things
that need to we need to find out the
deeper and complex nature yeah so so on
the so that's very true I think on the
one hand yeah it's true that there's a
there's some tendencies for an attempt
to level the differences or neglect or
annihilate the differences between men
and women but there's also attempts to
annihilate and that's maybe even more
problematic the differences between boys
and men yeah and the Joker is that that
person who who never grows up who never
goes through that particular stage so he
remains always in a kind of infantile
state and I think this is I think this
is kind of a plague especially in that
it's not the right word plague oh it's
it's it's yeah very very wide widespread
is this is this man boy who never takes
responsibility he has all the freedoms
in the world right as all that he has
all the technology in the world he has
all the gizmos and toys in the world but
he never quite grows and grows up and
like in the Jordan Peter Sounion said
takes responsibility right he remains
this kind of clown of caricature of
himself and I think I mean that there's
a that it's there's a tendency for us to
weigh in a culture to speak badly about
min and being a man was we so and it's
always like him twice not always but
it's often sort of us associated with to
something
suspicious or ridiculous or something
else being a man and and what that does
is that when we talk about being a man
in those terms what we're telling boys
is that don't aspire to become a main
don't aspire to become a man because
it's just ridiculous or it's dangerous
or suspicious or whatever it is it's
toxic yeah exactly and we're doing
everyone the boys the women everyone
we're doing everyone a disservice by
doing this nothing good comes with it
there's a there's a new mention John
Peters and so there's a there's one
phrase or one towards the end of his
book tour rules where he says if you're
afraid of strong men you haven't seen
what weak men can do something along
those lines yes yeah weak men become
this joker become this terrorist become
this you know and so will become what
are whatever all these sort of like lot
of things this is what happens when when
men you know don't cultivate some kind
of strength yeah yeah and I think I mean
[Music]
mmm what what also gets when we talk
about that's also made you I don't like
this word gender I want to talk about
men and women so when we talk about
these issues like for instance I was
just involved recently in a debate about
equality you know not so when we talk
about equality and oh how many women are
there in the boardrooms and what is the
gender wage gap and all these things it
we get it
mmm we talk as if it's a serum game we
talk some finite amount of goods and
then they are distributed between these
two classes of people men and women and
the more the men get the less the women
get so the more we can take from the men
the more the women will get that's an
absurd way of thinking and and what I've
experienced through my men's work and
through EMG and
is the more main the stronger I become
in my manhood the better for my wife
yeah well it's complementarity rather
than opposition right so so strong men
good men it just benefits everyone
including cut the women and the children
of course also so this yeah it's all
these kinds of good things about men and
strong men so we should yeah do what we
can to encourage this okay so you told
me you're writing a book about something
to do with Heidegger and-and-and
Peterson well comparing the two or
talking about Heidegger and maybe that's
not it well what happened was I started
writing a book about Jordan Peterson and
then when I was forty pages into it I
was like why am i what is this
potentially about I mean he's written
his own book and he's still alive and
he's known for himself does he really
need me to say something about him and
then also I was I kind of came to the
realization that what interested me I'm
not really interested in Jordan B
Peterson himself I'm interested in men
yeah but particularly men so I kind of
skipped that manuscript and then started
a new one where I wanted to raise this
question what does it mean to be a man
and then yeah and then my plan was to
sort of include different thinkers in
that actually I mean I know I actually
came across some of your writings before
we met and I did because I discovered
that you you had like this you also like
see shake and you also like Jordan
Peterson and I've also I mean I also
like she's she coy
yeah I still like him but I several of
my books have I've used his work and
I've been very inspired by their so I
also tried using some sheet on this but
it didn't really work and then so I went
my my default position whenever I don't
know what to do I think
and then I I started yeah just building
on on silent side and his ideas and and
I have really moved further than that so
now it's become like this book about
being a main using Heidegger so it's a
lot of my man and Heidegger and yeah
that's kind of it when I'm in the middle
of it now so I'm not really so that
probably means you will be attacked at
some point for being a Nazi
I think that's happening already it's
already happening I was involved in I
wasn't I wasn't television a couple
weeks ago on this issue of equality and
I mean I know this I mean some people a
is so hiding he has this phrase he says
being has the nature of yay - kite - so
it means that being is always I mean
it's always mine or I can't talk of
being sort of in an abstract way because
it's it's it's mine it's kind of part of
who I am and I think that also applies
to being a man or being a woman is
something very very very intimate right
and yeah that's interesting it seems
like you're resisting definitions here
you're talking about something that's
very important but you're resisting some
kind of ultimate definition of that
thing yeah which is I think that that's
what hi I mean what kind of I think
that's what I learned from Heidegger is
that is it a you know thinking is not
just being stuck in one cut in one
conceptual world it's sort of revealing
and unraveling the meanings of that
thing and it's kind of an infinite
process with with no end so um does that
make sense
and now I'm thinking oh no my book maybe
it's never gonna end
no but that's the right that's your book
shouldn't it shouldn't have an ending it
shouldn't be like it shouldn't be an
absolute statement it should be a
provoking of
of more truth right
and I mean you before you asked me sort
of how was why why did this quest of
being a man why has that become relevant
to me and I told the story about my son
and divorce and all this but I think
there's another thing is that I've I
studied sociology in this in the 90s and
I think they discovered that none of
what I read in sociology about men and
women was of any use to me
in terms of figuring out my own life nor
the opposite it was just confusing or
misleading me and I actually think that
there's actually very few resources in
philosophy terms of thinking about what
it means to be a man
have you read read Yvonne Alicia's book
do you know Yvonne image Yvonne Ilic
Yvonne Ilitch yeah he wrote a book he
actually he actually wrote a book called
gender and then and then this was
hijacked this term was hijacked probably
it was him who brought it into vogue but
it's the most interesting book I've ever
read on you know men and women and
commentary and although maybe you should
check that book it's from I think it was
it was published in 1980 yeah yeah I
think my friend he talks about this
sometimes but I haven't done round 2 and
I'm sitting here oh that's nothing in
philosophy there's nothing so and then
there's all these books that I haven't
read so maybe I should be a little bit
more careful but at least I mean I
didn't it was it was part of the
curriculum that I was introduced to it
just didn't helped me I mean and I think
it's that's still to last I think that
is one of the reasons why Jordan
Pederson has become so popular yeah
because he's he's actually the
beginnings or the sketch or the
introduction to a conversation about
what it means to be a man which does not
start from the premise that
oh yeah men are bad and they're just out
to exploit women and all this kind of
stuff but it kind of it really starts
from a positive starting
saying men generous they want to help
women and Gianna stuff yeah that's right
I think it's an introduction I think
you're right and also I think that he's
kind of like he's kind of the only
person out there who is valorizes that
and in a relentless sort of way and
keeps going by low-rises the you know
the value of men and keeps talking about
it I think even more like like like more
like intellectual people that it's that
seems quaint or something to them or get
but and so they miss the importance of
that I uh wonder if it comes from is
sort of working-class you know
background and really understanding you
know the kind of toughness of my more
primal life and and I don't know if that
makes no that makes it there's something
I noticed in so in the in the in the
Kathy Newman interview there was and it
was right at the beginning so she asks
him something along the lines of all
your most of your audience is male yeah
most of them are men and then he kind of
you kind of deflects that or he's then
ants as well yeah but it's just because
it's YouTube and tumblr is for girls
something like that and then there's
this sense that he wants to kind of
avoid or mmm he kind of deflects this
question there but then I've seen in
later interviews
it's like he's he kind of discovers okay
why is it that why is it that that's
even a bad thing there's so many or boys
or young men and why should i why should
he be apologizing for that in any way I
mean I there's no reason to apologize
for that
I remember seeing later interviews with
him where he's where he kind of M just
chase it more as a like a positive
quantity yeah
to them yeah because in young men are
important and they have all this
virility and they you know they they
help build the world and we have to yeah
I mean there's plenty of people speaking
for I mean if you're a woman I mean and
you want to know about Wendy's I mean
there's so much more stuff on that and
then and it doesn't start from then we
can debate whether that's good I don't
know that because I'm not a woman
perhaps it makes sense for the women
whatever us out there already who
feminism what-have-you gender theory
maybe it makes sense for them and if it
does that's all well and good go ahead
yeah but I could just for myself as a
man it doesn't make sense to me it does
yeah well I was thinking about this and
I don't want to be anti-feminist at all
I want to be pro feminist but I also
want to be masculinist like I think the
pitcher has to be has to be balanced you
know III think we can criticize feminism
in a lot of ways and then there's some
feminists who are more interesting than
others and and we don't want to go there
particularly particularly but but but
but but if there's feminism there has to
be masculinism as well I mean I think
yeah what if it's like this and I'm just
throwing that out there what if it's
like this for women or for some women it
makes sense to make sense of themselves
from the perspective of feminism which
is like taking one side maybe that makes
sense to them but what if it's like this
that for men that just doesn't make
sense
it's not part of our like part of being
a man is protecting a part of being a
man is putting women and children before
yourself if that's part of being a man
then even masculinism wouldn't even make
sense I don't know if that's true but I
do know that for me feminine I mean if
it makes sense to some people fine go
ahead do it
well I guess what I mean by masculism is
just revalorisé 'uncle inity and
maleness and
just as as feminism you know at least an
intention is trying to value the the the
you know the woman is a value right and
so we're saying the women is a value and
the men is also a value but but I yeah I
know what but this there's also
something in it in that I mean I don't
think it's for me to and I and I know
that's not what you're saying but you
one could kind of say oh now we've had
feminism that has kind of like whatever
overvalued off I don't think can be
overvalued but at least sort of put put
feminists or the feminine sort of on the
pedestal or whatever they've done so now
we need something to counterbalance that
hmm I'm not sure they ever got a balance
out
I think we need to find another maybe
that still rival recen in a sense and
again it doesn't there's a there's a
reason why this feminism and masculinism
it is because the whole idea of
valorising mmm the masculine over the
feminine it's just not a very masculine
thing to do it so I think one of the
things when out the first European Minsk
and also the second one but one of the
things that struck me at the first
Europeans gathering was we were 140 men
we were together for a whole weekend not
one single time
did I hear anyone say anything negative
about women not once
I was just so happy about that's very
interesting yeah yeah I could see that
in my mind my parents actually you know
you know
I've never heard my father speak ill of
my mother right after their divorce he
just did not in fact he wouldn't be more
likely say sort of positive things about
her and and and I never heard - as a
young person I I heard negative things
about my father
relentlessly right and I think a lot of
boys do your negative things about their
father the father's the you know and
that's not saying my father was any kind
of model or example or my mother either
but but but but that seemed to be just
normal right it seemed to be normal that
the you one should speak very badly
about about about the the the the guy
who had had failed and was a loser and
and but but he wouldn't he would not do
the same thing for a women and why
wouldn't he speak about about maybe out
of fear I don't know maybe I know I
haven't no the reason why he doesn't
speak bad about you your mother is
because he's a man period and also
another thing is no one wants to listen
to a man who speaks badly about women
mm-hmm women certainly don't want to
hear about it but even more other men we
don't we don't like to hear it
oh we just yeah yeah and that is that's
off that is like the worst kind of man
isn't the guy who's just complaining
about women all the time
there's something very unmasculine about
it yes or something I think it's also
another thing is that we also men we
don't we also don't want to identify as
victims and there's something like if we
when you talk bad about women and stuff
you're also putting yourself in the
position of being a victim and that's
also not a very masculine thing to do
yeah mmm I think it's I mean I have to
be carefully buddy just looking
empirically on what happens under the
headline of feminism there is a lot of
taking the position of the victim and
there is a lot of talking
about me I just have to I mean that's
what I that's that's what even Alice
says in his book it's like the power of
women's gossip is actually there's a
sacred quality to that and and you know
just talking about other people and
that's how you you know decide who's
worthy and not worthy and the community
and I'm sure I'm sure I'm sure that
there's some sort of and that that has
some sort of a function I'm sure that
there's a purpose for it I'm sure
there's a purpose for this and you're
not you're not just complaining about
women here that's not weird I'm not sure
that function is always being performed
in the best way but I think there's a
there's a primordial function in that
otherwise it wouldn't be there I'm much
of a social function with sociology I am
so so so therefore I also don't have a
problem with women or women getting
together and talking bad about their men
or I've absolutely no problem with it
they can do that all day long if they
want to however I don't want to be I
mean if I'm around men and they I just
mm-hmm if they start talking bad about
women it just there's no energy in it it
I just yeah I don't like it and I think
that's very dangerous to our culture so
it's it's kind of like then it's the
Achilles I don't really it is also the
problem of the I was gonna say the men's
movement but there isn't really
amendment because I mean it's it's easy
to have a it's all it's easier to have a
movement it if you can sort of identify
around some sort of victim boots over
all victims this form a movement yeah
let's do that blah blah blah and then
you can form a movement but it's very
very difficult to mobilize men around it
because men we don't like to mow cuts
around victimhood so mmm
but at the same time obviously there are
problems in society in relations between
men and women like for instance like
divorce legal arrangement around in for
sister where there's huge problems with
that have to be solved
there's a different it's so difficult to
mobilize people men around these issues
because yeah what is it actually
identifying within yeah so this is this
but so you don't think that you don't
think that it could be a credible men's
movement in the same way there's there's
a women's movement you know in the 70
it's not a question of credibility it's
not a person it is question of what
marketing or or no it'd be a big it's a
question of getting enough men together
I have a powerful movement I think I
think I think I don't know I think the
there was only in order to solve the
problems around the legal system around
divorces I mean I'm talking about this
because for me that's the main problem
for all the main sort of political
problem for men today has to do with it
it's terrible and it's terrible
everywhere especially terrible it did
mark and I've been involved in it this
works so I also know something about it
um and I've seen I mean the work on this
has been going on for at least 20 years
and I will stay very little if any
progress has been made in those 20 years
and but I and I think what I think those
[Music]
it's only when women start getting
engaged in these questions that's
something where you need women to say
this is not good we we want our boys and
our girls yeah you need women to stick
up for their met their man yeah just
like just like men
I mean why do women have why do women
have the right to vote because men stood
up for them and sit of course women
should vote like I'm not saying the
women didn't also do something but there
was a plenty of men involved in it yeah
yeah so there's there's a lot of
goodwill of men towards women and and
and the the other the other thing is
also true I mean of course there's a lot
of but III but I do think oh I wish I
wish there would be more women who would
sort of go into this and say we need we
can't have or maybe there are more women
they're just a silent majority of some
kind I think there are men that sort of
would listen to this and agree but then
might be afraid to speak about it you
know in a more public forum if they
could mobilize just 10% know the passion
and 10% of the engagement that they've
invested in the me to movement if they
could invest that in getting proper
divorce regulations that would make a
world of a difference yeah you want to
talk about she Zeke
oh sure well you know I'm not an expert
of Jeezy I just spread like three of his
books for for fun I never wrote about
him or thought about him that much as
much as Jordan Peterson but he's an
interesting person to contemplate yeah I
really enjoyed the I found that
interaction between or the the meeting
or whatever the conversation between
jiseok and Jordan Peterson I really find
that found that interesting yeah and I
think I think mmm interesting because
they have such different approaches and
ways of thinking you know Peterson was
sort of coming in there with his like
you know all of his like fierce you know
and energy and and Zizi Zack was kind of
deflecting all that you know or
something what for me what the most I
was really happy about it not so much
because of whatever insights came out of
it but more because they actually
listened to each other
mm-hmm right they actually listened to
each other and so what I found was that
it was really AM it was it was it was a
civilized intellectual conversation yeah
and no hysteria
there was no yeah and I really like this
I think a lot of people were especially
perhaps on the Cystic side because they
kind of wanted this dogfight or
something and they didn't get it they
did not yeah that was what's interesting
was it was sort of built up to be this
this battle of some kind and then the
battle never happened and it just ended
up to people talking and I would say
that for me that's another one and
perhaps an even greater contribution of
Jordan Pederson is that I see what what
what he's brought to the table which is
what he's brought into the elec
intellectual environment it is it's like
as if he's kind of rediscovered or
through him we're rediscovering the
intellectual conversation when we're
where I a lot of what I've experienced
not among my colleagues but sort of in
mm-hm
I think that's it at university there's
too little we tend to just we talk to
people that we agree with and then the
ones we don't agree with are the ones
they're from a paradigm we sort of make
up a straw man of them and then we
discuss with that among ourselves and
they do the same thing yeah but I think
mmm well I guess I guess that's what's
powerful about policies that can
Peterson as they've brought these ideas
down from the ivory tower in some sense
and especially Peterson yeah I
yeah made it sort of made people into
intellectually curious in ways that they
weren't before and and and people who
are not necessarily intellectuals you
know by Nature yeah no no that's true
yes I mean yeah and that's what's coming
out and then you can just have I mean if
you just have people talking and
listening to each other then then
there's there's also an audience for
that because people are just like people
are hungry for men's work there was a
hunger for this they're just hungry
they're hungry for uncensored
conversation and in a way that's that's
all so civilized it's a nice balance
between you know what where you should
theoretically be able to say anything
yeah
in a free society and talk about
anything and you know yeah but but there
is there is this intense sort of I think
in the millennial generation especially
the younger people there's this intense
kind of yeah this this political
correctness or fear of being you know
it's almost like you have to find a
scapegoat somewhere and and and attack
it and and and not that distracts from
the entire possibility of you know a
conversation where you're learning and
growing together I think I think I like
my I guess my students are would be the
millennial generation and what I
experienced with my students and I agree
with yesterday's what you're talking
about this you know our culture in our
time here but I also sense that there's
a lot of the opposites yeah me too yeah
yeah I I experienced so many students of
generation that I'm teaching now they're
so fed up with that and they're so
hungry for these big questions and these
big discussions about these potentially
controversial issues and they all for
freedom of speech
freedom of thinking and just as recently
as yesterday I was giving a lecture on
John Peterson organized by some students
at the theology department at the code
making university and they just formed a
student association called fleet angler
which means free think free thought or
free thinking or something like yeah
was this controversial in other areas of
the university or is that just over this
like business of Jordan Peterson being
controversial and all that or is that is
that kind of finished he's like a year
ago yeah well a year ago I did a couple
of lectures and publicly oh there was a
little bit there was a little bit of
controversy about that but i but i since
these things are moving like so for me i
can sense there's a difference just from
a year ago and yeah today so a year ago
john peter I had like colleagues coming
ooh what is this and are you not afraid
or something like that yeah where's
today it's like what john pease not
interesting so I think thanks yeah he
ceased he ceased to be I just read a
book by renny's yard and he RAZR I
talked a lot about the scapegoat and he
ceased to be the scapegoat in such an
intense way that he was a year and a
half ago he's kind of disappeared as a
person who who fulfills that role and
he's just heard a hoard dairy now he's
just like part of the landscape and I
also another thing that I'm experienced
I think has happened is that some of
these attacks on idea similar to John
Peterson or they were or just making
these accusations like oh you're racist
or you should be paying or something
like that they used to be for free they
used to be without risk you could just
make these accusations and then maybe
you got away with it or maybe nothing
happened you can just draw exercises
that's that's not how it is anymore
there's risk now in both you can make
these exercises faster and feedback
Luke right you can't just make I think I
think the mirrors there's a stronger
mirror for how you behave or something
like well I think there's a stronger I
think what used to be like the silent
majority who would not who like who
would agree with some of these ideas yes
there's differences between men and
women or something but they wouldn't
voice them because yeah well they would
be in favor of free speech or something
like that but they wouldn't voice it but
now they've seen so many other people
voicing it so they like yeah I can also
say so um so I think the the yeah I was
gonna use the word power balance but I'm
not sure that's the right word here cuz
I don't think it's maybe it's this whole
middle ground area opening up where yeah
that's what I'm finding that's what I
mean that's also what Jordan I mean part
of what John Peters data is he sort of
invites it or a lot of non academics
into the academic debate or into debates
when you exclusively exclusively for
academics she you have a lot of like
ordinary people or people who don't have
anything at stake in the academic world
who are now engaging in these debates
which this means you can't get away with
some of the absurdities that you could
get away with it's ten years ago or
something like right now you've called
out on them so so it's is this is this
the the the academic world the
institution's falling apart or is that
exaggerated you know yeah you know Peter
that's one of the things Peterson talks
about he talks yeah you know the
universities are sort of collapsing in
institutions and I I think it's gonna go
both ways I think it depends on how the
institutions how they navigate this I
think there's also opportunities here
for universities if they play it right
so I don't think they miss
we have to collapse but there's
certainly some systems are there
certainly some parts of the academic
system or which which will collapse or
are collapsing already so I don't know
what do you think I want to hear your
opinion on this
well I think it's definitely a collapse
and restructuring time because I teach
while I teach you know I teach at French
universities and I'm not a permanent
staff member I'm very much an outsider
so I don't get the ins and outs of
things but I again I do get direct
contact with the students a lot and I
definitely have a feeling that the
students have changed in the past few
years that they're getting smarter and
they're teaching they're getting better
at teaching themselves things and that's
so an old school teacher who has nothing
relevant to say is becoming more
redundant right so you have to you have
to you have to you have to pick up the
pace of it and be more relevant and say
things that you know be more meaningful
be more relevant and be on top of what's
going on and of course you have to be
like a bit with it with the technology
are you gonna lose them pretty fast so
yeah and also there's this you know beef
five five years ago ten years ago there
was no computers in the classroom it's
just there's like a third element there
there's the it's it's the
teacher-student machine now and it's a
whole new dynamic you know when they
want a daydream they can just go into
their computer and daydreamin which is
fine I guess if the teacher is boring
maybe it's better I mean maybe they're
learning more the class I don't allow
any screens in my class okay yeah money
anyway and I think so I think mmm I
think my own mmm I don't know what yeah
I'm gonna toot my own horn or at least
might say so I I work at a business
school right ya know right so I think I
think some of the things like mmm
one of the benefits of a business school
is that we can't afford we we have to be
more less
so to speak more into like this element
of yeah this relates to the world
outside how does this relate to the jobs
that people are actually going to
perform that's a more integrated part of
our discipline or what we're doing there
so in that sense I I think we're better
tuned we might in some sense I think
we're more flexible we more respond
quicker just things that are coming on
outside of the university and I think
that's a good thing
I teach it engineer schools and business
schools so I see the difference an
engineer and you know engineer well it
kind of hits a segue to our discussion
with guys engineers are 90 percent guys
obviously and so they have a certain
quality they're usually very they're
usually very bright and they're they're
less the businesspeople are more social
they're more you know extroverted and
social and more on the ball in that way
but the engineer guys are introverted
and weird and creative and they like to
go into you know different worlds and so
so that's kind of interesting
I'm glad I'm teaching at those kind of
schools also even though my background
is in the humanities literature because
because I again because I think these
kind of schools are you know the grand
echo in Paris they're more they're more
pragmatic minded people so so there's
less theoretical flakiness yeah ya know
that's probably true yeah I was really I
mean I've been at the business school
now for ten years and I really I I
really enjoy this mix of oh you must of
the students I mean they come there for
the hunger for knowledge and they're
curious and they've got all of that but
they also like okay we want to do
something in the world we want to get a
job we want to be relevant and stuff
like that yeah so that's ensure and and
and they also I sensed that at least in
in my in our proactive dinner
in a program where we combine philosophy
and business administration or
philosophy economics so and I sense that
they are quite sort of either logically
diverse yeah so so you can't just I mean
I mean you can't get away just yeah
capitalism is bad blah blah you can't go
that way and but you can't also say yeah
Oh Marcus will fix everything like
regardless what you say you can risk
being such a challenge from either side
and I really enjoy this I really love my
students yeah I really really love them
so and yeah I'm very I'm so optimistic
at the moment I'm really yeah even
though I mean so there's definitely
talking about is like this huge problems
but I instead at this sense that thinks
I'm a lot of things that they're moving
in the right direction
yeah that's great okay maybe I can ask
you like one more sort of pertinent
question and that is when we were
speaking the last on the last night of
this men's group yeah in Denmark you
talked about Troy he wanted to he wanted
to do something about starting men's
groups in companies and we had this
whole discussion on the pragmatics of
that and whether you know how that would
work and and that kind of thing so and
then I wrote this paper which kind of
nut paper excuse me a blog post which
kind of was a riff on that idea that
that that it would be good to have men's
groups you know in in institutions and
it would be good to you know which got
some some some mixed reactions people
thought oh you just you want to go back
and we've made so much progress and I
say no it's not
I was thinking no that's not quite right
I'm not saying I want to go back to
something it's more like I want to I
want to rediscover something for the
future yeah so anyway I I like that idea
and I'm interested in and how you're
trying to put it into into practice were
you out with that yeah
this a small company with two associates
one is Paul who's organizing Europeans
gathering and the other one is Tom who
is also at the Europeans gathering and
the idea so as I said also in the
beginning I have this sense that that
being a man is such an asset there's so
much energy in that that you can yeah
tap into but I also and and and that's
of course that's what we're doing it the
European men's gathering but I also
sense that for many men going to the
Europeans men's gathering is it's like
it's a big step for them like most of
the men who are there they already done
some kind of other self development work
or something like that so forth so going
to an image like that it's it's for
everyone of course and there's a lot of
different kinds of mint but they are
also men who already sort of yeah used
to thinking about themselves and stuff
so what we wanted to do was to say how
can we make it easier for more men you
get some reap some of the benefits of
this work to get to do men's work so and
and and so what we were what we're
trying to do is to present this in a
form where it's accessible to the
corporate world so that's to your work
you can kind of you can enter into
mittens work and of course I mean that
you have to do it in a special way and
but but it is I mean what I think what
you get out of what you can't get out of
what you do get out of men's work is
it's actually leadership I mean you get
a this this ability to speak from your
heart
or to mobilize you're not just your head
but the rest of your body in
decision-making and in in your judgments
and stuff that's what we train in men's
work and I think that's beneficial in
all relations it's beneficial in your
family life and your kids and your wife
but it's also very beneficial in
your work life I mean if you work with
other people it's to be able to speak
from your heart and say honestly to
someone look when you say that I feel
like this or something like that
hmm so I think there's a lot of benefits
in this which could also be valuable in
the corporate world so that's what we're
trying it's called FST's the company's
called FS and we're still in the process
of figuring out how our the one had this
a certain quality to just working with
men and having men work with men but of
course in the corporate world this this
men and women yeah and and and and and
and with absolutely absolutely no
ambition of excluding women from the
corporate world not at all
so so we also I mean I think this should
also be women's work in corporation but
I think now we're just starting with
this men's work and seeing how what we
can do with it so so basically what we
want to do is do takes all the
techniques and methods that we use in
the European men's gathering and then
introduce that to corporations or other
workplaces mm-hmm sounds great
yeah I was somebody Alexander was
mentioning this this need for like
desexualized spaces yeah what do you
think of that as a concept it depends on
what he means with desexualized spaces
if he means spaces where this no well I
mean the office is such a place of
flirtation right and yeah okay I see
that yeah so yeah okay now I see what
he's getting so I think the idea is or
maybe what he's as I understand what
you're saying is that if you take what
happens if you take a group of men
together in a room with no women yeah
you take what you do is you take six out
of the equation yeah and when you do
that you other opportunities arise so
you can that's also what we experienced
at the European mins nothing
it's almost like it's it's more of a
safe space yeah
and one of the paradoxes that I find in
mints were widens not a paradox but it's
a is that when you bring men together
only men yeah what comes out is on the
one hand that masculinity comes out in a
but also also their femininity or in
other words their ability to care for
each other and I mean I guess if you
have people in the military or if you
have people in a monastery they if
they're if they're isolated from the
women they have to develop that aspect
of themselves right
the Lord said to survive right yeah I
think another thing is that if you're
just because that's how men are I mean
if there's a woman if you have a group
of nine men and there's one woman there
and regardless of what kind of a woman
she is you will there's something in you
where you kind of think I need to take
care of this woman so when I say
something I can't just speak directly
from my heart I have to think oh how
will this woman react or think about
what I'm now saying yeah and once you
get to internet it was kind of like your
words kind of you can't believe whereas
if it's just men you just this is
there's a directness and you don't go
into a selection mode of yeah trying to
you know start competing for the women
and you're just you're able action
that's the funny thing cos men together
are considered to be this you know the
the rival wrists like competing and
macho kind of thing but but almost when
men get together the rivalry kind of
falls away and and yeah there's just
this direct yeah you know being together
yeah so yeah so more men in the world
should experience that the more men we
experience that the better and the more
happy there'll be I mean that's that's
just it's a good cuz there's so many
miserable unhappy men and we're all
alone in front of their computers and
you know the more they build community
with other men you know III have a
colleague and she has three sons in
there
play rugby together and they're so happy
these guys like you could tell because
they haven't tried right you know and
and you know a lot of you know I think
about like a lot of these miserable guys
who are all kind of all alone and kind
of like in front of their computers it's
like you know you need male friendships
you need male you know encourage them in
and all that no no no that's true that's
true
[Music]