all right hello welcome to our Saturday
morning project raising today we are
raising illnesses project kind act and
so honest I will let you introduce it
and tell us what your aspirations are
for today okay
yeah so conduct is I don't know some of
you might have read that look did I send
around I think it's also on Facebook
somewhere maybe if you you can quickly
show it yeah so it's this platform where
I want to encourage people to discuss
sustainable only wind solutions for all
kind of problems that you can come up
with and then to promote the
implementation of those and yes I've
been thinking about this project for a
while now and the aspirations for today
would would be pretty much to get
feedback for those ideas that I have and
get a little bit maybe some help in
getting people involved and continuing
to develop this project and yeah I'm
also really curious whether people think
it will work or not I have heard in the
past some feedback that says won't work
anyway and yeah just rescues what you
guys think
um yeah this project is basically like
um three pillars one is where people
come in and discuss their solutions and
find find the problems the other pillar
is kind of voting but I voting has
always a little bit this negative all
the voting is only the worst situation
possible ways of finding solution
together it's not really voting it's
more yes
something similar anyway I come to that
a little bit later and in detail but
this process of figuring out which of
the possible solutions we should
implement and then the third pillar is
the implementation and the incentive to
implement on this so I had the idea to
create a some crypto token or something
that will then give an out to people who
implement possible solutions the whole
platform is supposed to be all
open-source and evolve dynamically um ie
everybody sort of first of all
developers can contribute since it's
open-source it should be able to be
forked or cloned and people can use
their own thing and also with in the
platform people should be able to post
ideas about how to improve the platform
itself um yeah so so the whole thing
should be quite organic and so none of
the ideas that I'm going to tell you
about now are set in stone because they
should all be able to be changed by
whoever is participating
so the first bits the solution finding
problem I was thinking of having some
kind of mix between reddit and Wikipedia
so that people can post their their
ideas then people can discuss about
those ones like in reddit people can up
and download things that they like or
dislike opinions that they think is a
more or less valid um
and then at the top of all of it
there should be some kind of summary
that can be edited like in Wikipedia a
summary of all the major important
points that have been said and also
linked to those posts so if someone
writes a topic on a specific viewpoint
or so um then to have one sentence or
something in the summary with a link to
it if you want to have more information
about it then you will jump directly to
the post and the reason for doing that
is because I I think it's first it's
quite important to have the ability to
to voice your opinion in in quite a bit
of detail but nobody has the time to
read through all of this and so there
needs to be some way of compressing that
down to a minimum
and so that Wikipedia style summary can
be you know moderated um and it should
have history and stuff so that you know
if someone does something stupid you can
undo it and yeah all these kind of
things there are
tweaks to these to the system like for
example posts could be anonymized um I
think that might be something more less
important because you know there's this
effect of if someone is well-known then
other people will just like the post no
matter whether it's actually good or not
um also I
true whether the upwards and downwards
should actually be miserable um maybe
it's better not for them not to be
miserable so that people don't get
influenced and that they actually only
vote on things that I have read through
and that they really think they are good
and not just by popular opinion also
there could be a mechanism to randomly
actually show like the first some of the
best posts or so but without actually
showing the the votes and there are some
things around it to make that system to
have avoid this kind of group bias that
we see so often and some other kind of
influencing so then based on those
things um on those ideas that come up
during this discussion people can host a
possible solution um and those those so
there can be multiple possible solutions
in parallel so for example um you
believe was talking yesterday about food
um how do we solve food basically
and then someone could come up with a
solution you know that has this problem
that I think the title of it zero slaves
and three tons of carbon more so so
basically how do we reduce reduce the
amount of slaves that we need and the
carbon footprint and then there could be
a one solution might be to um actually I
thought
thought about something there yesterday
but I forgot anyway to to grow your
plants locally um that could be one
solution another solution could be to
fail plan share food with your neighbors
say so these are two solutions and then
people can vote on ok I like this idea
really much about growing your plants
locally and then that has um a number of
votes then someone can come and say ok
good I'm planting now some whatever
cabbage here on my field proof that that
person has done it by I don't know some
kind of documentation or photos whatever
uploaded to the community this proof
there it can be validated
um so someone can from the neighborhood
can say yeah that's correct he has
really done that or so or I have read
through the documentation and it all
looks good blah blah and then one it's
once it's validated that person who has
grown the food will receive a reward so
those rewards tokens and they depend on
how many people have voted for that
solution so how many and the ratio of
her how people have voted for it
so if 90% of the people so say 900
people have voted for it 100 people I
voted against it then there would be say
800 tokens that are given to the person
who plans to field um if they are our
500 people voting forward 500 people
against it then they wouldn't get any
tokens because it's obviously an a
solution that is very contra picked a of
um how to say yeah
it's not not quite clear whether it's
actually a good solution or not and um
yeah people shouldn't necessarily get a
reward for doing something this the
voting itself it
I mean that can can be heaps of
different voting mechanisms and Sutphin
that that can be either defined by the
community or it can be liked by the
topic um so some topics they might have
different voting requirements than some
others you know some some things are
one-off solution some things are an more
ongoing thing for example some things
have a deadline some others don't and
yes so that the community could always
just how they want people to vote for
these kind of things
then there's also of course the issue
that there might be too much too much
going on so nobody can read through all
the topics all the problems vote for all
the things so the whole system should I
think at least should be based on some
kind of liquid democracy or I sometimes
call it steam democracy one step further
it's a liquid democracy
this way you can pass on your words to
someone else you can delegate your votes
and that person can then vote on your
behalf with additional voting power with
your voting power you can specify
individual areas of expertise like where
you want to delegate a vote so you can
say okay in terms of environment I want
Bentley to vote for me in terms of
economy I want a drill toward for me
whatever and I can always vote myself on
a specific one the steam part comes in
because most of the things of the topics
they should be only they should never be
closed like right now most of those
decision making things they have a
deadline and they will be set in stone
at some point put into law whatever but
I envision it more as something that is
always open and is always
be able to change so
if something changes in society if
there's something happening if some new
evidence comes out people can actually
withdraw their votes again or can add
additional words at any given point in
order to really reflect what people
think at any point then in order to make
that system not too too unstable
everything that has passed a certain
threshold um I I would envision this as
as being kind of the the status quo for
the moment and then if the if the
balance changes so if something
previously everybody voted for an issue
and then it changes and people vote
against it then depending on how long it
has people have been voting for the
issue when it's changing there should be
a certain time so for example they have
voted for issue a and it has been in
that way for two years then there should
be a cool down face for um two years
times 0.1 or so where that issue is
still for and only after that after the
three months or so it would change so
that it's now okay I'm officially it
stayed for three months in a negative
and so that would reflect on the reward
basically the reward in the first three
months will still be positive and then
um after three months will be negative
not sure whether there was to clear but
anyway
that's that's I think the main main
points there um I think I would like to
give it to Christians our disappoint
them and then I can explain more if we
require all right um I have one question
that kind of goes into all of them which
is what is your skill level for getting
this thing made what you envision are
you able to create it or do you need
somebody else yes I can create it if I
have like 20 years of time no sir I am a
broker Imam and Isis I I try it I
started to make a prototype for this one
but I'm just didn't get very far because
I don't have the time but if I say if I
was to work on it full-time and probably
I don't know a project like this two
years maybe one yeah if I'm not
full-time then yeah 20 years yeah that
sounds like a lot of time to put into
something that's a beta that you're
testing is there a way to bring it down
to beta something you could create a
problem you want solutions to and create
either using existing technology or
creating a beta something that you could
then test
is this working yes so that a few things
like for example I also I don't have to
create all those bits by myself and I'm
not set in stone with my own opinion
about many of those things so one of the
reasons why I joined the canonical
Debates lab two years ago or so because
I thought that might be something that
is useful at some point for for my
project you know a process where you can
figure out you know facts and things
about about an issue oh by the way I'm
sorry I'm decreasing here a little bit
but one other important thing is that
all the issues they that are being
discussed they should also have metrics
alongside with it of what people experts
who ever think how they might influence
the society how they might influence
environment how sustainable they are and
those metrics they should flow into the
the rewards so nothing that is not
sustainable or everything that's not
sustainable should have negative
influence on rewards and stuff like that
okay coming back to the point there are
there are a few things that can be
narrowed down quite a bit and can be
beta tested and all the basically that
the individual pieces can be beta tested
by themselves like for example the first
bit of finding these solutions
um discussing and then putting the
summary up on top that is can be its own
a standalone feature um that that I
could put out and then yeah bring it
online for for testing um that that was
actually also how I started him the
initial problem was um I was only
interested in finding a way how to
discuss um these kind of things I called
it what happens if because I was always
wondering like what happens if I do it
isn't that I want to have feedback from
people and then I want to write them I
want them to write posts and then ah
then I would want to have a summary
because I can't read the whole of his
blah blah
yeah the other things actually some some
of the things are not that's easy to
beat it is for example the token the
reward token it it has to have the whole
system as an underlying thing and it
also it already has to have quite a bit
of participation in order for it to gain
any value so so this is something that
is probably only in even if the whole
underlying system is finished in two
three years there until the rewards
actually take take on some value and
some life on their own it will take at
least five years I think but yeah
okay so one thing I want to make sure of
it's just that I guess I fully
understand the plan so I just want to
quickly go over like my skills and form
notes and you see if I'm missing
anything so it says like step one is to
identify a problem after that the
community would gather ideas it sounds
like what the ideas people are
submitting don't you let some sort of
expert feedback to say like hey these
three ideas sound great here's what the
experts have to say about those as far
as these sustainability you know the
cost that type of thing yeah I mentioned
that as some of the users will be
experts they will have a lot of feedback
from other issues that I contributed
like similar to your recollections
actually I think you also have something
some people that are a little bit more
expert and some less and that's kind of
not not necessarily visibly but under
the hood it gets recorded on what kind
of issues they they have contributed and
how much other people have valued their
opinion and how maybe at some point even
how accurate it was and then their their
feedback of how it will influence things
or so might be then a little bit more
taken into consideration right so some
sort of an expert tracking system under
the hood where you you're sure that what
you're seeing is you know at least pass
through someone who knows about the
topic and not just the tyranny of the
reddit upvote and downvote
yeah okay so talked about identify the
problem is gathering ideas then you want
to sort of vote or rank those ideas but
within the community after some period
of time you would then have a winner and
the idea is that people would take
action using the winning idea yeah not
only the winning idea they can take
action on the I feel like any
my net positive points yeah okay so you
take action on one of the points then it
needs to be validated validated that you
actually did take action so the
community can say yeah we know for sure
that they did it and they are just
saying it and then based on the the
number of points that idea has in the
positive that's the the number of points
that person or is each person that
completes that that idea that's how many
points do get yeah okay and then the
point they don't have any like monetary
value outside of this system right so
there's no like it doesn't cost you
money to assign points the points just
have no intrinsic value until as you
said like probably about five years when
they'll start to sort of have like Oh as
points start to build up people will
figure out what they want to do with
those coins in what they're worth yeah
yeah I do think that I do want those
points to be tradable in a certain way
and right and exactly so I yeah I hope
they at some point will gain I kind of
forgot what my reasoning actually for
this was but I I thought yeah that
should they should have at some point
have some intrinsic value right are the
points cryptocurrency or the points the
up and down votes the net positive the
up and down votes and the net positive
would be translated into cryptocurrency
so if there are 50 positive up and down
votes a words for an issue then that
person would get 50 tokens 50
cryptocurrency tokens and is it there's
stop point like we voted we we now know
there's a thousand positive votes
I put action into place I know that I'm
the only one putting action placed on
getting a thousand votes and the next
day someone games the system and gives
it five thousand negative votes does
that money get taken or those that
currency get taken from me no I think
that's the three month lag he was
talking about I believe
Esther said that if issues change too
fast or if it has been a thousand in the
positive for a while and then yeah if
someone gives it suddenly 5,000 negative
then it will still stay a thousand
positive for a few months and also it
once you have the token you you wouldn't
suddenly lose it i yeah is there any
where this is there any like planned
factor and not just how popular the idea
is but how popular or important the
problem is right so if I come up with a
problem for like I can't get my tomatoes
to grow and it gets ten thousand you
know points for the idea because that
person has a you know great knowledge of
how to grow tomatoes and then somebody
else says I want to solve climate change
and the ideas are a bit more you know
controversial and they don't get quite
as many like you know it's 58 percent
sorry forty two percent fifty percent
yeah there's some you know the if the
tomato growing idea had way more points
than this these solutions for climate
change I'm imagining people would be a
lot more likely to go after the things
that have the highest points as opposed
to going after the things that sort of
have the the greatest capacity for
change and improvement does that make
sense yeah generally I would think that
issues like climate change there they
will have much more participation and
thus a much higher amount of
contributions votes then some my
tomatoes don't grow just because it's
much easier to find people are more you
know nobody searches for that person's
Tomatoes
there's also this aspect of a
territorial limitation like so I think
there should be a way to limit in what
territory a solution applies so for
example you can discuss in your
community and you say like okay here in
Pasadena
whatever I'm I want to have some wind
turbines or whatever
and then that should only be applicable
in that area and only people who are
registered to to live in that area so
maybe we'll be able to vote on that put
potentially something like this um or
we'll be able to find it easily um and
also there's this other point of how
much it is anticipated to cost like some
issues for example um say yes or no to
abortion are very controversial and are
likely to have a huge amount of
contribution but to actually implement
something it doesn't cost anything or it
doesn't cost much let's say it does cost
something because there is lobbying for
example and then those kind of things
they the the community they could put a
modifier into that issue of how much a
how much cryptocurrency they would want
to put out for this type of thing um and
so they they
potentially vote on that one as well
like by default it might be a factor of
one and then if they think this issue is
much more important than anything else
then they give it a road and then the
effector will be increased unto one
point one or will be decreased um and so
that there should be some mechanisms
like this to tweak it
for me the voting system with the
currency both of those things can always
be gamed having both of them together
seems like it exponentially increases
both both of those problems and the fact
that it's not even viable you don't mean
you can't test it for five years is an
issue is there a way to kind of test
those things or start them now like to
work through a process of problem
solving for this very thing right like
the problem is we need a platform or
something to be able to solve problems
on what are the solutions
what are you know and up and down vote
them without any currency involved right
just like hey this one got more
attention and and figure out what that
goes and then eventually get to an up
and down vote system of like we're not
getting enough interaction we want to
currency involvement right there might
not even need to be a currency
involvement but if there is what do we
want there's people who are currently
putting in more time and effort here we
want to be able to give them more
incentive right like work through the
process with the process yeah that's uh
would probably be quite good to have
this process I'm not sure how how it
could be done i I do have a question
counter question for you how how do you
think that system could be gamed
I mean I can imagine some some things
myself but I'd be curious about if it's
the difference between an upvote in a
down vote and I want to be able to get
the most money for the things I'm
putting into place one I'm gonna find
the action that has the least amount of
people taking impact I'm gonna get all
of my friends to come and upload it
instead of them and downvote
everybody else's it's quite easy to game
that system because it's just based on
the difference of voting right so
growing a garden in your backyard is
powerful but at the same time I don't
think it's a solution to our food crisis
cuz I can't grow a garden in my
with my labor so even though it's a
solution it gets actual calories I might
down vote people because I'm not able to
do it right whereas like growing the
food is an actual solution and so there
might be a metric like how many calories
are you adding to the world then I'm
getting a currency based on that is it
necessarily do people see the value in
this right because there's also thinking
outside the box and you're asking people
is this possible is this is this there
but like the person with the idea is the
one who can kind of see the value other
people might not and the ones with a lot
of negative down votes might be the
actual solution that has the biggest
impact on the actual metrics and so
there's always ways to game the system
and it's about kind of putting it in
place and looking for those ways and
finding white hat players to try to game
the system and give you the rewards for
getting the system also important to
note that gaming is not always done like
intentionally just as you start to
measure things as you emphasize them as
you know if those points are the number
one thing that you're saying these are
kind of the reason for it people will
naturally gravitate towards trying to
get the most points if you combine that
with I want to look for albeit the ideas
that have the most points and required
the least amount of work you end up with
this thin layer of like oh this is where
it's at and this is you know if all you
want is points everyone just focuses on
these ten you know so you have a lot of
people growing tomatoes and you know
just doing two sort of easier projects
that got a lot of points and then it
becomes a well why am I gonna waste my
time on this where even though you know
it's got a lot of points it's gonna take
me four weeks but that one's got the
quarter of the points well it'd take me
an hour I'm gonna go to that one yeah
good points I haven't considered those
ones that much that's why I like
having this red eye I kind of would
imagine that for example if topic
growing tomatoes in your backyard at
some point people will definitely see
okay there we have enough Tomatoes
first of all that we have enough
Tomatoes I don't I really don't want to
vote on this one anymore secondly people
who grow tomatoes they can't do anything
with those tomatoes because there is
already too much of it they can't sell
it that well anymore whatever ergo they
are profit would go down they wouldn't
do it so I'm I'm kind of hoping that the
de market in some way regulates itself
after some time and doesn't go like
completely um out of sync so to say so
it's not just the problem it's sort of
the current state of the problems if the
if the problem is we have a tomato
shortage and a bunch of people take
action and grow tomatoes and get points
at a certain point the community says
all right that's enough Tomatoes let's
start downloading that did that idea
because that problem solved yeah cuz I
got from what you said that we're also
involving the markets actual currency in
the problem that without necessarily
having it there that somehow the market
takes care cuz in what you explained I
didn't see currents the actual currency
the American dollar the euro and such as
you know I mean like if I'm just trying
to grow tomatoes now there's too many
tomatoes in the market but that's not up
voting and down voting and
cryptocurrency that's created for making
the solution if we've up voted tomato
producing and we grow tomatoes we get
the currency doesn't matter if there's
room in the market and until there's a
there's a mechanism that actually takes
that into place within the system yeah
you know you are partly right partly
wrong on there is definitely at that
downstream effect of okay you have two
Tomatoes now what do you do with it so
we're definitely the market comes into
play and then before you are you are
right that you in in the way how I
thought about it you would still get all
the cryptocurrency all so if we already
have too much tomato actually um
but yet then at that point I would hope
that people start to actually download
it because they identify the problem
they see okay we have too much tomato we
don't have enough cucumbers and hold up
the cucumbers and pour down the tomatoes
so after all the whole thing is supposed
to be a problem solution finding thing
where they constantly figure out what
awkward solutions to the current
situation said that last week keep
keeping the silos open and realizing
there might be my solutions in other
solutions I don't know exactly they mean
by that but I think that note I think as
Jonas said I'm hearing a lot of
similarities in between this and the
like sort of controversial topic
discussion of wiki election and the
topic last week we were talking about
like if we make some sort of I don't
know a council or something where we're
saying here's people who are who are
working on for example like how to solve
a problem and and getting you know
community ideas and then ranking those
ideas make sort of a small group of
people that are trying to tackle that
problem in that way and then you know
sort of have a as I said a council where
that there might be three or five or
however many people who have projects
that are trying to solve the same kind
of a problem in the same sort of a way
and then it's meant to kind of be like
the opposite of the game a you know
projects competing take projects in the
same space form some sort of a group
around okay in the game a space we will
be competing but because this is game B
how can we actually collaborate knowing
that we're working on similar things
also there is to the whole thing I'm not
100% sure how to do it but there is this
kind of thing to localize
specific issues so throwing Tomatoes
it's it's both in some way which makes
it a little bit tricky because on one
hand so so you want to have it as a
local solution where there is a tomato
shortage say but there is also the
general idea okay growing tomatoes
locally instead of abroad and shipping
it in is better but in the global
context this kind of problem might be
framed in a slightly different way for
example um more as okay how do we avoid
carbon emissions by excessive transport
and then that one can have slightly
different implementations and rewards on
this global scale then the local farmer
that grows it who applies it in Pasadena
so Eunice I do want to say that I think
the way you described it was like the
initial kind of pitch or that initial
sentence that chiefly shared I think was
excellent I think it it fits a lot with
some it it puts into words kind of
something that I've been thinking about
in general and I think very much also
what jubblies been going through is just
kind of finding a way to get people to
work together on these topics in a way
that frees them up to do it it sounds
like your focus is kind of that
communication this platform there's
something to do that so I just I guess I
wanted to kind of open up the discussion
and say you know is this concept pretty
much you know one of the the past to get
at together tech or you know what's the
overlap of already ideas the other
things that are going on
on where we could collaborate do you
Jones do you see what you're doing is
uniquely different from I mean what you
blind Jubilee and I have been doing is
not very specific yet but I mean do you
kind of see that is that this is a
potential proposal for kind of what
we've been groping around for or do you
think it's different I do think that a
lot of what we what you've been
discussing definitely flows into this
and um is a big part of of my problem I
see
Yasuda together take more as a you know
my thing is one-one tech piece one of
the projects I could very well imagine
that together take also heckles
all kind of different very different
projects but yeah what you are talking
about what you're trying to achieve of
bringing people together and focusing
their energy onto a on to solving some
problem or so that is definitely um yeah
very much part of my one as well so
there's definitely a problem and then
back to Canada to what you were saying
earlier at the beginning is finding a
kind of stair step approach to get there
which you can't iterate to everything
but I was thinking that it seems like
kind of the first well here's my
thoughts on how we could step to that is
one is to have just a place where you
can put in ideas and vote to say which
ideas are more important and that would
be found on the first step and then the
potentially I don't know which would
come next
it would be like the reddits of style
kind of just discussion and then kind of
the summarizing summarization and then
and then build on as a separate piece to
get into the the implementation and then
kind of the the reward system of the
cryptocurrency I would see that as kind
of a doable step progression yeah so
that that's kind of a idea and maybe
maybe the first iteration is just you
know here here are the some ideas people
where I put rank these in whatever order
you think that we should tackle them and
then or or vote or you know however you
want to actually ranking so yeah I would
give someone like a hundred points and
then say allocate these points to these
ten things however you want and and then
and they also give the option to have
them kind of add the ability to add new
ideas and figure out how to do the
curation but I think that would be like
the first gem of the idea or the
implantation yeah so firstly I yeah I
also definitely see that there are these
bits of that can be trialed
independently and developed
independently like putting up some
solutions and then voting on them and
then discussion about that red it's our
thing um and yeah I think that would
definitely go somewhere along that path
there's also for example here in New
Zealand's there was this company or you
seen in Australia the company horizon
state it actually tried they tried to
implement voting with cryptocurrency as
it's input kind of thing that was also
interesting on there are a few few
projects that I would hope at some point
to connect with um to so that I don't
even have to develop that thing but just
you know see how they are doing it how
what problems they run into um can we
make it better can we use it exactly how
they do it and then take it from there
the thing with giving people a hundred a
hundred volts and they can distribute it
as a service was actually also something
that I did I thought about I'm not sure
when I even wrote it in deep paper I
wrote it down somewhere at least I yeah
there's definitely one one possibility
how to do it I also thought a little bit
about whether that should be the same as
the actual crypto token in the end to
have some yet to really have value
behind where they put their votes but
yeah I'm also uh I'm also a bit afraid
of sometimes people really gaming the
system and especially the more the money
and the votes come together the more
dangerous but yeah there might be a
really really good possibility there um
but there's um why not start a subreddit
like starting like a solution subreddit
where we focus on one solution and then
or like sorry one problem and then
people can can offer solutions
underneath and have one per week and
even if you're not actually solving the
problem just looking at what that looks
like and then I'm just trying to find it
yellow where there is something like the
pros and cons and following it down and
kind of using those together having a
subreddit and having the hundred votes
on us for it like using the voting
systems that exist I don't know if any
of them doing this they can do that with
100
Oates but playing the spreadsheets doing
like playing with it where it is right
now but in reddit and finding a
community of you know ten and a hundred
people to try and try and play with us
yeah and you could you could even do the
summarization to where you have a Google
Doc that is allowed for comments but not
edits maybe or you can even allow edits
because the doctor you can you can go
back to any version of the doc that you
want and them in history so if someone
goes in those do that so yeah so you
could literally do a reddit create a
thread for each topic and there are
systems that allows you to allow you to
integrate cut even custom voting systems
because in change my view they have a
Delta system to where you can put deltas
and then a separate website calculates
them so you could even go in so you
could put each topic everyone could put
in just a like score colon and then the
number and then you can create another
website that would strip that out and
give you totals so yeah we this might be
something that we could piece together
and till we hit the wall of you know
hacking all this stuff together and then
if there's some enough momentum from
them then enough developers or funding
could break it out into its own tool and
that's one potential path yeah I'm a
little bit concerned like for example
and reddit if we go there and just ask
people to contribute there that it will
still be so different that the effect
that the positive effect of our I think
about it might be gone like for example
that extra click on that Google document
instead maybe just one
click too much to actually quickly see
that thing because a lot of what what in
the end at least will influence how much
participation we get how good it will
work is also really how convenient it
will be for people to do things so that
is one thing the other thing is the like
voting and will for example will we then
see this are that popular person you
know we all know um let's say it's a
trodden Hall or so would come into that
one and then we all know him and we kind
of let's just vote for his idea because
you know he's clever something like that
so I am I really like I would really
like to do that um to as you said to
just set something up and read it and
then have that Google Talk and try it um
but how do you see those those kind of
factors that are just sets well how much
of a problem is that yeah I mean I I
don't think it's that big of a problem
anytime you're you're starting with kind
of an MVP or something it's understood
that there's gonna be added friction and
you're only going to get you know early
adopters and people that are willing to
go through an actual work but I think
also if you can't find anyone that's
willing to go through those extra clicks
then that's kind of a proof point for
the idea so yeah so it wouldn't reach
mass market potential but what you're
trying to do is get a test so I think if
you can then get a hundred people that
are willing to do the extra clicks then
I mean you could automate it some more
tor maybe you'd have an automated app
that would read this read the latest
Google Doc and post it on the screen
itself and then just have like an edit
button that would be the link to the doc
you know you could slowly iterate it and
then eventually take it out but I think
I think there should if an idea
is gonna work it has to be compelling
enough that there will be some diehard
people that are willing to do the extra
work now Jubilee is is an example of
someone who is more verbal than audio so
having a text-based system would kind of
bias against those people but although
if we combine this with the with the
scheduler that we've talked about it's
where people could then easily schedule
online you know things then you know a
person that's good in both those areas
that's also good a documentation would
be the person from that group that would
go and update it so it kind of combined
both those ideas but yeah I think
there's I think there's gonna be
friction but if an idea doesn't survive
through some friction it's probably not
going to survive I think also when you
have a system like that the subreddit is
built for problem solving then people
are also generating those problems and
solving them right like like I don't
want Jordan Hall to have more say than
anybody else and so how do we have and
that becomes part of the conversation of
when we create our own platform that we
have the anonymity to it right that you
don't know how many people have voted
for maybe you don't know who said it but
they're generated from the community so
there's you don't have to sell it to
them like it's it's already like hey we
don't want someone with more eyes to
actually get more power or how do we
minimize this effect and you're you're
looking to the system to solve the
system which in and of itself is
empowering I can also find a lot of like
the real-world examples of what kind of
content you're seeing like how do you
want to handle it if two people submit a
similar problem or a very similar idea
and how do you want to correlate those
two on Reddit you just start off with
right which one has the most votes you
start to see what the community will
actually do we'll probably have like
comment chains chart to reference each
other and start to get an idea of how
things need to be connected I was
so envisioning something along with a
subreddit where there is a process of
you first let's say how the community
submit problems and then you vote on
which problems the biggest problem that
week and then ueb you're focusing on
solving giving solutions to that one
like where it's a little more structured
your first having like monday we vote on
which project is or which problem is the
biggest problem then we should also
tackle on a sub run it right and then
have people submit their solution and
then we vote on on that piece because
there's already gonna be not a big
community doing this having 17 different
problems going often and
cross-referencing will be dissipating
that energy but maybe that's part of
what we want to play with I don't know
sort of like put an upper limit on how
much of this extra work involved because
if there's no system in place it sounds
like it's going to be Jonas doing it for
at least the first couple trying to keep
a limit so there's not 10,000 ideas to
yeah okay so what one thing that I was
also I am always a bit concerned about
is the the uptake and so for example if
we talk about doing this test project
now on reddit like is there even a
problem that those four among stars or
that we would want to tackle and this
like that we would want to vote on I I
feel like it's quite difficult to find
something that people they I invested if
it's either something that affects them
directly is something more local or if
if it's something global climate change
whatever if there are many people
involved like for us for it doesn't
necessarily make a lot of sense to you
know to vote on okay go
let's let's make flying more expensive
because we cut so so we're not going to
start tackling that that problem even
and then it also doesn't make sense to
talk about a local issue of growing
tomatoes or not because we are all in
completely different areas we have
completely different problems so is
there a I'm struggling with this of
finding this kind of my idea will work
with a lot of people but how to get
there and how I somehow I struggle with
seeing it working in even a X you know
trial where you're so in a small I mean
I think you just started to build the
framework with like okay it can't be too
local it can't be too big is gonna be
this set the framework and then just
that's your first test of the community
is hey within this framework what ideas
do you as the people of a reddit want to
see and then you've got the up votes and
then you can start you know moderate and
say oh that climate change is
interesting maybe a bit big for right
now I don't want to you know manually
moderate a hundred thousand comments so
maybe not climate change yet but you
know what else I mean as you start to
get ideas oh if somebody you know it
might be very regional but as long as
it's sort of a smaller one it doesn't
have to be perfect but it just has to
exist and then you can start okay the
first one where that one wasn't very
good how can I ask it differently how
can I do it differently how could I
improve on the previous one I also think
you can you can break it like if your
climate change is what we want to tackle
we can also look at what are the things
that needs to be right we don't have
power I making laws of other people's
rare traveling but we could choose our
own air travel right so we could have
some power in air travel just on on
other people's choices so it's breaking
down where is our power what kind of
problem do we want to tackle that like
individuals have a saying and like that
is you
I mean like the first problem it's like
what are the components we need in a
problem yeah I think if yet expand on I
think if you phrase the question is what
can we this community do to combat or to
improve this problem then you can take
the biggest issues you're just narrowing
it down more by our scope and then also
keeps people from just sitting there and
kind of intellectually spinning our
wheels talking about things we can't
accomplish yeah yeah that there are also
some issues that some it are actually
feasible and it affect us all like in
online for example creating this this
kind of platform also would be something
that people might be voting on as oh
yeah I think that a lot of it could be
the metal work on the platform we're
down to our last minute theoretically I
have to keep it close to an hour because
of my stream yard yeah thank you that I
think that's that actually help I think
it's I might instead of trying to
develop that thing from scratch now I
might focus a little bit more on yeah
trying to set up something on Reddit
trying to UM figure out how to use that
Delta system something seminar sounds
sounds like I could approach all right
awesome thank you YouTube for hanging
out see ya
yep next week is the brainstorming
brainstorming part two