Alexander burn your books I like I like
putting them in front of the screen I'm
half way through this one hey you go
yeah
Cinthia ISM and we were gonna talk today
about Tantra whatever the hell that is
why don't you define counter first oh
and then you do the questions yeah
exactly exactly what those needs
understood this beautiful concept
exactly so there's there's a kind of
etymology that has to do with weaving
sewing together that's part of the the
animala G and also stretching I noticed
when I was looking into it
it means generally a technique or
practice but and it's normally
associated with with sex in the West but
that's actually something more like neo
Tantra because yeah it could be all
kinds of practices right it has much
it's not specifically related to fucking
let's say more about our Western
obsession with sexuality the dust about
original Tantra doesn't it exactly so so
the Western the Western obsession is
with sort of opening this serpent power
Kundalini Shakti or whatever the hell
you know there's it has it's such an
elastic term and it's such an abused
term and it's such a it seems to be it
seems to me to have taken on almost a
demonic quality in the West we in the
West are so obsessed with instant
gratification yeah that we thought of
tons of the way we think of everything
else in the West which is essentially
we're gonna colonize am I gonna
appropriate and then we're gonna extract
instant value or whatever we find yeah
called an exploitation we're an
exploitative culture where is so faster
do you think exploitation so we run into
something like tundra and long huge rich
traditional thinking from the east and a
practice and and then we think the
Tantra is just gonna be another short
route to our desires so yeah first a
fast route to enlightenment which is
really what you and I are people and and
and leads people to as you say it's
exploitation in
sense of wine you exploit that the
body's natural power and the mate maybe
in the way you white mine for uranium or
something you know is that exactly
again power to get you know mm-hmm right
and that is why in our first book the
netic rats which is the first book in
the futur the trilogy can we wrote what
80 80 years ago we do not have a very
important concept it's gonna catch up
with us eventually in the digital age
and we call this concept employ tation
mmm-hmm which is the opposite of
exploitation fun enough there wasn't
even a word for this what we mean with
implication is that we're gonna have to
learn that the real value in something
is actually investing in it and keeping
it as it is for as long as possible
which i think is fundamental to Tantra
so that means in our age you know the
current obsession that we don't grow up
any longer our culture is infantilized
and the whole journey from childhood to
adulthood it's gonna be hard to be
relearned it's gonna be the most
important exercise we do over the next
100 years
it's a adult defy society again well you
and I love Jordan Peterson I always
point out Jordan is greater and what
serdica is not doing in our work and we
probably you're doing your work 200 is
that we try to teach people the beauty
of adult education that we have to
become adults again and no longer state
children and this ironically means
countries the exact opposite of the way
it's been presented in the West this is
not a short route to pleasure or you
know how you get access to something you
want so bad to be you don't want to
learn it you don't want to go through
any trouble you want it now now now yeah
you know I've done a lot of Buddhist
practice I lived in a monastery for a
year I started on I started off doing
Zen and then I then I got interested in
in broad ryona there was a great deal of
intense study intense meditation a dense
practices before you could even kind of
approach Tantra right and I'm not even
sure right now that I've approached
Tantra so so I the only way I can really
you know talk about it is is let's say
with a bit of humility what I think I
think this is the thing when we think
about ourselves as children adults it's
the same thing that's exactly when you
say you never reached it or you're not
sure you really well you
but you didn't stay there and that's
exactly the point would understand what
it means to be an adult
we are always children in a way
Christianity's right we're almost
expulsion of God right so we're always
the children of our ancestors they know
better than we do that's what religion
is but you have obviously reads Tantra
precisely because you have this humility
about it but you go back to Toronto you
can stay in Toronto and then you have to
return to be non Tundra it's not a steak
you can stay in that's that's a complete
misunderstanding of Tantra we can we can
go into tundra I talk about it like when
I want to go into libidinal stayed I
probably get out of sexuality I push
that energy into my head and then I can
for example think and write and be
creative for a few weeks or so and then
I can go back into the others to stay
and I think that is fundamental to
understanding Tantra so I I agree with
you that you're not in the state of
tundra but you obviously under you you
are tantric obviously our country well
my my orientation towards the world is
is probably headed in that direction
that's how I would look at it that's
what being tantric means okay otherwise
you'd have to die to be permanently 200
oh you're alive this is what you aren't
right so the humility goes with being
tantric the humility be growing out of
this also understand you allow yourself
to be a little child knowing that
because the child inside of you will
always papa that you take on the role or
pretending you're a grown up and that is
the beginning of being an adult and then
your behavior will become adult that
will strengthen your self-confidence
that you can't be dull when you have to
okay so you said torture was a state
what did you mean by that
I'm relating 22 the tantric exercises we
had to create a whole new philosopher
for this for the West and what I do it
for example when I use the word employ
tation I do it to teach Westerners with
Tonto really is so we invent new
vocabulary that makes sense to us
implication obviously being a Latin word
in in quotations besides instead of
exploiting the situation when the
situation is in front of you which you
train to do with Western sexualities
like if I get a chance to fuck this and
I get in okay I'll fuck it now and I'll
come as quickly as possible and from
this we learn
that everything we do in our lives we
will have a higher value if it can't be
country this starts with farming
it starts with agriculture I mean what
will be the first thing you teach
somebody when you finally have access to
so much knowledge and information
because you can store knowledge of
information outside of your own brain
you can write it down the first thing we
did we could write we invented written
language and Mesopotamia was that we
started to making Diaries or collections
of grain so that we can learn that
instead of eating the screen right now
starve a bit plant the grain in the
earth and within six months you're gonna
harvest there's gonna be way bigger than
anything you could have picked up by
walking around as a nomad for years and
suddenly instead of spending you know
three hours in the morning to get a few
grains you just have the grain right in
front of you you can have a larger
population or we can therefore create a
civilization so this insight is that
basically you teach the kid that okay if
you don't eat this now he's invested in
the future you'll get ten times more
that is essentially what Tantra is
Tantra analogy to farming that's exactly
so so by employing the value now it's
all about the time axis it's why it's
important thing in religion to
understand the value of time um if
you're best now you're gonna get 10
times more in the future
meaning that contraception says that if
you don't come now if you don't get the
organ or something little death now if
you keep that in you learn from
sexuality that oh my mind will go WOW
and I will be much more productive and
much more creative in my life and we can
apply this to everything we learn this
we just push the sexuality into our
heads instead and we get libidinal
energy which motivates us to do amazing
things this is our Titanic
into the history of civilization it's
just it's it's the Indian whatever it's
it's a term used in the East for
practices to teach people to be this of
course you teach the children to be
adults but you then teach the adults
among those adults who want to teach
them how to be spiritual this exactly
the exercise of priests and monks nuns
who then practice Tantra to perfection
mm-hmm go back to your story okay what
do you exam for example uh yeah a lot of
meditation in a rinse eye tradition I
mean a lot is very relative because some
people spend you know a third of their
life sitting in zazen but but uh you
know III spent my 20s doing Zen retreats
and but I also I was also very
interested in in the the writings of
ch√∂gyam Troopa and I and I read sort of
all of his stuff and loving got me very
interested in I guess the the magical
aspect of spiritual I would call it
magic not in this sense of the search
for exalted experiences but but the
exultation of ordinary life so to speak
yeah it is it is libido libido you get
more little into your life into your
current life you can only you can only
understand certain things once you know
and other things before that that's
exactly how education works is right you
you you apply the education to where
you're at right now and then when you
learn an ass you learn you're ready to
take on more knowledge and if you jump
the queue too quickly you will not
understand a thing you completely
misunderstand it and actually education
become destructive mm-hmm I mean it's
the if you look at life that way it is
you go from child to dog and you go from
a dolls into the divine and actually the
divine is when you die right so so the
this journey means that there's a lot of
knowledge along the way you will learn
that you will not get it and of course
this is what you discover when you turn
50 or so you discovered that oh yeah I
read this when I was 30 I didn't get it
now I finally can understand it so
so this is essential I think the
technologies that you can only apply the
knowledge to the level where you're at
otherwise you don't get it you don't get
it and actually the misunderstandings
can be very destructive incredibly
destructive so you know ultimately I
would say that the biggest mistakes of
human history her always who allowed a
little boys and girls to play gods so we
could say that tundra has great
potential for what's called in the
Buddhist tradition Rudra
which means embodying the ego completely
no becoming fully evil in some sense
have you go beyond good and even I would
say you would understand how things
actually work
this is exactly why I'm so interesting
dongjun and then because Dobson is
saying we actually Buddhism to these
these these sort of titles these sort of
boxing in a religion actually only
occurred in the 19th century with the
Western right to the east and Westerners
decided to you know punch them in and
call it Hinduism and Buddhism and they
allow the Chinese that Taoist and and
Confucianism and suddenly they have
these four titles and it could throw
them on things when a seed option is dog
sure then is then Shawn in China Shawn
you don't actually Buddhism to any of
them because they're actually mixes and
what I mean interests induction is
because it is the mixture of the person
and the Indian the person here being
Zoroastrianism and the Indian Buddhism
and any six actly when you meet when you
when you when you mix this or a certain
tradition which is very phallic and you
mix the Buddhist tradition was very very
magical I'm going mix the two you
actually get dogs and
the underrated period in the east the
Golden Age this was the curstyn Empire
the course name part briefly for a
couple of hundred years unified northern
India and Iran it's really hard to unify
in Iran geographically because you've
got a huge mountain range in between
called the Hindu Kush which makes the
ops very small by a comparison and yeah
that's exactly why that rarely happened
but it did have for couple hundred years
and briefly saw Aston ISM and Buddhism
were both state religions of the
Christian Empire and this is funny both
stated
in peace there's not a single recorded
conflict between the two probably
because they match each other perfectly
so you would go into a motive well we
can practice or a students in here we
could practice Buddhism here because
what is phallic there are that's
practical they're actually together
tribal they're actually makes sense for
society as a whole
and I've never seen a conflict between
the two if you go for example the
Afghanistan but the Taliban's tried
really hard to tear down the Buddhist
statues mm-hmm that is simply because
the original religion of Afghanistan
long before Islam arrived was to mix in
between Zoroastrianism and Buddhism
because Afghanistan obviously is the
culture with Iranian Dean you meet
mm-hmm that's exactly what they're
interesting about all things them
repeated when you get to China because
Taoism is the unification of the phallic
and the magical they call the danyoung
that's exactly what taoist miss the
chinese tried to practice that under one
roof is one religion which also makes
sense universes or a stone or a buddhist
you might as well be taoist then you see
the full picture but then also in China
they developed the Shan practices they
did not start in India then did not
originate in Indian and went from India
to China to Japan because there's no
direct connection between India and
China besides a few really brave Tibetan
monks I thought Bodhidharma came from
for India too
no no that's just very tough okay okay
again learn from Aristotle to always
check both sides of the coin before you
buy into any story the Buddha Dharma
mythology in China that he was an Indian
prince arrived in China we just look at
the paintings that was done about at
harm I know engine looks like that he's
got these boskie big I'm always right
bearded well he looks like an Iranian he
doesn't look like an India doesn't okay
oh did I harm you if you go to India
which you should you discovered it's not
a single day supported harm anyway you
know there wasn't a boy at Harmon
endeavor so he obviously wasn't not only
not Indian he was certainly not india
prince so then you go to central asia
and you discover the board enormous
origin east and sogdia saga is a Persian
Kingdom and Central Asia along the Silk
Route 400 Harma was a trader
and because the monks taught the
warriors to be traders historically you
could also us a trader become a monk
that's a sack of avoided harm as he was
a sogged and trader routing Seon in
China which was the world's largest city
at the time and the Chinese connection
to the Silk Road and eventually then he
established Shan his teachings in China
and he never declared it was Buddhism he
probably applied Buddhism to it or was
applied later because to add some
credibility to it the way you hide
something the way you tell the story
well this hasn't like a golden origin
from somewhere and because that's a
golden origin somewhere then because
we're valuable I mean Moses never lived
in Egypt and the Hebrews never left
Egypt for the promised land but to make
the promised land which existed the
nation of Israel more credible of course
their origin was in Egypt because Egypt
of the world so that's why you created
that mythology then if you go to Egypt
and check historical records you don't
see single trace of Moses anywhere in
Egyptian history
it was obviously made up but still the
mythology the value we thought is there
so boded Hamas is origin in sogdia and
from Central Asia
it takes a Zoroastrian teachings
wouldn't India mixes them with the
Buddhism there's already there and
certainly with the Taoism and creates
the charm tradition which is essentially
the tantric version of Buddhism mm-hmm
that Dan moves on to Korea and I've been
shown to Japan in the government son and
you discover it when you go to Japan and
you walk into one of these beautiful zen
rock gardens by the way I'm terrible
it's awesome - I do walking meditation
Zen is that actually most meditations on
walking not sitting and I think
Westerners shouldn't walk around and
said so I do walking meditation when I
practice that but when you look into the
sand rock gardens of Japan you discover
that almost identical to the sorest and
fire temples if you're finding Iran in a
super job minimalism you got the rock
garden you got a symmetric rock put
inside the garden and you focus on the s
symmetries because the spiritual isn't a
symmetric saying with it with this
Reston's in iran you put fire at the
center the fire is always alive because
of live it adds an isometric element to
the rest of the symmetry of the room
everything is white you've got the all
touch bottom which is a sacred fire at
the center of the room and you can sit
there and meditate and meditate to
meditate for hours it's an environment
created for intense deep meditation
so asterism and zen are essentially the
same thing mm-hmm
well interesting the Vajra honor
tradition is much more let's say
colorful or explosively Baroque well
that comes from Hinduism as well so
there you go right yeah that probably
comes from Hinduism yeah yeah it comes
from a distant ISM is metrical as is
Buddhism and that comes out of India I
mean if you want to study the strength
of man Turkey and started this thing
strength of magical storytelling you can
go to India to do that because the
Indian landscape Foster's it because
permanent settlements the dream about
the permanent settlement the ultimate
female fantasy that we don't have to
walk in a longer we no longer have to be
nomads the Oasis has arrived in Louisa's
can support itself so he can stay at the
races
now that was first realized in India
they're giving me an insight into let's
say let's say what you called
patriarchal and match your uncle's
storytelling but also just the male
principle and the female principle in
general right and that's not sort of
what I think Tantra is about right it's
about the dynamics between them
absolutely the Fowley kinematical
absolutely the balancing of the two this
is Jenny young and dorsum and we Tantra
you practice that all the way and the
beauty when you study the East Asia or
South Asia and you study where these
ideas were developed fully and really
woman golden you discovered that the
landscape itself provided that because
it's in the river valleys of China and
India where he created the huge
permanent settlements and agriculture
blossoms but he wasn't amount in his
areas like Tibetan Iran will you develop
the other stories so that's exactly why
I always think now when you study the
East and learn
you should study as what I call the Silk
Road triad and an excluded Hinduism from
the formula that means the Silk Road try
these Westerners and Buddhism and Daoism
and their relationship between the three
and now they actually crossbreed all
over the you know over the centers they
cross way there are no conflicts in
between them and that's exactly meant
traders who were either Taoist or
Buddhist as Austin met there were no
conflicts in between they're just the
highest respect that's exactly why the
Silk Road worked as wonderfully as it
did and why there wasn't a single case
of warfare among the people who traded
along the Silk Road and with the Silk
Road eventually fell apart it was
because of two external threats that
were not involved in the trade the
Mongol invasion and the epidemics and
the epidemics of course this is what we
need to learn to mr. travelled
frequently and wildly along the Silk
Road like they do today when we fly from
one country to the next that's a threat
of intense international traveling today
and also the Mongol invasions like an
external threat that doesn't understand
the system the Mongol invasion were
nomads there were no minutes and how the
hell could they understand the culture
of chained permanent settlements that
traded with each other it wouldn't
understand that
and because they were sitting on
horseback they could just slaughter
people without understanding what it was
until finally the Chinese tamed the
Mongols turned him into their own
Emperor's gave them China basically to
domesticate them so they could include
them in civilization hmm the Mongol
invasion is the ultimate example
throughout history of children playing
gods without even owning ratably
destructive incredibly destructive you
know it's just it's just they would
surround cities along the Silk Road that
had over million citizens I mean along
the Silk Road was so prospered that
six out of the seven biggest cities in
the world in the thirteenth century were
along the Silk Road including the two
biggest which were the end of the Silk
Road Xian and Cairo see onyx are not
currently with a two biggest cities in
the world
the biggest city in China the biggest
set of the Middle East way bigger than
anything you found in Europe right so
these these were the ends of the Silk
Road no longer Silk Road for example is
say like Merv in current Turkmenistan
that probably had a population about 1.2
million people this is in the mid 1200
isn't it well Honda's what Europe was in
the dark ages or whatever Merve had 1.2
million people and we surrounded me
three or four days the Mongols slaughter
everybody in the city in less than a few
days right mm-hmm that is exactly what
we need to learn from history is that
when did when the boys to play gods the
Mongols not knowing there were boys who
played gods they were so high on their
power on the on the weaponry on sitting
on these horse backs being able to score
two that gave me people so quickly
basically interpreting the citizens of
Mervis idiots from mostly women and
children to begin with
they just started them they just started
they found a racing to do not just did
not and this is what we have to learn
from history so back to todrick yeah I
have something can I just say something
something you you wrote you said Tantra
as the ultimate exercise in moving from
child to adults yes that's the way she
which is the exact opposite of taking a
course and how to improve your sex life
to get more out of life
this is not about you exploiting your
resources it's not about you exploiting
other people this is a very very
childish understanding of what sexuality
should be so adult sexuality is very
much about serving the other yea and
serving the other by not coming for
example it's just it's just the not
coming part it's actually a minor but
it's despair to remind us that if we
don't behave like children but actually
behave as adults the rewards we get are
so rich and so beautiful that is really
worth learning that exercise mm-hmm
so why you say it's minor it is minor
but it's very off we have to talk to us
our people and describe these things you
just have to go to their everyday life
you have to connect somewhere and since
they understand that coming too quickly
for example or you know especially for
men men discover that they
their sex life is gonna be about three
minutes episodes yeah it's the
gratification women at least understand
cuz it takes them a while to get started
and once they get started they want to
stay on for quite a while so the guys
discover that women leave me they get
tired of me because I basically exploit
them maybe I should learn to employed
sexy women instead meaning that if you
can learn at least have sex for an hour
or so the way in are way more likely to
be placed with you and stay so it's very
often the guy that thinks that he has to
learn how sex more the way women want it
to be because then he'll get more out of
it but it doesn't understand that he's
just taking a very boyish attitude to
his male genital organs the boyish
attitude might be like trying to please
the mother you mean somewhat no no well
no no actually I think I'm making mother
happy hmm
you actually kick-start the urge to make
the woman pleased so it is precisely by
by the desire from the boy when he's a
boy to making mother happy I started my
time teaching us oh you tried to make
mother happy you were a boy didn't you
and if your mother was happy for you you
made her laugh all the time you already
have people I want you that's kind of a
training exercise for you as a man to
make the woman pleased because of the
woman is pleased you've done your job
and she will stay with you and she'll
give birth your children and how the
woman of your life so you have to learn
these things so rather it is the getting
the grown-up man away from the boys
desire for instant gratification because
the child says I want it and I want it
now
and the reason why the child does that
he said we spoiled with that the first
year of life with a tit
it's been our work we call these the
mammal oh yeah the Mamula the first year
of life is that your mother's tit is
constantly there for you so whenever you
scream she'll give it to you you know
this is where instant gratification has
to work the first year of your life but
after your turn one year old and you get
away from the tit the phonic intrusion
happens and and you want to go towards
the phallic and you get this desire
sorry you wanna be grown
one day you started imitate your parents
or to imitate the grown-ups and yeah
this is sorry yeah I want to be grown-up
one day that is childhood but then
already you make the first move away
from instant gratification and you then
have to learn as it's up
no you're not gonna get everything
exactly when you want you can't just
stand there and scream and you got it
mm-hmm
that's exactly why the welfare state is
so you know destructive for society
that's exactly why the whole idea
universal basic income today's
incredibly destructive because it gives
you this kind of cosmic tip to suck on
exactly don't need is that we need
Tantra right we need that we don't need
the credits it's and Tantra isn't into
instant isn't more and more and more
well it is pleasure but it's also
stepping back from pleasure and and not
trying to grab it or allowing it to sort
of become a bigger wave or something
like that
yeah the word for that is libido and the
libido means that for example when it
works today I'm gonna study our sisters
new books today and I'm gonna study some
stuff over here got some Tim Burton
stuff to study today and I get pleasure
of starting this today working on this I
get pleasure having a conversation with
Andrew and soon I do things that I enjoy
I wake up in the morning I follow my own
lust and passion but I've been tamed the
loss and the passion into thinking okay
how can I keep this going for 10 hours
how can I enjoy my work today for 10
hours Rob just for 30 minutes
mm-hm and I do that precisely by not
trying to exploit the pleasure per hour
to even it out and employed it so I can
stay for 10 hours
Steve practices and everything you do
your entire life practicing when you
wake up in the morning how can I find
lost and pasture to begin with which is
finding the limit oh yeah okay start
from there and then keep the limit or
going or at home that's a full bodied
libido rather than a genitally obsessed
libido hey yeah you take the energy if
you like to call it and you take the
limit Oh from your cock or from your
pussy from the genital area
and he just basically move it up into
your head and you get exactly the same
thing you get a heightened sense of
awareness and a heightened sense of
existence and that is the definition of
Liberto that within either wants to live
now - - Sigmund Freud the fundamental
drive is Monte know which is you know
they drive within us the wants organic
to become inorganic that wants us to die
around it and I'm gonna I'm gonna do the
more work on this I find incredibly
interesting what we call the dialectics
between the video and material so we
want to sustain the live it up while
they are alive mm-hmm that's why I'm not
a Buddhist in the sense that I don't
want to reach that state of non desire
well I'm alive work on it because as a
Zoroastrian I believe I'm gonna get it
anyway and I get it the day I die and
like men to rise today I die
you know perfection arise today you die
because you're firmly perfected the day
you die your life history is then
complete and it's it's it stays as
memory in the universe for the rest of
existence you're gone but everything you
did your entire life is according to
quantum information theory stock in the
universe once data are perfect or your
whole that is enlightenment so you
you've accomplished your life your life
has been full you lived your life no
matter how long or short it was you've
lived your life and it's over okay while
you are alive well while your body wakes
up in the morning your heart beats and
your brain starts thinking you know
those things and your cock gets hard now
and then that is being alive and that is
what's called libido and why we chose to
title did is a limiter for the book it
says it it's Lib adore in the digital
age now how are we gonna tame tantric
retain domesticate this libanon force
today meaning it's essentially a book on
solar Phoenix so how do you live a life
as a book on what or what sword used so
edits and it's integral principles
applied ethics okay so that that is what
that is would Tom Tracy it is a very
pivotal or very personal journey towards
controlling your desires bring them into
your mind into your senses a little
fully alive and follow your lust and
passion yeah so you're talking about the
energy moving up yeah it also has to go
down to right though people people I
think have have you know brain damage
from bringing everything to to too much
up and not not being grounded yeah
exactly when I do men's work I tell the
guys is very simple you got a dick in
your head and you hopefully have a dick
between your legs
okay some guys that got cut
self-confidence the big between the legs
okay great then they really want to be
seen as more intelligent than they think
they are video very often are so you
just basically take that energy upwards
and you're moving into their mind and
you look at their everyday life and
that's where they have their problems so
they go chasing girls all the time they
go then
club several times a week they take too
much products to drink too much alcohol
and the lies are getting pretty
destructive because I started getting
older they kept maintain this lifestyle
and beginning to a personal crisis it's
just because you're still stuck with the
dick between your leg all the time we're
gonna we gotta move that Libba dough of
yours up into your mind you've got to
learn how to live in your mind so that
your everyday life becomes more
meaningful and you can stop chasing the
girls and you can stop the drinking you
can stop doing the drugs and actually
have lost them passion in your everyday
life that is tantric okay the other way
around all subsist a lot of guys come
through the door too much in their heads
yeah
and they basically see themselves as a
be people meaning that they got a which
it's above the throat right did they got
B beneath the throat which they I've
gone degenerate about so be very often
away problems they don't exercise enough
they don't take care of themselves they
eat the wrong things and they just try
to forget there's anything beneath here
beneath the mat right so you see that
you see that in their behavior and just
okay we're gonna put you through some
easy exercise you're gonna learn to care
yourself you're gonna start eating the
right things or actually gonna teach
your actions be more sexual than you
been so he can take on the entire body
because as a human being your body your
mind and and of course to live a full
life you're gonna have a full-on body in
a full-on mind and that is exactly what
you learn in Tantra at least in real
Tantra so I mean perhaps it might be
useful to talk about what is not real
Tantra because this seems to be a lot of
the Osho had this thing called neo
Tantra and you thought that Western
people were very very repressed right
and we just perhaps true and that they
needed all of these sexual and somatic
techniques and and he called that neo
Tantra because he said it wasn't the
real Tantra so well it's I I like also
he's very useful we can't stop just
reading or throw and then discover the
whole thing because he as many
philosophers do there
commentary on the time within which they
live and this of course for the West
experimental wildly in the 1960s with
sexual liberation and Oscar came onto
the scene he was a very clever guy in
ending guy who figured out where
American Europe were heading and he
could just tap into that but obviously
the problem with the entire Austral
called was that it was a very infantile
very name that's exactly right for the
part I was with the problem that wasn't
what was the problem is it just promised
all the kids you can get everything you
want essentially also became the great
tit again what it didn't realize or at
least what it did is that he basically
promised you could get all this sexual
fulfillment and the spiritual awakened
like if you were you know the adult of
all the adults and he promised it for
instant gratification yeah which is not
the way it works
that's exacta boss who did not take on
in India even when also moved and left
America and he moved eventually to to
India and set up shop there and pruning
they still go through there that's the
Westerners all go there and they buy
into a very touristy version of
spiritual India which really the Indians
don't care too much about daddy so
should speak volumes about ways look at
it now I've got lots of friends who
don't know so enormously I'm hi raffia
Morgan in the UK is one of my dearest
friends he's he's a great spiritual
teacher but he's also criminal also
obviously on the other side and learn
more and and understands there's more to
it but our show was so popular with
young Westerners especially in America
because essentially promised them
spiritual enlightenment and sexual
satisfaction yeah instantly yeah and
that's why that's where that community
became so dark I guess right yes yeah
and also was in the 8th he pulled in the
Psychopaths and the sociopaths in jizan
cult and that's exactly why I fell apart
I mean if you check the story of also
for example in Oregon where they set up
their community they did not at all
communicate with us around
world and become friends with the local
community there were enemies it was more
of a civil war in Oregon while they were
still yeah that speaks volumes to be
about the infertility of the
organization so an infant I
organizations like say the German Nazi
Party yeah you're gonna have the boys
and girls to think that God's running
the show
oh yeah that's exactly what happened
gosh oh thank God they didn't have an
atomic bomb because they're probably
Brona of America time when that happened
watch out for the sects and cults
because the sects and cults Louis
promise you you can get spiritually
enlightened and because you get
spiritual light you can sleep with
anybody you want and you could do it
instantly when in reality spirit
enlightenment is removing yourself from
sleeping with anybody you want or having
sex all the time or coming all the time
and having instant gratification from
your own body mm-hmm it's the opposite
coming too quickly yes no we need to get
away from that I think what is happening
now and Jordan Peterson certainly helped
open the door come to Pablo's done it
for years is that we were learning now
that we have to stop being infantile and
and and it's crushing because we thought
the digital itself when it arrived in
1990s in a big way would give us
everything we wanted instantly but then
we discovered we all become
exhibitionists role looking for the
father case to look at us and tell us
how good we were you know we're all
screaming I mean the internet eventually
became or still is today
it's just one huge Cuckoo's Nest of
seven billion people screaming at the
top of the lungs for attention when
attention is the highest value because
nobody so in a way the dark side of the
Internet is like the ocean cult in a way
that makes me yeah Jorge draw the
connection between the two right right a
little bit always say that we saw the
Didache saw was like the perfect father
who always looked at us and always
giving us attention for any little
mediocre thing we did it serve
when you look at these Instagram
accounts today they're all like six year
olds it just made a tiny little painting
and held it up to us and think we're all
gonna say oh you're damn because - yeah
but the hard-learned lesson is that the
six-year-old shows that picture to his
mother right and the mother then with
her motherly love because she has the
table - oh that's a good reader and you
think you're because all right and then
what's lacking is the father case the
family case tells you what you did that
in two seconds bidding you you're not
lying down because - because you made a
drawing in two seconds if you have any
kind of talent any pecans anything close
to the Casa Monday to begin with you got
to work for 100 hours yeah then you have
to learn all the classical techniques
before you can take take them apart
right I mean acts so the real digital's
that will hit us probably now beginning
in the 2020s it's gonna be awfully hard
lesson of suddenly being confronted with
memory because digital is that
everything is memorized meaning
everything is there the fact check will
be enormous and it's not really phallic
it really is the real magic we're
talking about here the ultimate shit
test of humanity of the oldest woman in
the tribe it's like the oldest woman
that I will now step up to us and say
everything is to be memorized a wall of
facts will hit us hmm
you can't get away we both shit any
longer can you explain that in a bit
more depth I'm not sure I get it
that's what the technology really is
because we always project our little
childhood fantasies got anything new
that happens to us and that's exactly
what the internet did to us and even
Silicon Valley fell for it Silicon
Valley also very infantile fantasy of
what digital is and people that Mark
Stallman in New York and me and
Stockholm and a few other thinkers out
there who've actually studied you know
down the deep studies and know what the
ancients told us and can realize that
this is probably one huge
misunderstanding and just a childish
hope
gratification that's exactly what got
myspace but myspace failed now shouldn't
you've asked yourself already back then
when myspace failed because then you
learned a lesson a wife Facebook is
failing us now
Oh Instagram is gonna fail us next
except we don't learn the lesson do we
because there's no content is that
there's no why did myspace fill what I
used to work in the music industry
before my space suit us in the 99 and I
knew the sack of MySpace was it's like
all these crappy mediocre demo tapes
that were sent to the record company
that would put in a potato sack at the
end of the office cuz we hated that much
suddenly all these guys instead of these
demo tapes got access to a new medium
where they put all this shit out there
yeah and of course they expected to be
discovered they were longing for the
phallic gaze to walk in through the door
until oh you've been discovered you are
so amazing you're so talented the whole
world must hear your music and you know
what you did this music in three minutes
whoa you must be Mozart right and all
this shit was put out there and then
because nobody wanted to listen to it
people pretended they were listening to
it it's very American this whole
attitude knows that I scratch your back
then you scratch mine meaning that I
pretend that I spend time listening to
your shit music so you pretend you're
listening to my shit music so we can
fool the third person who's named Jackie
listen to our shit music and you knew it
in my space the moment people started
writing thank you for the ad what the
fuck to stop me thank you for the ad
why would I thank you for my ID because
if I had you Andrew I'm adding you in a
social media platform to tell the third
person that you and I know each other
why would you send me for that oh you
would only sit back before that if you
didn't know me and you pretended you
knew me because you're gonna fool the
third person through our marketing that
we actually listen to each other's shit
yeah this is the entire internet today
well that's bull that's what who is this
philosopher wrote the book caught on
bullshit oh is Harry something over
there it's just bullshit right
that was bullshit and what a child shows
that little painting they made in two
minutes to you you basically you don't
tell the child that is bullshit but if
you're the good father he told him so
you know what if you spent 10 minutes on
the next drawing instead of three
minutes you probably better right yeah
so this is again that is what countries
this is again yeah that might be Tantra
but that's also that's also the critical
aspect of our minds enough of the
masculine which is so taboo and a
narcissistic American Society is that
you can be critical about everything you
have to be nice to everybody it's like
but in this very fake sort of way you
can that's what I guess what Geoghan
shrimp are called idiot compassion you
know yeah Americans do not have friends
Americans have acquaintances that's what
the Facebook friend he's at best an
acquaintance and very often he turns out
it's fake acquaintance see he's got
nothing do with friendship and it's very
very childish fantasies like you long
for the family case you long for the
father to see you with this Stern but
loving eyes meaning you long for the
fact you long for someone to first look
at reality and then look back at you and
we look back at you they can judge you
according to reality you long for the
father case but you don't want the
father right yeah was he scary no you
cannot separate the father from the
family case you cannot separate the
fellows from the father case that's
exactly what we don't even call it
absent father syndrome in at work
because then you think did not too many
they're not enough father
no because the fathers are only the
father's yeah well turn to deities for
example are always represented as
wrathful and one and also you know
benevolent and beautiful and kind and
there's always a there's always both
sides to that there's there's let's say
there's the the you know that the the
generous compassion and loving gaze and
then there's the the fierce grassle gaze
which you know destroys what needs to be
destroyed I mean because yeah because
it's garbage you know
because that we called in a magical gas
and we called metallic case and the
magical place is hopefully the first
thing that needs you when you're born
you just went through the biggest trauma
we ever gonna go through that's its
ocular you can't remem you birth but
thankfully when you get out you see the
wife the midwife space is usually a
grandmother like it's not your mother
it's the mother of your mother then you
learn wisdom for the first time so the
mother of your mother
the Midwife meets you with her gaze and
that is the smile of the beautiful smile
of an older woman who looks at you so
welcome to the world you're born right
that piece gives you unrequited love it
gives you unconditional love it gives
you love beyond love
okay you need that as a star then
introduces you to the Manila see them
brings you to the mother stick you can
suck the milk and for the first during
the first year of life is absolutely
essential but after because you're not
really vulnerable at that point you're
exactly your absolute total
vulnerability right and the mother the
mother's body the whole body of the
matter the ones really focus on your
screen you get what you want he is going
you get what you want this is for
instant gratification loss but once you
turn one year old and the phallic
intrusion has happened the grown-up
world is enter your world literally your
father's penis the mother looks at and
he has something you don't have that
kick starts the whole journey during
childhood towards adulthood and that is
in the tumbling starts so the question
that is what is it that follows has that
I don't have and he's always the same
answer tundra so it's the same answer
dad can control himself and because he
can control himself he gets mother
mother can control herself in front of
father oh that's how it works because
she could control herself in front of
him and he can control himself in front
of her he goes up and he gets the
deliveries done and because he gets the
deliveries done she can eat because she
can eat she gave me the milk then you
learn how things work you learn the
interdependencies between human beings
and the child is fascinated with this
the fairy tales would tell the children
are all about how this injured
these are both enormous ly productive
and very dangerous if they're
misunderstood this is the this is the
lesson the child has to learn and that's
exactly what childhood is so long it
goes all the way up until teens and then
we do the teenage rebellion which is the
rebellion against tough on us because
you have to become a leak yourself
whether you're a girl who's come I'm a
woman or your boy has to become a man
you have to understand it so by all of
these starts it starts with the genitals
first
that's the teenage rebellion and it's
completed when you brought it up into
her head and that's when you do the rite
of passage did you see I read somewhere
that that adults like the brain comes
into full development at like age 23 or
something yes I thought it was much
younger that's why 22 year olds and 20
year olds are not fully there yet
no because I will be give them the when
we get what we give them at about 20 to
24 last thing the elders not prepare the
elders gives you after initiation ritual
and that if you manage the afternoon
stationary to support yourself which is
the fundament lasted being grown-up okay
you can support yourself then you're
being rewarded and you're being real
what about the others by pointing it
towards your archetype which is pointing
towards what kind of man kind of woman
or for that matter of a drawer generous
person you are so you get your specific
archetype how are you gonna serve the
community and then you're giving a
mentor an older uncle or an older arms
or something like that it points you
towards where you go is they can guide
you in that direction somebody who is
that archetype already that is the
mentorship that is the teacher you get
in the tribe after say 23 all the way
into early 30s and then you're ready for
the rituals ready for a sexuality then
you're ready to become a parent and then
you're ready to support us you're fully
grown this whole journey has to work
yeah and maybe every single part of it
has to has to be there right yeah I
think I know that personally when you
talk about that I think about this kind
of happening to me but not in a
conscious conscious way it's like all of
these processes sort of have to happen
to you yeah and they happen consciously
or they can happen through trial and
error and
you know just what where your
unconscious mind takes you does that
make any sense yes absolutely
and if the father contrition doesn't
happen that is the ultimate disaster if
you don't leave the Ted and hate the
church from that moment on if that
doesn't happen the OI to purpose
conflicts or the Elector conflicts that
doesn't happen to one year of age you
become infantilized what we point out
digital Liberto is that we talked about
in the BC epidemic in America that's not
an epidemic that's that's that is of
anything an epidemic of infantilization
every damned grown a person who dona
beasts and can't stop eating is it child
that's clear yeah mm-hmm he's in some
time just stop eating you know that's
the first thing you learn in Taunton the
first thing that happens the people
going hunters this stop being fast you
know the first thing you see see weight
loss on a dramatic scale with people who
go into Tantra the first thing to learn
is basis take care of yourself to begin
with before you even touch your genital
organs you know and in and the weight
losses that happen they just calm
automatically when you do that because
you realize that this is a journey
towards your own adulthood so if you if
you're going to turn troubling that I'm
gonna get more sex I'm gonna get laid
more you know the first thing I learned
is that no it's not about you not coming
it's about - learning to actually
control your own drives and desires and
make them serve you and then hopefully
also make them serve your sexual
partners and hopefully make them serve
the team that you work with and people
around you and eventually one day you
might even have a family because of it
mm-hmm so I guess one one definition we
could come up with for Tantra is you
know a kind of education of service
right yeah yeah hopefully you're right
there
and that's what you love when you make
love to somebody's that you don't always
thought about my pleasure it's about the
other person's pleasure it's about it's
about giving the other person pleasure
it's called which you could call it
pleasure plus I had prefer to call
enjoyment plus right it's like it's not
my enjoyment it's about it's about the
other person's enjoyment making somebody
else happy making somebody else
satisfied you know is ultimately
sexualities about that's the beauty of
it and that journey moves you into the
realm of the dog pleasure rather the
child√≠s pleasure
I want this and I want it now yeah just
like ice cream now I wanted getting your
rocks off or something like that or
necks out as the expression goes you
know