now I see red you see red is that better
it's live
sure all right welcome to Saturday
morning roundtable where we talk about
our projects we've done last week try to
give an elevator pitch without bitch
Barnett play a little game a so we can
get to game B and it's just a roll and I
this morning but we're pretty sure other
people will be joining soon so it'll do
you want to start giving your update as
to how wiki elections go inner you so
wiki election is going okay still been
working with Bentley and a douche on the
early mock-ups for its I've been working
on the draft abet yes technically the
second project kind of also counts here
which is I mean keeping sort of part of
the planning not super open but roughly
it's sort of like a patreon or a
Kickstarter for game be we announced
that to sort of in the post meet the
post set posts meeting wrap up I guess
you call it we've discussed that
yesterday and I will be drafting out
respects on that and particularly how
sort of things overlap with with the
election and how the overall design flow
will end up going and how the two things
will talk so we'll be hearing more on
that and part of the reason why that's
also happened is so that I can create a
a project on there for wiki elections so
I mean those two are quite tied if that
makes sense
all right thank you my project is
process raising and solution raising
Schlueter nazianz going fairly well I
think we're gonna stop doing it live bow
because I think there is a different
quality to doing it live versus doing it
recorded and putting it up this is the
second week we've had a processor easy
and so a conversation it's just Raymond
Eric Shiloh and I talking about
how could we come up with the process of
ten thousand people should follow and
we're still not even there like we're
still not even like understanding what
each other is trying to bring into the
conversation and so it's this beautiful
chaos that something is emerging from
but like every time we have a we have a
conversation I get more clear I'm like
oh I think what we're talkin is
governance versus process and this
versus versus that and figuring out like
I just know I'm not gonna be proven
wrong until we like until there's ten
thousand people who could work through a
project and then say yes it absolutely
Falls the partners nothing we can do
about it that the power of having ten
thousand people create something or more
or less like just a large number of
people creating something round up for
their funding it together and they're
deciding what's in it gives it the power
that it needs to actually be successful
and it's the only way I can create a
technology project anyway so so working
through that process and seeing all of
the triggers that are happening in game
B that are like in me that are
reiterating right like that other people
want other people jump on their project
I have the solution I have the solution
and we all know I also feel that way we
all feel that way but being with that
and working through how can we bring our
different ideas to the table and still
have something come out of it for
process raising as well as the
individual projects that people are
still bringing to to process raising
because for all still individuals with
our opinion and bias so the beauty of
working through that is in and of itself
valuable even if nothing comes from it
but showcase it so that is a bit of oh
and this Wednesday we're tackling
prisons which should be very interesting
because it was it happens not that
there's an always police brutality but
it happened before the charge
slight thing that I scheduled it and now
it's all okay that is gonna clearly come
into I mean you can't talk about prison
so talk
racism so I'm interesting cuz it's gonna
be one I haven't I have very little
solution for besides data and keep
holding you don't witnessing and so see
what what actually comes out about and
can we tackle something right we can't
change the entire prison system or what
could 10,000 people do to improve it for
their loved ones or their their
hypothetical loved ones that might end
up there themselves so that is what
process and solution easy look like at
the moment it was like no one has
actually joined us during this part if
they do join us they can always give us
their their update otherwise we can you
know shoot for now we know we can
no no no they're not wicked shoot the
 for an hour knowing that we're live
and like I say that recorded that was
also the the frustration with the
resource-based economy conversation
where I get lost my sovereignty a little
bit like what the your
understandings a negative seven but it
was because it was beyond that partly it
was like wait is this person trolling or
do they really don't understand how can
they protect like they're like I've
spent hours and hours but like show me
one place he said that money isn't the
thing like how could you say you've
watched Jacque fresco for five minutes
and not heard him say that money is not
the thing it's very different as I said
to add on to resource-based economy like
frenzy and common planet to and say we
understand it we don't think it's enough
we need some kind of currency to deal
with that first is like right humanity
can't deal without a currency but it's
not them it is them in the moment it was
them it was like how dare you not
understand it how do you think you
understand it but it also goes to show
you that this beautiful I think
beautiful idea of a future
resource-based economy the only reason
it's not going to be implemented I think
is because it's needs to be global and
overarching and we don't even understand
the implications before it's put into
place but it's not even though that it's
like people's lack of understanding that
even when they hear about it even when
they watch the documentary they still
don't understand it and there is a deep
flaw there because if you don't
understand it and you can't see the
beauty of that then you have people
arguing without ever coming to the same
consent
and although I'm not trying to create a
resource-based economy I'm trying to
create game be in a better world and I
think that is a resource-based economy
I'm not tied to that one there's a lot
of parallel between KBD and all of their
like if you can't understand it how do
you do it and game B has this beautiful
simplicity of that just a language but
then it's like where's the leadership
and we need to like like focus in on
what it is I'm like that's kind of
breaking what it is and although I'm one
of the people who was one way and I'm
like right it breaks it because it is
the fact that we all have I mean it's
it's not but like in solution raising
where we talk about what's currently
happening and then we give our version
of the beautiful future that we don't
have to agree on and then we take the
step not to me is kind of game be like
it's like okay so like we all agree like
we we agree there's something broke in a
book game we might not agree what it is
we have a different vision of what it
actually could be five ten no here's the
let's not go a million I'm in the future
and just taking that step forward and
coming together and forming things is
like the adjacent possible and if you
need it to be this huge everyone
switched over to resource-based economy
it's not gonna be and like to constantly
own I'll let you on one second Daniel if
you don't want if you wanna put operator
having um just allowing the whole the
whole process so so Daniel I don't know
if you have of your own project do you
want to give an update on what you've
been up to this last week would you on
these or you can uh yeah I've been
working on this social media project
I mean honestly since about this time
last year
so I mean updates I worked I a couple
things on the pitch deck there wasn't
really a lot to change and you know
based on my new experiences talking
other people so doing a little bit more
networking I got in touch with another a
business guy who he's got two small
businesses
and he's he's pretty savvy on some of
this stuff so I got in touch with him
through a friend and this guy is good to
know because he has a network of angel
investors as well that he's gonna put me
in touch with so that's that's good news
I mean the hardest part probably and
this what I ran into last year is not
having any programmers on my team which
is pretty dangerous um but you know I
gotta move forward
um bit by bit so that's my update is
just doing more networking and making
some progress there Daniel it's like
it's like I feel like I have nothing but
programmers on my project and that still
doesn't help like it's okay didn't you
want to program your own thing terribly
when they all have their own projects in
their own idea yeah
needed this to be made and it's that bad
energy also it's like okay how do we get
to that point of this thing can now be
coded and made and hire someone to do it
but like feel the pro feel ownership of
the process before and after once it's
me yeah it's no problem to pay to pay
programmers to build this thing but you
get in this never-ending loop of if
something needs fixing or or changed you
know then you're still paying and like
that's normal and that's okay but
ideally you have someone who shares the
vision who can also do the thing and
they're like yeah I love that vision I
mean the other challenge that I've been
told the biggest thing as well as is
probably advertising and marketing so
like once this gets built I would
probably do some kind of like I don't
know campaign or like I don't know
podcast tour or something try to like
get on podcast show it off talk
it get people to try it out or something
yeah you're the name for your project
Daniel ah this is a this is another the
name is not set in stone because I'm not
a marketer like I'm nervous about
putting a name on it because of the
marketing problem we got you the
placeholder name you have a placeholder
name in the mean bar code name Pluto
Pluto the planet we don't know if it's a
planet or not all right I like it
all right Mateus do you want to given an
update say morph planet just so my son
is watching all like everything about
the cosmos right now so I know stuff
though when I was young it was the
proper planet then it was degraded so
I'm still doing some bits and pieces to
actually show it but it's like it has
proper like DNS and everything so it's
progress and then I have totally no idea
where to go from that probably now in
angel in the source will be very good
thing you see that's my GP update do you
thank you
does anyone have an issue they'd like to
be in the hot seat or would like to ask
to work on or focus on you started
talking about RBE it's today's meeting
going to be about resource-based economy
Oh necessarily you can open it up to
that though nobody else has anything we
can put resource-based economy in the
hot seat talk about and talk about that
okay
because yesterday my friends from
zeitgeist because I apparently I know
people from zeitgeist the Polish chapter
of it they're thinking about writing an
application for starting something like
shared shared economy for basically it
would start with being able to borrow
tools and physical items and share them
among the community of whoever would
want to join and participate in anything
so the approach is to write an
application and then create some this
used to be decided how to keep track of
like hours and items and have some
metrics not money of course but
something to keep track of how well
expensive is not a good work because
it's not money but in terms of for
example impacts to environment of
everything in the system and yeah time
of how long someone kept the thing oh
how resource how much how many resources
it took to pass the item from one person
to another stuff like that so an
application for shared economy and then
move from there to well other places I
mean an application like they're putting
in an application for a grant to get
money to create this like what
application application web page and
mobile applications and yes items around
call it yes
all right cool I mean they have enough
of a threshold of people that are
already like they're kind of one of the
people who it's like great because that
project hasn't been done before a
million times but like if zeitgeist does
it because they have enough people they
actually have the threshold of users to
make it viable so that it's like there's
shows that it's viable but not everyone
and it was someone from zeitgeist some
time ago who actually made it happen and
he had like a storage space huge and
people just whenever they wanted to get
rid of some old equipment or something
they would just give it to him and he
organized quite a big thing apparently
it was in vogue he was famous for it and
then he went bankrupt because his
business model wasn't exactly as I
understand it he couldn't afford to keep
it going for some reason but in cash and
whatever went wrong there we could fix
it so there is a start from another
angle
[Music]
it's reminding me I think it was last
week if it wasn't a stick it was the
week before Ryan said that I would put
out to game be asking for people who'd
had two failed technology projects to
talk about why that was and I've yet to
actually actually do that because I'm
focused on process raising but it is a
conversation many conversations that I
want to have like why but I kind of want
to kind of like a formula question so
that like it's the same question for for
everyone but I also don't do so great
with those kind of like as I like I like
to have a conversation and ask questions
but I'm curious as opposed to in a
formulated way but a formulated way can
give more understanding for why all of
them broke down their various like
there's more data if it's formulated
given some of the conversations you've
told me about that I think may have
spawned that I wonder if it's like a
conversation around what problems do you
think can and can't solve and then if
it's a problem tech can't solve look why
do you think that have you tried and
failed do you know somebody who tried
and failed is there just something
innate with that thing or the technology
that you think one I could fail yeah I
mean I already know that conversation
the waiter oh I don't need to have a
because it's like there's so many
amazing ideas and then it's like wait
there were men of people there was
enough funding we didn't have enough
business minds to actually make it
business worthy but yeah having right
instead of putting out the call for like
the one-on-one interview with the person
who was in charge of it which is very
vulnerable you like hey it's like the
periphery of I've heard this one failed
right yeah or just you know a quick
two-minute like oh yeah I was on this
project that this happened this happened
and I think it means X yeah cuz then
yeah you aren't like spending 50 minutes
explaining like something that you're
embarrassed about
yeah and that like that's so I
understand it's our entire society but
that like like when you fail in a
business you're a failure it's like but
you learned stuff and if you're able to
share that then the world learn
something and especially in tech the
thing probably still exists somewhere
like it's like you actually probably
even still have the code
and whatever like it's it's a strange
phenomenon and yet we it's it's partly
like the survivor bias that when someone
makes it big so sitting with yesterday
is is that makes it bigger like well if
you do what I did you will get to where
I am right tony robbins although it's
like this is the the formula well no
because if you took a thousand people
they'd exactly what you did no not all
of them would be a success how many of
them would be a success is the question
and then even out of the people who
succeed how many fail after and there's
something in that we like a look at
people who and just probability-wise
didn't succeed and like they're a
failure and then people who got the
periodic it's basically like won the
lottery then you're like telling you won
the lottery all you have to do is buy a
lottery ticket and then you wait the
right numbers it's like oh so right
place right time right angel investor
right connections and and luck out that
the market was ready for it at the right
time gotcha
that's a hard let's just do that yeah i
think for a lot of host people ended up
being tough because they usually did do
a lot of hard work it's a yeah but a lot
of people do hard work and fail that's i
mean hard work doesn't necessarily mean
it's something will succeed or fail it's
almost irrelevant one way or the other
like as long as the work that needs to
get done gets done you can still be you
know working hard in the wrong direction
depends on how you define success too
right like if my if success to me is
just getting a platform up and going
then i had success if my success is only
defined by having a million users then
i've just like raised the bar a lot so
something to think about um but to go
back to what Martius is it Martius or
marcus much my church was saying um so
I on the resource-based economy
type of application so there are a
couple different folks I guess out there
some apps I've seen in the Android App
Store that are designed for lending and
borrowing of items and like two of them
worked okay there was one that I found
the website that looked like it was very
very good but it had like died out it
was one of these like they got it off
the ground they got it going and then
who knows but I you know I'd have to dig
through to reference it but it was one
of these that got going maybe they had
no users and then they ran out of money
or something
it looked well done the one of the
things that I have seen as a problem
with all of the ones I've observed and
this is a little bit of a question of
like can technology actually solve our
problems I think that it's not a
replacement for relationships the main
people that I'm probably gonna you know
if this is to work the main people I'm
probably going to want to borrow and
have a tool library with are the people
who live closest to me and if I just
think I'm gonna go on an app and that's
going to give me a better relationship
with the people that live near me like
it's it's not likely to do that so an
app can't solve every part of our
relationship part of this right and then
the the other thing and maybe you can if
you're working with these folks maybe
take this with you what I have noticed
on all these tool library and borrowing
lending apps is they are they have no
privacy
um I haven't seen one like some of them
are geo based and so like I can load up
things that I own tools that I own in
the app and even if I'm using a
pseudonym people anyone can see that and
ping me it does you know as long as they
live in a geo I need it to work like
more like Google Drive I need to be able
to load up my tool library and then have
specific control over who sees what um
you know I'm a let's say I just have
books I may have a hundred books and I
have certain books that you know I lend
out to certain friends some friends
don't even know I own this other book I
don't even want them to know that I own
it or it's the same goes with I'm happy
lending out my ladder to some people but
then I've got a power washer which needs
a little bit more care I don't want that
visible by my whole network maybe I've
got a couple close friends that I trust
them with that thing the idea that all
all the people in my network should be
able to see all the things that I own I
think has been well is personal but it's
been that I can't use these apps because
they just lump everything together these
terms of view ability and I'm like I
have no I need fine-tuned control Google
Drive doesn't just make all my documents
open everyone I have fine-tuned control
there's a sensitive document only I
share this with this person etc if you
have any influence close to what I'm
thinking we need the fine-tuned control
I think for it to work and then so you
folks can respond I'd love to have the
conversation about why it can't be
income-generating this is my personal
understanding of game be well it's not
to like well it's supposed to compete um
and I don't know about you but
like if I had something going and it
drained all my resources my monetary
resources it's not competing we're
supposed to compete better which
Dutchman's we're supposed I think the
thing i saw from daniel sh montón burger
is like we need to design things that
put energy into stuff that we like
so things that are non predatory or
aren't harming the environment or
whatever we need to create these things
so I can shift my monetary resources and
start to put them in that direction
instead of that direction that's like
how I see it so these folks can do their
app however they want if if I'm lending
out my power washer maybe I have a
little checkbox under there that I leave
off if it's free but maybe I checked
that box and I say actually this has
wear and tear and if you borrow this
from me it's like $3.00 a day or
something like I don't see that as being
predatory I see that as just stuff
breaks down and needs maintenance
something think about yeah and that also
helps give a like a little bit of I
don't of scarcity is the right word but
something like if 10 people want it who
gets it is it just who who asks first
will keep up what if they can't get
there for a week like there's all these
things of how do you manage it and cost
I think it's something that does help
with that and then what you know things
break so what happens if you lend this
thing out 20 times in the 20th time it
breaks
well now that's costing you money and
you got yeah nothing to help pay for
your new one like it's not to to to to
say that I you said it shouldn't be
predatory you shouldn't be trying to buy
a new power washer every three rentals
because you can afford because it's so
expensive but enough that you know if
you lived it up ten times and it breaks
you're like all right well at least I
got something to help pay for the next
one it wasn't in perfect condition to
start with so that's not not too bad I
think you would also need profiles for
the people borrowing to say you know how
well
this person treat things because some
people just it's in their genes that
they just don't give a about
objects you just see how they treat even
their own stuff and other people's stuff
they just don't care they'll you know
throw stuff on the ground they'll not do
proper maintenance steps and other
people are meticulous sure what about
the site guys like zeitgeist has enough
people that they could have a threshold
but if it's someone in the zeitgeist
movement like I mean guess I'm in the
zeitgeist movement he was making it a
side app and it's not going through
Peter Joseph and it's not then they're
gonna have all the same problems than
every other tool library has but the
issue is we all have different reasons
why we would or wouldn't put our tools
on there and different reasons why we
wouldn't use it as it'll be able to
create something from the ground up to
say so we can have those conversations
and say yeah you know with Daniels idea
of having things visible to different
people and also asking ok well well
maybe I don't want to have it like there
won't be a way to do that with
technology right like you said putting
it yes I want this person to see it no I
don't want this person to see it but
there's also owning that right
beyond technology of like listen if it's
my power washer and you have to have
this skill to be able to use it so you
know you're the your really friendly
person down the down the street but no
you can't use my power washer because if
you can even if you're really good with
it um even if you like that you get to
set your your metrics and that becomes
or know that we give it up to the
library but then you're gonna be first
in line when there's a new power when
there's a power washer and you need it
because you gave a power washer to it
right like that you can have the
conversation and where there's
trade-offs have the actual conversation
about the trade-off when there isn't a
trade-off and we can do all then like
put it put it into it but all of these
things gonna have one little thing right
if they did it for just Daniel does that
sounds like an amazing idea but there's
gonna be something about that for
someone else it's like oh wait I have to
go in and put every different tool and
every one to see which which one nope
I'm not in rights like the same works
for one person doesn't work for another
but if you can if you know that and
default is I put my tools and and
everyone can see them someone who has a
little more technical skill I can put
them in and cater to that and someone
else can say hey just skill level like I
don't care
you are but I need you to have a certain
skill level before you use my tool and
to prove that and and you know I won't
wear and tear money back and someone
else doesn't want weird share money back
and figuring out or actual solid genes
building it hmm yeah III like the idea
that well this is personal right I love
how you're able to bring in like well
we've got these different viewpoints I
mean I wouldn't make my stuff visible to
people I didn't know personally and so
like to me it encourages if this app
exists this type of app existed I think
it would be so useful that everyone
would have it like even if you just used
it in your own family like this is like
uber level like game-changing type of
app it would be so useful
you'd be strange not to have you know
whatever you called it like hey you know
friend me on the thing because it's so
useful well I think it would encourage
me to build more relationships with my
neighbors because there's more there's
even more value and meaning in those
relationships I'm not the type of person
that likes to just search on mean even
Craigslist I'd rather see if a friend of
mine has something that I want or need
or whatever then search on a like a kind
of database I don't know these folks and
and whatever and some people I guess are
like super comfortable with that and
like that's cool my thing you need to be
a close friend of mine probably to be
like in in my network but I love meeting
people so it's pretty easy to be become
a closer friend of mine but you're
you're so right that some people would
have a different level of comfortability
they could make some of their items like
publicly visible like no
I would do that but you know cheers to
the people that do yeah I wonder if you
could almost make it like both sides of
the sort of Craigslist outlook where you
can go on and say I have this to sell
and you can go on and say I want this if
you could kind of do both like if you
needed a power washer you could say hey
I need a power washer and then you could
see if anybody has it publicly shared
and if they do cool you you might be
able to see that in ping them but also
if you have a power washer and it's not
shared you might see the the request
though and then if it's your next-door
neighbor you're like yeah all right I
don't I don't know them super well but
like I know where they live so I'm not
super worried about them doing something
super sketchy yeah okay I'm comfortable
with that or not it's up to you because
they don't know you have mm-hmm also and
most do I think most cities that start
to a libraries end up branching out but
they start with just the tool library
that there's there's I would love to
have access to to a library but I use
them so infrequently it doesn't make
sense for me to be a member of the
Vancouver to a library because there's
like a monthly no no there's a yearly
fee and such what I would use is is more
of like a kitchen gadget one right like
oh I want to try bread maker or I want
to try this new thing before trying it
so that I'm not spending $400 on
something before it before I know it's
it's liable to have a I don't really do
decorations or party centrality party
planning but to have reasonable
decorations and cut and plates and stuff
that you can be dropped off and picked
up til to actually problem-solve stuff
together to say hey where's our waste
coming from where's it going how could
be like coordinate on this even having
something like people who are really
into tools and have their own power
tools but having the odd other tool they
need having them have a buyer's club
right of like okay we're all gonna put
in 50 bucks a month because that's what
we put on tools anyway and then we get
by the big tools that we all don't have
like and that would be more more just
transparent right your your you know
your level you know you have the skill
level of both being able to use it and
hopefully be able to do the wear and
tear on it and voting on what you're
what you're gonna buy with that honey
and putting on that system there's tons
of ways to deal with it and that's where
an app doesn't solve the diversity of
possibility it
it's like one person's idea or a few
other things and then if it doesn't work
for you it's broken and so then yes this
is a great idea and literally dozens and
dozens and dozens of them have been made
there's free cycle there's there's
Craig's look like there's things that
aren't quite it even in the
resource-based economy Amina Cole has
the transition and they have a section
on like for under resource-based
economy' umbrella how do we coordinate
even things like share gonna cut like
couchsurfing and Internet if you're in a
new city where can you find it and it's
like but that's Nicole's version of what
she thinks people need so I mean I
haven't been on there in years but it's
not there's there's a lot it's it's like
real estate on my phone I want I don't
just want tools I want it all and I want
it to be able to be diversified so more
people want to put their stuff on there
more people want to use it what how do
we build that trust in into it and
creating it from the from the ground up
including things like hey Vancouver has
a Tool Library why are we recreating
this from scratch how can we coordinate
with them brings together and give them
software that helps them and people can
put those in is is very different than
like constantly trying to start
everything from scratch which we know is
fun but it's like yeah this conversation
has restarted from scratches but what
humans kind of want to do in their own I
mean my idea for two libraries I could
literally put anything on there like I
could put the smallest little
knick-knack and like that's okay but
some folks want it like well just tools
I don't know but that that's a good I I
would love to be able to be in touch
with the people who have already built
some of this stuff to a pretty pretty
workable degree an app that does most of
everything and just be like hey you know
can you put a calendar on this I have
some I've seen some that work almost
exactly how you'd think they don't have
the privacy part that I've talked about
earlier but they just when someone
checks out an item and I lend it out
there's no calendar I want it to like
ping me I want to be able to say all
right
three weeks remind me that my friend
so-and-so has this book cuz I'm gonna
forget and please have it ping both of
us to say hey you you know you could set
it for three weeks or three months or
whatever but so one of them worked
really great just know calendar like man
when I check this out put help let me
put a reminder in so I loved it yeah I'd
love to be able to talk to the folks
that are so talented and already have
built so much of this things for me
although I want to calendar basically
anything and everything for that account
unlike a calendar because if I'm not you
know if I'm not a library and I'm just
I'm really using my friends storage to
some degree right so what I want is to
be able to look up my inventory you know
who has it right I don't care if you
have it for a week or a year as long as
I know you still have it and they can
also look it up and be like wait what
did I borrow this from I've lent out so
many books and now I'm at the point
where I'm like I'll never remember who
has what anymore and like I don't I'm
happy to do that but I wish I could just
see because who knows it might be
collecting dust and someone else needs
that book now or something and that that
is like in my mind it works different
which is even like our different
versions we have completely different
applications at the end but if we were
able to coordinate on the base then we
can include them in in the thing right
because what if I want if I don't care
who has it but now the next person wants
it well they can say hey I want this
book and oh I have that book but but
todd has it well I can ask
and Todd gets a ping of like hey are you
using it or can you pass it off to the
next person can you finish it within the
next week like that it's instead of
having a central inventory like to a
library does right well they're sending
things out and coming back having it
that it's dispersed but it's like who
has it at the moment and they can even
possibly lend it out to other people if
they know that I trust them right like
clearly I wouldn't lend out Daniels tool
to the next person because he doesn't
want it to go to someone he doesn't know
and and having that be more information
that we have in the end the system
mm-hmm
or even make it because what was
discussed is more like pool of resources
and tools that do not necessarily have
an owner the system owns stuff and then
in some smart way is able to distribute
and fulfill needs of the people who
participate in the system and it makes
it kind of on one hand easier too
because if this isn't all the tool then
the system is able to decide who out of
ten people who want it right now who can
have it at the moment and then it's not
treated of course and it's going to be
found right in it but yeah that was the
the approach and then it'll start only
because really the tools are not what
the system is about the system is about
needs and for example if I want to
borrow a drill driller
what I need is not the tool what I need
is a hole in the wall right so that was
an enlightening sometimes I once heard
that's I buy a tool it's not the two I
need it's something else it's a basic
need that can be fulfilled with that
tool but maybe there are smarter ways of
just giving me what I want but they
really want instead of giving me some
physical objects that I can do the thing
with so yeah have been tracking all the
resources engaged in me doing what I
want and the end goal is to make it
smarter and make it better and make it
so the resources used in the system are
equal to the resources that are
available because that's the key thing
about this planet we have some finite
amount of resources and there
what we are doing right now it's over
using them and that's the problem but of
course that's for the next maybe right
now uh one more thing I was trying to
say
it starts with tools and starts with
landing borrowing or just passing stuff
around but what is also involved
precisely as you go as you start a local
community being engaged in just so
what's also involved in local
communities there are also people who
like to fix stuff and idea of
hackerspaces and maker spaces as in
places that can serve as storage spaces
and garages and places where people can
meet and technically minded people can
meet and do stuff which I heard as in at
least one country it's a good finger and
there are a lot of when I was young I
also read always into some technical
things and gadgets so if I had a
community of people who could teach me
things and how to fix things it will be
played and I know more people like that
who'd like to participate and have fun
we've stopped like drillers and and
enters in some space which then you know
it would create out of those elements it
would create the basis for the new
economy
right yeah I'm a cultic a little bit but
that's the idea that it starts with just
simple passing items around but then
what is involved are people relations
which technology can facilitate and the
body can cause them to appear but you
know relations are the most important
thing so there are some common points
like fixing stuff and then people can
come along and they don't think I get to
know each other and they build community
which is really love the idea that if
you in in this system if you put a value
on every item then you could build in a
way in which every time it changed hands
you could be tracking all that value
like valued material saved or like you
know every hammer is ten dollars and if
it changed hands a hundred times you
know you're you're adding up all that
wealth that was saved or whatever you
call it and then secondly I'd yeah I
just love I love the idea that what if
you had a whole tab in there which was
skills or services to be lent out and
yeah we've all got these different
skills and I don't just need to borrow
things but I I need I can't do my
plumbing and like you know does anyone
want to lend out their time if you
already had its custom this
comprehensive it almost makes sense to
have a section a skill library its skill
library right yeah I think so build on
something you mentioned earlier Danielle
would like you might not want to lend
out your power washer to somebody who
doesn't have a certain skill well if you
set up something like a makerspace
unless you have a table saw do you just
want anyone off the street
able to come and use a table saw that
sounds like a possible legal issue you
you might have to have it steel in order
to be able to use certain things like
hey we have a maker space for an auto
shop you need these skills to be able to
come in there and use it or you can't
book it because we don't want you
crushing yourself to death with a car
just in general and where you know where
your people can see what's this I do
want to mention I love it we've put a
mythical project but I think if there is
something so um like when you look at a
tool library its Omni when the number of
people that are involved its Omni when
the number of tools that are involved
what's not Omni win or the number of
applications involved right like
everyone knows no complication is not
because it's like everyone oh I got a
really an idea and they want to create
it and they want to create it they want
to create it and yet there's something
about like can we solve something that
is a need now right like Daniel has a
need to keep an inventory so so there's
a way to create something that he could
use as an inventory I could use as an
inventory
even if we're the only one on there it
doesn't matter because I'm using it as
my inventory right like there's problems
to solve that could be that aren't
necessarily like dissipating the energy
but they still are because I'm going to
application that does your inventory and
does everything we're talking about
would be amazing in it but the fact that
all these things like maker spaces um
you can't have too many maker spaces
besides rent right like if you have to
pay for rent but if it's in your garage
and you're like you know what I'd love
some neighbors to come over and work
with but I don't want just anyone I want
people to certain skill set like they
put in stuff in there like there's
resources that are Omni win resources
that aren't and figuring out how to like
start with an omni win premise of can
this technology offer something that the
other ones ones have not and is it
powerful enough to bring in people
without a threshold of users I mean this
is this next thing did gets a bit into
to to gaming but to build on what Daniel
talked about with like the you
you could you know like actually offer
up a skill right like if you're a
carpenter or a plumber or whatever and
say I can do this thing hey hey can you
help me I think the assumption there is
that it's kind of it to be like if it's
a person's time you know free or or
donated but having kind of like a pre
free option where if it's something like
you're a plumber or you're a maid or
whatever it is that you can offer a
service and if you can hit a threshold
in a certain spot like so for example if
you're a maid and you can get ten people
in the same apartment building to agree
on a day of the week for cleaning then
you can you know do $32 you know for a
certain period of time instead of fifty
because then you don't have to worry
about travel and finding people and blah
blah blah so the day end of getting it
for cheaper and as a person providing
the work you get you know a more stable
form of income because it's helping you
find customers and it's sort of grouping
them together in a way that helps them
save they help them save money but it
also makes your life easier in a lot of
ways ask us since we already have a
mythical one in the hot seat this
process right that we're talking about
none of us are holding this project this
is an hour project does this feel
different there's like a different
quality that I don't care if I agree or
disagree with you there's one we're not
making it but also there's there's a
quality to like I didn't come into this
with with I've put all this time energy
into creating it to a library and I've
done this work and like it better be my
way even if I open to openness they're
still gonna be that subconscious bias
and all of that like oh this undoes the
work I've done you can't undo the work
I've done
and so this different quality of
figuring out something that wasn't ours
before before what do people think
what is this different this command for
your crew
oh that's easier to just do right now
you should feel free to iMeet yourself
there's the kids background noise I was
like I think I know it's not in my nose
so it's because I think I need to go fix
so after all so yeah and this is not
even a that this already it kind of
started there are some basic thoughts
and ideas how to make it happen and yeah
and just you know talk about it and have
a point of view that is the outside of
this and still so it's still close
enough so you understand what is like
what is the meaning of the project right
so it's very it's great
I think compared to projects that I've
already put more time and energy into
because I feel like I have less
ownership on this type of experiment the
thought experiment we're doing right now
it's easier to just dream big and they
talk about scope a lot in in a lot of
programming and so well this is all
hypothetical we can just keep slapping
on features and slapping on features
because we're just dreaming I think that
some of the work I've done on other I
guess the project that I've been
spending my time on I'm aware you can't
just keep adding features all these
things cost something in terms of money
or maintenance or time or complexity um
so that is different when we're like
doing whatever you said Jubilee we're
doing this hypothetical we just the
mythical I think you said um experiment
so it's like yeah let's add a calendar
yeah let's add pingbacks yeah let's add
um security and this like sure let's do
it all and but if you go down to earth
for a moment you I guess that's another
reason why it's easier to to to do the
Dreaming part on this as compared to a
project that kind of got a I've got a
cost limit a scope limit this is how
many features I could reasonably have
yeah I could add more features in the
future but they're they're not necessary
and I've kind of done the work to say
what's most necessary and we've we
haven't it seems like on the tool
library project it almost feels like
everything is necessary I don't know how
you leave something out
that's yeah that's one of my views on
this I think that's that's very
insightful that it what we're just
feature up on feature and so the next
question would be we only have less than
ten minutes left but if we were to like
focus on creating a beta write something
that was super easy well we're not gonna
really be able to agree on does this
meet all my needs because it's not gonna
meet all of any of our needs but could
we agree that this is the beginning and
therefore we're gonna build on it right
like like would you be willing to put in
a few tools if you can't control who
sees it right like like maybe there's
you're not gonna put in your entire
inventory until you can control it but
like at what point do you walk away
completely because you don't get your
thing or you don't I mean like what kind
of consensus to come to to say that this
thing is the one that has the minimal
features and hopefully we can build on
it right like I would use it even if it
did then didn't have a calendar I'd keep
track of that on the side and I just
keep praying that we had a calendar one
day but I'm not gonna just not use it
and even this conversation we're not
doing it right we're like thinking about
thinking about so it's like right if we
were to actually create the beta we're
gonna come up with different tension
than the idea of maybe creating the beta
right because when it actually comes
down to using it you put it on your
inventory and be like oh wait if there's
no calendar actually this is kind of
useless I'm gonna use all the ones that
already exist but owning that as part of
the feedback of like I said I was gonna
put my tools in no not this is too much
work like part of I don't know I kind of
put myself in the hot seat who's this
processor like it's like that's what I'm
working through is that frozen it's like
I want to say remember this feeling like
whatever this feeling is of wanting an
idea to happen not having to own it that
kind of moment we just did like stay
there and like what does that feel like
is it better
is it and and how do we keep creating
those moments of
that type of cohesion felt a little bit
like a project raising but the project
person wasn't here so we just like had a
title and we're like let's just add
level on it and let's just you know ping
off of each other and say well I think
it does this okay what do you think it
does that but maybe you could do this as
well but I had that same vibe of like us
not owning it but I say trying to
contribute to it and give ideas and sort
of move it forward in not a real way but
like just with ideas that maybe somebody
else could help move over it feels
really clean as the word that I would
use like not being attached to the
project as something that I own and I am
i have my expectations and i have all
the feelings connected to it because
it's mine I think this kind of
selflessness involved in talking and in
creating project that I do not feel the
need to all completely and I can I'll be
able to work on it just for the sake of
doing something great there's some
allegory in like the art of shooting
arrows that it's like not caring not
bringing yourself yourself to the table
with all the all your ego I think is the
the key and then you can engage with all
your energy in the project without
caring that it's not yours it it's a
great feeling my closing statement is is
how to tap into that with
forcing it right without saying that
this has like you're not allowed to own
it you're not allowed to bring your much
near you don't a lot like us you're part
of it is just continually owning that
right that like someone's playing with
my toy and I want to kind of hold it
back even just acknowledging that
sometimes it's enough to release it but
then other times it's like no there's
something here that someone's trying to
like use my pressure washer and they
don't have the skill set and the more we
can just have these kind of
conversations and play in this space and
then feel like what's different and
unique about it the model able to create
something that is different without
forcing it yeah and I'm supposed to go
to another meeting now that we're on the
hour but yeah I learned a lot today just
from this process and hopefully in the
future here or other places that go and
on the stuff I've been working on I can
try I can bring this to that yeah so I
learned a lot today thank you it's that
like how are our individual projects
that we have ownership on and people are
coming in and offering
how can we how do we invite ourselves to
give it up but how do we also invite a
group of people how can I invite more
people into giving feedback when I think
I've already got it figured out like
that's been unhelpful but I haven't
known how to get out of that so I'm
gonna have any closing statements before
we say goodbye to YouTube and Facebook
strips me how similar this whole thing
was to sort of take you gather tech as a
project where because no one owns it
it's a lot more free to sort of just
shoot stuff out there and nobody has the
same sort of ownership as the individual
projects which almost seems like a
useful separation in in projects like
there's the individual projects or the
owned projects and there's kind of the
co-op projects and end up lifting
Boltzmann's we're talking both but
having two different frameworks to show
here's what it's like when one person
owns it
as sort of that framework on how do we
treat them in their idea and their
ownership and then what happens and how
do you retreat a project that's
something like together tech or this
thing that we just you know spent 30 or
45 minutes talking about that none of us
really owns or has any you know
particular plans to move forward with
personally but if there was a chance to
participate we probably what it sounds
like I kind of this conversation for
sure no we're playing the
pictures and everybody which ones are
best for me somebody had started it and
they had taken this feedback and yeah I
built in about 80% of that I think most
of us would be like Oh check that out
that sounds cool because that was also
what I actually would I don't know if
other people are into this but like tool
library community apps social platforms
right like like bringing it together and
saying hey we don't own it we're not
making it but hey what do we imagine we
would want on it right and offering that
to people who are looks like the
zeitgeist people looking to create a to
a library right like this is not people
praying into a libraries field talking
about what they would need in it and
it's for people imagine a thousand
people let's go on verse Asian right and
and I just and isn't offering um hey if
you have an hour to sit through because
I think this would actually be an
amazing home verse aging especially that
piece of it for people to watch about
crazy into a library you'd like oh yeah
that is a feature that could be part of
it including owning that baby bringing
it back to zero is not the thing let's
figure out can we can we all of it
alright alright goodbye YouTube and
Facebook yeah next Friday