howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
listeners have asked us provide pointers
some of the resources we talked about on
the show we now have links to books and
articles referenced in recent podcasts
that are available on our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
ruts show com
that's Jim ruts show com today's guest
is Tyson Janka Porta hi Jim it's good to
be here hey it's great to have you here
really is really enjoyed reading your
book and looking very much forward to
talking to you
Tyson is an academic an arch critic and
a researcher who's a member of the app
alleged clan of Australian Aboriginal
people in the far north of Queensland he
carves traditional tools and weapons
also works as a senior lecturer in
indigenous knowledge at Deakin
University in Melbourne
he lives in Melbourne we're gonna dig in
into some detail into his remarkable new
book called sand talk this is a book I
normally wouldn't have stumbled across
but somehow I did and as I was reading
it I was going wow this book even though
it comes from a lens that is so
different from anything I've ever been
exposed to before comes up with some
conclusions and perspectives on the
nature of reality and the nature of our
civilization then I found just uncannily
similar to some of the things myself and
other people are working on and I hope
you all will enjoy this journey and it
will be quite a journey this is a book
of incredible richness again it's called
sand talk and as always there'll be a
link to the book on the episode page for
this podcast at Jim rutt show dot-com so
so often we read about peoples and
cultures around the world from the
Western reductionist scientific
perspective you know here are the
kinship rules here's you know how they
you know extracted energy from the
system etc sort of classic cultural
anthropology Jason makes what to my mind
is an amazing and audacious move and
essentially while we'll be learning a
fair amount about indigenous culture
what he's really doing is looking back
out at the wider world using an
indigenous
lenz is that fair you think that's a
good way to describe what you're doing
yeah I think that's fair that's a really
good way of saying um yeah it's it's a
it's a complexity lens you know um and
that's I think complexity theory is a
really good metaphor that you know it
aligns quite well with the lens that
we're looking through here
indeed that I was so taken by you know
people listen the show no I'm I complex
at Orion if there is such a thing and I
was very taken with the way you wove
complexity into the story in a very
natural way and I got curious so I had
to do this search I'm a bit of a numbers
nerd how you to know is exactly right
though in this case was more like 12 the
word complex or complexity appeared
seventy-seven times in your book you
probably didn't even know that I did not
know that before we hop in let's talk a
little bit about you know some of the
definitions and and a tool that you
describe it I thought was very
interesting you basically had the
concept of two hands one fingers held
together horizontally and the other hand
held up vertically with the fingers
apart could you maybe frame that a
little bit as sort of a framework which
I found to be useful
yeah well it's it's kind of what you
described already it's um I mean so
often when when you know any knowledge
of indigenous cultures is always viewed
through that Western lens so you know I
had sort of worked it into a hand
gesture because as with most of the book
I tried to well I I mean I did express
all of the knowledge first in nonverbal
forms you know through traditional
carvings and you know lots of different
practices and one of those ideas was
just in a hand gesture which also came
out as a symbol a visual symbol but yeah
so it's got a closed hand that's like
reading a book and then it's got a
spread open hand like you know there's
rock hand stencil paintings you might
have seen in caves around the world you
know so usually we're kind of trying to
view that open hand you know through the
closed hand of the
book you know and you don't really see
it you just see the edges of it just the
tips of the fingers but if you turn
around the other way and you look at the
closed hand through the open hand at
some you get a lot more clarity and
interesting perspective so I kind of
like to do that a little bit of a
reversal a lot of my work is kind of
reverse anthropology I guess you might
call it and and it's really cheeky yeah
I I mean I think I mean it really just
skates along the edge of pop science in
fact I think you could probably call it
pop science the book more than serious
scholarship you know and a lot of my
work is like that just because I just
like having a laugh most of the time
yeah I found that that's a good term
reverse anthropology I also found it
kind of this beautiful riff and kind of
like weaving right it goes here it goes
there it comes back but it makes sense
holistically truthfully I would say that
the book is a work of art and I'm not
kidding I really did find it unusual
richness and yet not necessarily linear
you know the same ideas would be
examined in three different ways at
three different places in the book and
they all made sense within the context
we're in not the kind of thing that a
typical academic monograph would do
before we jump into the book I usually
don't do a lot of bio but your biography
is is intimately woven through the book
and you know I don't want the whole
story but just maybe there's a very
short version so it's just a little bit
about the epaulettes clan who they are
where do they live today and maybe it's
the teeny bit about your own remarkable
life journey
ah my remarkable life journey yeah we
always have to do the burger if you
don't me but look the yes an upper-class
or some Western Cape York the homeland
there is a few different places would
includes a place called Cape Kilauea
which is Dutch for turn back this yeah
five hundred years ago we had a little
bit of an incursion there from from
Dutch traders yeah most of them ended up
getting speared and he went back because
they were trading things like soap and
rice and and they unfortunately Europe
at the time regarded women as chattel as
well and they figured that the women
were a resource as well to be traded and
they got a bit of a rude shock here's
the women were not we're not having that
so um yeah how most of them got speared
and they lived back to Holland and yeah
and that's interestingly enough that
little encounter with the wick people
particularly uplet's clan Western Cape
you up there that spawned the world's
first corporation because you know they
made such heavy losses on that trip the
people that were funding the trip were
quite upset about it and I guess they
had to find a way to shift
accountability around so they they
invented that corporate entity in there
so the Dutch East India Company was born
and then that kind of spread British
East India Company and all that sort of
thing and corporations became the norm
and yeah and then out of that came the
whole land as capital situation which
pretty much created the pyramid scheme
that we have for a global economic
system today so you know there was our
fault really oh yeah that play all your
fault right so you can blame you can
blame my extended family for for the
entire global financial crisis and
everything else we we caused that about
500 years ago and you know my my
personally my life is like I guess it's
divided into three parts
you know so the first and I guess
there'll be four parts in another ten
years or so but yeah I'm just sort of
starting on the fourth part but the
first part was um you know I I kind of I
was defined as a part
Aboriginal and so my identity was very
much tied up with these weird racist
ideas of a genetic inheritance that
would mean that I'd drink and fight more
than everyone else and so that was
pretty much the first for my life so
there's nothing really useful or
interesting to come out of my youth just
a whole heap of bloodshed and whoa and
then I guess the second part of my life
I was I sort of saw my identity as being
cultural and tied to material culture so
I was you know playing the didgeridoo
and making boomerangs and clap sticks
and always you know dancing robberies
and you know hunting and then but you
know in a really performative way do you
know what I mean like oh look at me I'm
the real deal I'm really authentic so
that was the that second third there and
I guess this last bit the last decade
and a half or so two decades has been
more you know understanding my identity
and my cotton war as a knowledge system
you know as a system of of knowledge but
not just know how about I here's where
you get this medicine plantain you know
here's how you catch a fish or whatever
it's not that kind of thing it's
actually though the ways of thinking and
patterns of thinking and that the
systems of logic that have really um
have really taken me and and I don't
know that just made me into a sort of a
better person who's sometimes worth
listening to
yeah yeah that's good in fact I know you
reference it in various ways but I think
one of the one of the things I took away
from the book is that you treat your
culture as alive rather than as a museum
artifact right yeah you know this or
isn't this lovely stick from 800 years
ago and it's meaning whatever okay well
there is some use to that but you know I
took away you know the fact that you're
interpreting the Aboriginal way of
seeing this lens as live and adaptive
and interacting with the world I love
the little riff you had with the elder
about the cell phone right yeah those of
you who listen to the show know I've had
my struggles with cell phone addiction I
wrote an essay called was it something
like recapturing our cognitive
sovereignty or something about how I
ditched the cell phone for a flip phone
right but yet cell phones have found
their way deeply into contemporary
Aboriginal culture with god-knows-what
implications right so I like that well I
mean the adult literacies improved you
know in communities where all the adults
were illiterate everybody learned to
read and write in in about three weeks
after getting their mobile phones cuz
everyone was aromas texting so I mean
that's a that's a good thing but there's
also a lot of really negative
consequences as well yeah I did do a
podcast about that we did one season
we're supposed to be doing another one
but you know covert yeah looking at the
impacts of those see I got my first
mobile phone in 2016 there was the first
time I had one and it's just it has
messed with my cognition horrendously
it's messed with the way I connect to
the world and to other people and I kind
of went oh now I understand why
everybody got so weird over the last
decade yeah that was it but I actually
have to have one because you I can't log
on to my work computer without having
this app for security on my phone yeah
that goddamn second token it makes it
almost impossible to be rid of the
things you know I try hard not to be
enslaved I think I bought my well you
like you like this story when I was a my
last work gig I was a CEO of a pretty
high intensity company and we sort of
had to have a cell phone and I was out
of the office so paid instructed my
assistant to keep three cell phones in
her drawer and when I went out of the
office for you know a business meeting
or a trip downtown to argue with the
government or something she'd give me a
phone and in those days in the DC area
mostly I'm think because of the CIA we
were in outer fringes of the DC area
there were a lot of black spots where
the reception just didn't
and famously whenever I was on a call
with somebody and the call dropped I
would just roll the window down in my
pickup truck and throw the cell phone
out the window I'd get back to the
office and I say Jana you better order
another cell phone cuz the damn thing
pissed me off but you know later when I
retired I had a cell phone but I always
warn people don't ever call it it's
probably in my sock drawer and it
probably was until 2010 god dammit when
they got good enough that they became so
seductive that even you know I was
forced I was forced yeah yeah just like
the fat boy with the bag of macaroons
I'll confess to say I am a person of
girth so I can say this it's like a fat
boy with a bag of macaroons the goddamn
things became so useful and so seductive
they're really really hard to put down
but they have anything maybe the CIA was
up to you then anyway because you know
what's this game be stuff you know keeps
ditching his burner phones he's up to
something
well that was back the day when I was a
classic game a so hey if
they at least weren't worried about that
right there you go I did a word search
on your show as well and the word
 comes up 127 times I didn't
really I just made that up only 127 my
side of the bag that's only about two
per episode let's get down to it a
little bit further one of the first
things that you talk about in the
upfront part of the book is the concept
of civilization and guess what you don't
use it in the usual positive valence
right in fact quite the contrary what
does the word civilization mean to you
what are its implications well yeah
exactly I mean you know the way there's
not a really good definition for it they
talk vaguely about rule of law and and
you know systems of laws and arts and
culture and you know surpluses of food
or whatever like I don't know and they
talk about and bread for some reason
like grinding flour for bread is a sign
of civilization
why that is yeah but they've actually
they're found grinding stones now that
predate lack Egyptians grinding flour so
in Australia we've got the whole disturb
flour grinding history of anybody when
they recently actually destroyed that
site a mining company destroyed the site
I think they want to get rid of that
it's unpleasant for them but for me as
civilization is um it's basically a
community that must be constantly
growing or it will collapse and so
therefore it relies on the importation
of resources that's it that's all I can
find in common across all these places
that call themselves civilizations and
they all behave the same way and they
have that growth based imperative that
growth based paradigm and its are it's
impossible it's a denial of reality it's
a denial of physics it's a denial of
everything and it's some I think that's
if you want a definition of evil I think
um it's probably a good one
it's just denial of reality yep and you
know just frankly plain old math right I
mean the math of exponential growth
forever
guess what it doesn't work right
eventually you hit the limit one of the
good thinkers I forget who was it
Herbert Simon somebody said you know
something can't grow forever it won't
right yeah this may not be a warning to
you right well I mean we have a very
different in Aboriginal Australia here
we have a different paradigm and it
sounds similar it's some it's just a
very subtle difference instead of a
growth based paradigm we have an
increase paradigm so we have actually we
actually have annual increase ceremonies
that we do to organize all those
behaviors and get everybody on on the
right page with that and also to you
know to to be able to sort of model
create a model I guess a simulation I'm
trying to translate this into your
language a simulation in a ritual space
of of what needs to occur in the
ecosystem for increase to occur so now
increase is different from growth you
know because you don't want the size of
the system to grow but you want the
relationships within
system the exchange within the system
that needs to increase and you can
increase that quite infinitely so I
guess it would be like gum if you wanted
to get smarter you wouldn't need to grow
a big brain you just have to make more
neural connections so it's kind of its
kind of like that so it's an increased
fat if it was aniconic like like we were
we're not really interested in you know
quantitative easing this kind of we're
not interested in the size of the
economy but we are very interested in
the velocity of the dollar you know what
I mean that's it's it's that kind of
puts that lens on it yeah I talked about
that sometimes when we talk about D grow
thing I am careful to make a distinction
we certainly need to do with respect to
what I call gross growth or macro growth
you know that couldn't you know tearing
the earth up pulling stuff out of it
burning fossil fuels destroying intact
forests and grasslands for industrial
agriculture etc but on the other hand
growth into the microcosm doesn't
disrupt the way the world operates
there's no real limit to for instance
you know how rich our poetry could be
for instance write poetry may get richer
over time I don't know I don't know that
much about poetry but art certainly has
gotten in some ways rich or at least new
techniques have been added probably some
of that circular but I like your
perspective also that if we make our
relationship map better and more
fulfilling that's a form of micro growth
right growth into the microcosm and
making that distinction is important
because you know saying that we want to
de Groote mean that life can't keep
getting richer it can't write it's
as-tested respect the outer envelope you
know the other thing you know gonna get
in your perspective of that thing which
has to grow you also are pretty specific
about the manifestation which is the
city that everything that you call a
civilization build cities did the
Aboriginal people ever have cities no no
particularly they were so you would sort
of manage these large estates that were
defined by sort of the natural
boundaries of a
of a bioregion really and so your
language would would be perfectly suited
to that bio region and those borders
were or maintained as such and I guess
that's how if you look at an Aboriginal
map of Australia there's about 500
different countries and different
languages dialects etc there was that
one's situation referred to in the book
of the Barker G mob who experimented
with a sedentary lifestyle and they had
all lots of different people coming
together
select the Tower of Babel story in the
Bible you know and they will came
together and they forgot all their own
languages and started speaking their own
language but then when the earth moved
as the earth inevitably does they'd
forgotten how to move with it and so
they were nearly wiped out you know so
they kept that story you know and they
painted that story down we've had lots
of apocalypsis to remind us of that so
you have these sort of seasonal estates
like you move around those estates
seasonally and care for the different
parts of that country in the right
season you know I don't know that that's
kind of how you operate and you have
several different camps there sometimes
the camps are a lot more sophisticated
so we've got something down in Victoria
where we're living now people were
building their houses out of stone and
some quite large ones that sleep up to
20 people or something and there's lots
of early settler accounts of that that
was so sturdy that the settlers are
riding their horses up on the top of the
stone house and getting their picture
taken or but he painted or whatever it
is that they do you know so there were
there was a there was a aquaculture
system here where there was Mason
reliant canals and things like that but
people still move seasonally around the
big estates so it wasn't really you know
this permanent sedentary thing some
places though that the food was so
abundant particularly on the coast the
north northeast coast there of Australia
there were some places where just some
people just stayed put yeah so there
I've heard reports of some permanent
settlements are happening big just
because the coastal area was so abundant
with fur
that nobody needed to move but you know
coastlines move yep
very true especially in something with
the time depth of Australia I mean
Australia was settled when the Ice Ages
were still high all right and the water
level was low and you know as you
mentioned in the book there's still
traditions about the inundations that
came you know starting maybe 11,000
years ago as the ice melted lots of
areas that had been settled or now 300
feet underwater yeah we still have maps
in our oral histories of the land that's
under the sea there along the coast so
it's still land that we familiar with
through the stories which you kind of I
don't know you visualize them stories
songs these things are maps so you do
map that territory and you you're still
caring for that place even though it's
under the sea you know so a lot of the
old people they had this this kind of a
relationship with whales and dolphins
you know ritually whereby that care for
that country under the sea and with
their relationship with those things
there's lots of documented incidences of
the old fellas calling the dolphins in
and that still actually happens today
there's still lots of people who do that
so they call the dolphins or they make a
sell like bank to rocks together under
the water and the dolphins know you're
there and they actually will chase fish
up towards the beach and into the nets
and then everyone shares shares the fish
with the dolphins like that the idea of
when whales are beating the idea is that
they're bringing the spirit you know out
of the land under the sea there that got
flooded they're bringing a spirit child
apart to be born you know so that the
whale brings it up and beaches itself
there so the old people do do a ceremony
to take that you know that that spirit
that child spirit and don't put it in
the fresh water so that it can travel up
and get born into the baby they quite
interesting it's amazing amazing the
depth of the stories you know one of the
recent learnings of European science is
that one of the most important
settlements in the British Netherlands
region is actually now underwater in the
North Sea apparently it was probably
the biggest such settlement maybe eight
or nine thousand years ago but within
the traditions of in a Western
civilization all that's been swept away
and nobody remembered it it's really
quite impressive yeah well I mean you've
got a you've got a just I mean you look
at the things that get triggered you
know by these these these shifts so I
mean you got to kind of wish that the
the land of the angles hadn't ended up
start and get it flood and getting
getting flooded you know because if they
hadn't had that inundation coming up
then they they might have ended up
looking for greener pastures in England
what became England anyway and now I
think things might have been different
yeah but of course we know if we both of
us are interested in the complexity of
the world you know the ability predict
the future is very slim because so many
things are contingent right well that's
it yeah they climate or you know frankly
a family feud so you know Charles the
bald gets thrown out of the family for
being an asshole and he and his cousins
get in a boat you know a leaky boat and
go across the English Channel and go
over there and attack the people there
and maybe they're successful maybe
they're not but the time that somebody
is successful then they end up slowly
colonizing a new country and it's
happened again and again you made the
good point that the Brits who were the
uber colonists themselves had their ass
kicked at least three times right they
weren't an incident they were had their
ass kicked by the Romans by the Celts
and then by the Vikings so then that's
let's not mention the Normans in 1066
right so everybody gets their ass kicked
by somebody right though it of course
back to our you know sort of our deep
theme I always like to say mother nature
bats last right so if somebody else
doesn't kick our ass mother nature will
and I think you know that's really a
really important person that's lost but
I mean it would be like playing baseball
with Emperor Nero or something you know
yet like you don't want to beat him
accent you know because he will cut your
head off if you're lucky
hi sorry I got my pronouns mixed up
there with I can't talk about it I was
trying to write about Nero the other day
and I wasn't sure what the correct
pronouns were to call him because he
just kept changing throughout the story
you know like when he killed his wife in
front of everybody and then said that
didn't happen and then forced some poor
guy who was unlucky enough to look a bit
like his wife had a sex change on him
there on the spot and then just so he
and dressed him up like the wife and
then that was his wife then he dressed
up as a woman and married dude as well
so he's married he was married to both
of them at the same time so I don't know
whether it's is it she her as a day
there my and it keeps changing
throughout the story so I I just I gave
up I didn't write that essay in the end
it's women I'm not even gonna try is
this a pronoun nightmare here pronouns
are imported though I guess I guess I
don't know I think maybe we're getting a
little too you know sometimes I've
sensed that maybe I'm just an old fart
I would met to be another okay boomer
right yeah yeah yeah god damn you know
well we don't have we don't have
gendered pronouns in my language so um
so it's alright you gots a very FB kind
of collective pronouns there was it
that's all or something like that or it
was it the one that you use the lot yeah
there's this clue there's quite a few
but yeah the one I use in the book as
far as I know it's the first book that's
that's largely written in the what a
linguists call it the the dual
first-person plural
that's called so the dual first-person
plural is basically um yeah I just
translated it as us to us to that was it
yeah I like I actually like that you
know it made me feel like I was like
sitting next to you and we were having a
conversation or something right yeah
yeah
but then there's then is um the
exclusive first person plural which is
um you know us but not then so you know
just us follows just us just us guys
just us overweight people full-figured
fellas please right yeah I say you can
have your exclusive groups and but then
they also they have to interact with the
bigger inclusive groups which is us all
you know but then there's heaps more
there's us belonging to him us belonging
to her us belonging to them there's
there's a whole different ones but your
pronouns basically tell you who you're
supposed to be in the world where your
social roles are and what I saw coming
out of the pronouns was did they lined
up pretty much with I know what I came
to think of as the operating protocols
for an agent in a complex adaptive
system which I kind of liked you know
yeah we'll get the boaters that that
section is real important yes but though
you're indigenous languages is something
that comes from the landscape you know
it's it's embedded in the landscape it
perfectly describes it and so your
social system it's not separate from the
land either you know there's no -
there's no two separate words for you
know society and nature it's one thing
you know so you have this totemic
connections you know - everything within
the ecosystem and so your your social
system in your way of operating in the
world it really follows along precisely
as part of the what you call natural
system I guess or the eco system
yeah well I particularly liked about it
is that it showed a huge amount of
nuance frankly more so than English by a
whole lot which is famously poor in its
pronouns how important relationships are
and that you know we are all whole ons
you know we're all both a thing an
individual but we're also part of many
other higher-level structures we have a
pair bond with our wife and with our
brother and with our best friend and
then that relationships have betted in
other relationships etc and I thought
your peoples language perhaps it's
focused on that more and is rich you
know in the same way that you know they
tell me that the Inuit people have 34
words for snow ah don't go superior wolf
on me that sort of folk folk
anthropology yeah
that one of the trendy one in the
seventies I know you were smokin reefer
at college for that one yeah there's
anything wrong with that a similar way
they'd have such a finely articulated
set of collective pronouns is
interesting yeah well I mean but there's
heaps of different ways was snow in
English too if you think about it you
know slush and sleeping Oh cards but you
know yeah it it's kind of like that but
that see their research Sapir and Worf
was was shoddy and so it got it got to
but you know because I don't know if
they hadn't crossed the eyes and dotted
the t's on there I don't know their
experiment or something or other so you
know that actually got debunked and then
so the idea of linguistic relativism
which I know you don't like the R word
that one got shut down for a long time
but then there's been a lot of heaps
better studies that have been done over
the last decade or so and yeah so
they're actually finding wellyes
language and culture do affect your
cognition they affect the way you
sequence things they affect your focus
like what you attend to like in an image
like you notice the foreground figure
first or do you notice the context in
the background and so you know you're
indigenous cultures and you know
non-western languages tend to focus on
the context first you know they'll see
all the trees the bird the time of day
where the Sun is the shadow all the
things in the picture and then they'll
say and a man's walking his dog you know
where as a settler Oram a lot of
Europeans will look at the same thing
and go oh that's a guy walking his dog
in the forest you know yeah so you kind
of sequence things differently and you
you attend to different things and yeah
that is mediated by language and it's
mediated by culture that cognition yeah
you know it's the so called sapir-whorf
hypothesis right that our language
actually conditions are thinking in
pretty substantive ways and it hasn't
been proven it's still a conjecture but
I've always thought it's likely to be
true right and you know some of the
examples you give you know yeah but
there's some good ones this there's a
little more you know
studies so studies of language whether
they've shown that so Turkish Spanish
and Japanese people will sequence so the
cat rolled down the roof in English you
know if you speak those other three
languages you actually process that in a
different order because the cat
descended the roof rolling you know so
that they've kind of they've done a lot
a lot better studies in the meantime you
know and they're arranging objects on
the table you know and then removing the
objects and moving the table on a
different angle in a different place and
then saying okay place the objects back
on the table as you remember them so
non-indigenous people will tend to put
the objects align them with the corners
of the table you know whereas the
indigenous people will align the objects
with the original position you know in
regard to north south east west you know
so it's that kind of more contextual
place based cognition rather than that
kind of more what they call that field
independent cognition yeah would make
sense that you know the cognitive models
that were developing from a very young
age much of it mediated by language in
the case of humans are going to impact
you know the way we work that's it and
you kind of generalize and say Europeans
either because Scottish people do the
same thing apparently and you know a lot
of other different communities and this
you know in some places it's interesting
they found that the cognition starts to
change the more contact you have with
the global economic system yeah you gave
a great example in your book actually
which I have later in my notes but I
think we'll hop to it because I think it
makes a distinction that you pick up on
which is European white those are just
labels we slap on these phenomenon right
and you keep the very interesting
example of the Sami people used to be
known as the Laplanders who are about as
white as you can possibly be from you
know bright yellow hair and nice pink
cheeks and all this stuff and they live
in the far far north of Sweden and
Norway I think maybe a little bit over
the
border into Russia and yet they don't
live in a way and maybe they do a little
bit more now but until very very
recently they live much more like
indigenous people and still to this day
have a lot of indigenous style ways of
seeing the world yeah will they maintain
their languages and cultures and they
also maintain their herds their reindeer
herds and all that sort of thing yeah
but when I met those two old ladies I
was just learning they're like yes and
we are indigenous people from and I'm
like ah and but then listen to them for
a while it's like this is just like
talking to my auntie this is insane you
know this is I feel yeah it was like
exactly the same way of thinking and
relating and being together and and you
know they just were doing all the same
protocols you know that I was doing and
yeah it just blew me away but then it
made me quite troubled because I was
still using that black and white
language before even though I'm like
personally I'm more beige than anything
you know we're like we still use that
word black a lot like we call us all as
black fellows you know even though most
of us as I said in the book we can't
scrape together enough melanin to scare
off or taxi anymore um we still use that
language it's there all and and and some
of the young people started taking the C
out of it to make the distinction they'd
just be Lak kind of thing just try and
make sense it try to have you know why
we're saying that because actually
offends a lot of like you know African
people come yeah and those of us who are
heaps more pale we're calling ourselves
black and they get really what yeah so
yeah it's it's problematic there's that
p-word but yeah I just I wasn't
comfortable with those those terms after
that and and I guess one so once I
smashed that binary then I started
smashing a lot of other binaries too you
know ah all of them yeah I must say you
know it resonates with me very strongly
I've for a long time
thought I call it the race swindle right
this idea that these alleged races are
actually you know
hugely significant in who we are when if
you actually look much more carefully
who we really are is what our cultures
are right and the cultures are very
variable you know even in Europe you
know you have your Sami people who you
found as another group which is much
less well known which are the mountain
Serbs that live on top of a tall
mountain in Montenegro and they were
still tribal people until 30 years ago
and they still have very strong tribal
styles of being allowed to know one and
she is you would not want to get into a
fight with her as all I can tell you she
would kick your ass in our he is
still a mountain Serb to the bone even
though she lives here in the United
States and so it's about our culture I
mean I truthfully over the years have
come to the conclusion that the actual
differences amongst the races are so
immaterial as not to be even we were
thinking about in terms of the actual
people right but it's the culture well
it was an economic classification a real
I mean originally the race theory is
just whoever they wanted to make into
slaves like remember that they had done
the cottony race and the Irish race and
the Scottish race they had all these
different races and charts showing the
different skull shapes and how has much
more stupid they were you know yeah by
the Irish that's Irish were you know we
were considered the black men of Europe
until quite recently right yeah yeah
well you look at you even Polish people
in the United States until very recently
were that they were only just included
in the last few decades as white people
it's it's so weird it just I mean it
just shifts and shifts it's just
whatever it needs to be to suit the
interests of the powerful I think at any
time and I don't think we have to buy
into it
yeah I think we should I think we're a
hundred percent in the same page another
interesting historic example is the
caste system in India if you dig into
the history of it you basically find saw
prized surprise that each new invader of
North India and that's really where the
caste system the strongest essentially
invented a new caste to sit on top of
the previous castes and North India has
been conquered again and again and again
and essentially the caste
system is just an institutionalization
of you know the fact that the new
invaders are ranked higher than the
previous track of invaders frankly not
very different than the way the norman
french invented the idea of the nobility
to sit on top of the english right so
this is a pattern we see over and over
and over again so this is all very
interesting let's move back towards
maybe what I would think of as the main
theme here and that is you talk about
the fact that growth is the engine of
the city if the growth stops the city
Falls and as we talked about has
happened again and again and again you
know the so called Fertile Crescent
ain't so fertile anymore right and North
Africa used to be the grain basket of
the Mediterranean region in our game be
talk we talk about the fact that our
current system and all systems that have
been operating on essentially the same
template are essentially self
terminating and this time you know the
stakes are really high in the past
because we hadn't built our stack of
infrastructure so high
okay Rome Falls right and fair number of
people die but human race doesn't
disappear new German tribes come in and
intermarry with the Romans and life goes
on the level of culture Falls quite a
bit literacy the example like to use and
you know 400 AD 60% of the people in a
French city French town were literate by
600 AD the King of France was illiterate
so we did lose a lot of culture but most
people survived but in our world with
eight billion soon to be 10 billion
people depending on artificial
fertilizer electricity all kinds of
stuff people bad habits need fancy
health care this time the fall is gonna
be ugly you know I might guesstimate is
the world can only support one to two
billion people without advanced
technology so if we're at ten billion
when the hits the fan
do the math not pretty and we got to
find her way out of this self
terminating trap yeah well I went to a
modern monetary theory conference I had
to do a
a speech there a few months back and
they're really they had Bernie Sanders
financial advisor there I can't remember
her name now yeah and but they're really
convinced that they can do a soft
landing using modern modern monetary
theory they can kick the can down the
road is my guess yeah yeah but
eventually the can goes over the cliff
you're surpluses is is my deficit they
say and that you know you just expand
the deficit and as long as you know peg
to another currency you're right you can
just print as much money as you want and
somehow you'll have all the resources
you need I don't know but talking about
that to fund a green new deal and I was
like ah that sounds lovely but it sounds
a bit magical to me as well I think
people are dreaming of a soft landing
but I don't think this landings gonna be
too soft this next decade is gonna be a
interesting one
you're lucky you're in the mountains you
got you got your farm in the mountains
that he'll be right
yeah and in fact I hate to say it but
global warming will actually make our
land more productive although if you
talk to people who went through you know
a little a civilization apocalypses in
place like Serbia and Argentina the
people who were really prepped and
sitting on a land out in the countryside
they're the ones who were least likely
to survive because there's efz of
bandits so I I hope you got a big bunch
of guns well I will say you better
 beep your horn before you come
out yeah we are well-prepared as I will
leave it at that yeah well you're right
you're right in fact just a quick little
story we first bought the farm this is
actually interesting and ties in a
little bit to some of your other themes
we've done the title search as we
typically do under the English common
law to see the history of the land and
we found quite interesting and extremely
rare in the United States that this
parcel had been settled by one of the
five original settlers in this area in
1746 and our parcel had been handed down
father to son
unbroken for two hundred and twenty
years that's a lot that's ten
generations approximately maybe was
eight generations father-son no break
and then one of them got a mobile phone
and he was finished well a little bit it
was a different temptation in 1973 the
last one of the family decided like
drinking more than he liked farming and
so he sold our farm to a bunch of
back-to-the-land hippies and it turned
into a hippie commune and they tried
growing sheep they tried growing corn
they tried even garlic which is terribly
bad idea where we are for various
reasons and they finally found the one
product that they can always sell guess
what that was reefer right that the
place had sort of a dodgy reputation and
so when we bought the place you know a
nice young married couple with a
six-month-old baby I called the sheriff
just to introduce myself I'm from a law
enforcement family my father was a
Washington DC cop my brother's a cop you
know so I know sort of you know how to
talk to law enforcement people even
though I did have my life of crime
period there in my late teens we may
talk about that later we we get to that
topic but I just called the sheriff said
hey you know we bought the ex place and
you know blah blah a little bit about us
yadda yadda yadda we talked about half
an hour very pleasant conversation and
the last thing he came out of his mouth
was hey y'all know your 35 minutes from
the sheriff's station
something comes up do what you got to do
right that's life in the country and we
take that very fairly seriously anyway
let's get back a little bit onto our
theme here which is self-determination
and interestingly you hit on one of my
favorite topics and listen to the show a
lot you know we talked about a fair off
and it's the Fermi paradox hey yeah
why if there's aliens why don't we see
him and you say maybe the reason I'm
read this is the direct quote from the
book maybe the reason all the powerful
instruments pointed the sky have not yet
been able to detect high-tech alien
civilizations of these unsustainable
societies don't last long enough to
leave a cosmic trace an unsettling
thought that's one of the 99 arguments
about the Fermi paradox maybe yeah I
thought I thought it was my original
idea that one and then
listening to your show and yeah it's
it's like it's one of the there's a lot
of people saying the same thing yeah
yeah the great filter it's actually one
version of it's called the great filter
argument that was focused and formulated
by Robin Hanson who we've had on the
show and this is our argument and the
he's very subtle guy says well you know
the great filter is either behind us or
ahead of us right and maybe the great
filter is something behind us like the
emergence of our particular variety of
multicellular life in which case great
even if it's extremely rare to become a
galactic civilization we've passed the
great filter but he gives a lot of
interesting arguments that makes one
believe that the great filter is
probably in front of us and that should
be an unsettling thought look if you if
you if you find the yet a really vital
missing piece in your game be community
designers is that there has to be some
kind of religion for the whole thing to
work then maybe you could pray to the
great filter
yeah great filter please don't filter us
all right now now we're getting into
some of the places where your
perspective really does come very close
to the game be perspective in almost
same words he talked about the fact that
the fact he's again right out of the
book the stories to find our thinking
today describe an eternal battle between
good and evil springing from an
originating act of sin but these terms
are just metaphors for something much
more difficult to explain the relatively
recent demand that simplicity and order
be imposed upon the complexity of
creation Adam and sprouting from an
ancient seed of narcissism that has
flourished due to a new imbalance in
human societies could you expand on this
concept to things you know two of your
very important themes now surface for
the first time is simplicity
and artificial order imposed on
complexity and then one I had never seen
used quite this way the idea that
narcissism is a very important aspect of
what's going on maybe talk about those
two things
yeah well you know I mean first of all
you know I know entropy my understanding
of it as it happens in a closed system
not that such a thing that it's possible
to have a closed system but you know so
it's it's kind of like this this um
there's this desire in these
civilizations to to create this order
this unity this simplicity
you know citizens who think alike on
most issues and you know uniformity and
thought word and deed I think we're in
the original public school syllabuses
you know it's this idea they're these
monocultures you know and just I mean
just their arrogance of that it's this
is what leads to that I deal with the
narcissism
so I AB original cultures basically the
entire culture is a response to
narcissism it's a way of holding
narcissism in check
it's of basically stopping these I don't
know what you'd call them assholes or
whatever from running amok and making a
mess everywhere but also acknowledging
that everyone's an asshole from time to
time
everyone's a narcissist from time to
time it's a seed in us you know and yeah
so it's um it's basically you know our
social systems our cultures are designed
mostly to hold that in check because
when that gets out of balance you know
things go wrong you know your society
breaks down your systems break down your
your you know your ecology is damaged
you know I guess in game theory terms
it's you know that's see you get a rise
in your defectors and your your
freeloaders and and sociopaths and
predators you know they all come out of
this narcissistic idea and it's just
that original sin of that thought I am
greater than yeah but I really like that
I really like that cuz you know what the
things in our game be talk we talk about
sociopaths and how one of the known
failure modes at least known to us of
game a is the ugly fact that the kind of
power hierarchical power that game a is
built upon attracts sociopath
same way cheese attracts mice and you
know in my four raise into that world
I've come back estimated that probably
10% of c-level executives in larger
corporations in America are actual
sociopaths compared to 1% and the
overall populations and it might be 30%
or more in certain areas like finance in
tech - I like I keep hearing that that's
saying it's almost saying now is that
you know Silicon Valley is an army of
autistics led by a handful of sociopaths
I made that quote that's what I
originally use it to describe Apple back
in the days of jobs and his folks Apple
is an army of autistics led by
sociopaths beautiful well I'll be able
to cite you now and I use that cuz easel
all the time it's beautiful as far as I
know I coined that expression I've never
heard before and it's now being used
fair amount as you say I should have
known it it's so rutti and hid indeed
indeed but and I think it is true that
we do have a sociopathy problem but I
think that's is particular to game a
hierarchical position based power as
opposed to role based leadership which
we'll talk about later
but I think your idea of narcissism is
actually broader and maybe even more
important it truthfully opened my eyes
in an important way and something that
I'm gonna try to add into the working
kit of game be you know not just frankly
power-mad no empathy people but just the
idea that I am greater and there's a lot
of people who are relatively mentally
normal who have that as part of their
operating baggage it's not that you know
you are nothing and I don't give up
about your pain which is the sociopath
but just I am greater right greater than
what why how right and if we can focus
on that I mean you know I would say of
all the learnings I personally made and
there was a lot reading this book this
idea of narcissism as this concept of I
am greater it had some other valence as
to that was the core
one I thought was hugely important one
of things I found very interesting was
that you said that the elders the
knowledge keepers if they're starting to
work with you and talk with you you are
and with you as you talked about we'll
talk about what's a yarn next but that
these elders these wisdom keepers will
withdraw if they sense narcissism in you
and it would seem to me if that could be
built into the game be culture or any
operating system culture that would be a
damn good thing yeah I think that's
universal too because I think I
mentioned in the book that you know I
was I was talking to a Native American
physicist at the Perimeter you Institute
yeah I just I'd come into that
conversation completely the wrong way
and you know I was I don't know I was
distracted and I think I was a bit
narcissistic and he did that he just he
kind of iced me in the end you know and
I thought ah I can't say he's politely
shut it down I've gone the wrong way
here you know yeah and you just accept
that and then you learn the lesson and
move on and I think that's the the big
thing with our culture too is that you
know you're happy to get a rebuke or a
punishment or even an ordeal like a real
ordeal because it transforms you you
know and then after after you've been
punished that's it the crimes done you
don't you don't carry that around in
your reputation forever it's finished
everyone forgets it you know and I think
that's that's a beautiful idea for
anybody's justice system as well I think
but the narcissism is dealt with like
early on because your life is in almost
in these 15 years sort of segments and
you go through sort of four periods of
ordeal before you can become a real man
you know and it kind of happens every 15
years or so and so I guess the first one
happens for men and women you know
around the age of 1415
you know you go through that that rite
of passage that ritual of ordeal and
you experience terror and pain and a lot
of other sort of secret things I can't
go into but basically the upside is you
learn a very important lesson the most
important lesson in the world which is
I'm I'm not special it's really
important to know you're not special and
it's devastating it's devastating at
first but then there's like a series of
cascading realizations that come off
that because eventually you figure out
well actually that means no one else is
special either and so that that feel
makes you feel a bit better and you know
you can sort of start to see a bit of a
governance model coming out of that if
nobody's particularly special then this
is sort of heterotic imperative there
but then you have more you understand
then ah but we we belong to something
special all of us together we belong to
something special you know we're this
custodia species you know we're the
people who belong here and it's just a
beautiful way to live because it just
crushes the narcissism in you but you're
not going into some kind of high of mind
or commune or anything like that because
it's not like that you know um you know
you're indigenous identity is really
strongly individualistic you you're a
bit of a show-off you know it's it's
important to remain as distinct as
possible from those who are most similar
to you you know you you are an
individual but at the same time you're
profoundly interconnected and related
and interdependent with everybody around
you there's a very fluid self other
boundary
yeah I like that a lot a lot of things
to talk about here you know you know we
talk about you're not special of course
it's a bit of a stereotype else I think
it's actually fully true but like many
stereotypes are some you know hint of
truth to it we talk about Millennials in
the West right who gets the trophies for
showing up for the football game rather
than their everybody is special
everything in the original term of
snowflake was every snowflake is
different and it's special and wonderful
etc and you know my day you got the
kicked out if you had that attitude
right well Millennials got 50 different
words with snowflake exactly
right and this unfortunately you know
the helicopter parenting as they call it
here in the West may have produced a
group of higher than normal narcissism
by no means I know a lot of good
Millennials let me get that on table I
work with a lot of Millennials and the
Neo back-to-the-land local agriculture
movement these are grounded people I
mean if you're farming it's hard to be a
narcissist right the universe is your
checksum and it kicks you in the butt
regularly but for the ones that are out
there in this abstract world of online
and jobs that you couldn't explain to
your kids if your life depended on it
maybe there's a lot more narcissism than
there used to be and you throw that into
the you know the inflammatory situation
of social media and the feedback loops
and the signals you get to produce more
narcissism that does not sound good to
me no but I mean but any any threat like
that that arises in a system will will
spark the creation of its opposite
somewhere else in that system you know
so like you say you know you have those
kind of disconnected Millennials some
popping up but then you know straight
away then you have that agricultural
community you're talking about which you
know is very connected people and yeah
yeah well a great example here of the
young Millennials in our area were lots
of farms there was five farms that were
being run by young hard-charging
Millennials to service the high-end
restaurant community over an hour away
but you know they were driving their
produce over there and of course the
pandemic comes all the fine-dining
restaurants closed so they are adaptive
they pull together and quickly build a
website and offer all this unbelievably
nice produce to people to regular
end-user consumers and we now subscribe
to them and once a week we drive down to
the kind of the central farm of the five
farms and they aggregate all the stuff
from the five farms that we've ordered
online and then we drive down press the
button open the tailgate on the SUV they
load the stuff into our cooler and off
we go it's the exact opposite of
narcissism they figured out how to make
something work quite interesting now the
other thing I want to jump to it
in my notes further ahead but I thought
was a very important point very
important and as one of the ways that
the West especially the most current
West is up is this business about
your criminal record right and
permanently disabling you tell a couple
of personal stories here one I was a bad
boy when I was young is that shocking
probably not I was thrown in jail three
times I got a criminal record right and
I got caught once for something really
bad and got out of it but I find the
most unbelievable good luck imaginable
which I'm not gonna get into but in my
day it wasn't such a big deal nobody the
databases didn't exist they couldn't
find out you know and it just wasn't
something that's done I suspect I would
have had a hard time having the good
career I did today with some stupid ass
 19 year old on my
record right and that's really wrong
right and I can go even deeper store and
I don't know what the truth of this is
but I suspect that it is exactly this my
mother's father is a mystery man he grew
up in a town in northern Wisconsin
fought in World War one traveled around
the world as a merchant marine and then
showed up in place where my mother is
from very far in northern Minnesota and
just showed up there one day and
wouldn't tell anybody really where he
came from he never left the county again
for 30 years never spoke of his family
etc and we figure he was essentially on
the run from some misdeed probably
criminal and yet in those days easy
enough just move right and behave
yourself and go on with your life and he
had a reasonably productive life he was
an eccentric individual say the least
but he was able to have a normal life
had nine kids etc and this idea that
people are stigmatized for ever by
something for which they have received
their just punishment for strikes me is
very up and actually one of the
bases of some of the black/white racial
problems in the United States right and
I really do like this idea that we
should go back to wait even used to be
in the United States until 4050 years
ago
that hey you done your time you're a
free man you're a citizen again let's
just forget about that and go forth and
sin no more
that's it I mean it's I don't know it
just seems pretty simple to me but I
mean you have to make sure that that
ordeal is transforming the person though
we can't be fioor it's hard to tell
alright well I think for some things you
want some degree of certainty like um I
think some people probably need to lose
their junk before they're unleashed back
into the community you know for example
yeah but you it has to be some kind of
ordeal that they go through that
actually transforms them and changes
them and some people who are wise enough
to to see that that has happened it
can't just be you know yeah I I've taken
Jesus as my personal Lord and Savior and
you know reading the Bible now so can
you let me out early because you know
that you know I've seen enough movies to
know that that's half the time
you know but look I think all this is
coming out of this some obsession with
safety and security in this idea that
it's a human right to be safe you know I
that's that's it's just it's such a new
idea like so when you're growing up as a
kid you run around with a knife on your
belt and all these sorts of things that
that was just normal like five minutes
ago you know but now I mean I know
that's a that's a oh it's Ness is it's
illegal you've got to get fine for that
because we've got to keep everybody safe
you might lose an eye that's just it's
just awful see we don't have we don't we
don't have a word for safety in
Aboriginal languages and every algorithm
language I've seen there's no word for
safety there are words for protection
though and protection is a very
different thing because protection has
agency as part of it you know your
protection is your responsibility then
you have agency in assuring your safety
but also in in our communities you're
not just responsible for your own
protection but the protection active
protection not just passive safety of
the all the people around you
and so that means that you're watching
their back they're watching your back
you know and in a group you you are
protected and there's power in that and
that power has been taken away you know
and I guess that's where if we talk
about violence later looks like enough
to be another episode the way we're
going but you know the agency of
violence has been taken away and
monopolized and concentrated into the
hands of a few people and you know you
see how badly that goes pretty much
lately especially you know if that
doesn't work out too well for everybody
like everything else in in a complex
system you know violence needs to be
something that's distributed throughout
this system and you need lots of agents
who are capable of using it and I think
if there's any group that's denied
access to the agency of violence then
you know that that groups not going to
have a particularly good time yeah let's
talk about this one maybe this will be
one of our last topics for this first
session to our listeners Tyson I have
talked offline and we realize there's
just so much good stuff to talk about
that we're gonna not try to jam it all
into one 90-minute episode and we're
gonna come back and do a part two you
know I'm my podcast I've talked quite a
bit about when I was a kid I kept the
knife in my pocket from literally age
eight right that's just what we did you
know my senior year in high school sort
of a almost mandatory part of manly
dress was to have a folding buck knife
you know a big hunting knife on your
belt in a leather scabbard
could you imagine today if 50% of the
seniors at a high school showed up with
big old buck knives on their belt they
call out the National Guard probably
right in the end of the world if I what
the hell right revolution and then the
other one again is one of my pet peeves
and that's why I resonated with what you
wrote about violence you know V word or
is you know considered so bad by so many
people when I was a kid everybody fought
all boys fought and a non-trivial number
of girls fought you know it didn't
really matter frankly if you won or lost
right and some people were better
fighters than others but having the
heart to fight was a key part of being a
person in our community and as you say
it
essentially was almost like a cayenne it
was a protective measure that any group
of us knew we all knew how to take care
of ourselves and so it was a group of us
we run it a group of others whoever
those were we weren't too concerned
about it we weren't overreacting we
weren't anxious etc because we all knew
how to take care of ourselves we all
been punched a few times we knew that
the world does not end if you get
punched in the face a couple of times
he's as Christ right but today kids
fight in school and literally they call
the police what the hell if you know
anything about young mammals
particularly male mammals they all play
fight spar etc and we had what I called
the code of Adelphi which is the town I
grew up in which there was definitely
unwritten rules for fighting within the
in-group which is you never kick
somebody when they're on the ground you
know you never you never tore ears you
never went for the eyes you know you
never kick somebody in the balls well
enough provocation maybe but that was
the outer limits but and nobody I mean I
got knocked out right collarbones got
broken occasionally but oh well right
but there was never any serious damage
but guess what we did not have in those
days school shootings the thought was
just unthinkable you know you had a
problem with somebody we went underneath
the the pear tree and you had it out
right well in how many how many
hospitalizations do you remember from
those fights 0 right 0 no zero overnight
you know again maybe you have to have
your collarbone set or something but no
hospitalizations overnight yeah that's
it but but it's not like that now
because the kids don't have access to
those codes of conflict because you know
all violence is bad so it's just not
allowed so they don't understand the
codes and the rules and when the
violence erupts in the school I mean
they they they're getting someone on the
ground and stomping on their head and
trying to kill them that they're doing
horrendous damage you know so now when
fights happened they're they're horribly
violent terribly damaging and as I said
we all carry knives but it was at be an
absolute violation of the code to ever
produce a knife in a fight amongst your
peers right it was not even thinkable
truthfully it was so deeply engaged in
the culture and if someone had you know
the group would have just John
then and beating their ass right but I
literally never saw it happen and
probably a hundred fights that I
witnessed that anyone produced a knife
even though probably 80% of them had a
knife on their person just wasn't done
I'm in a strong agreement that this
attempt to make life safe and padded
with foam and particularly young males
not being allowed at all to fight it's
just terrible in multiple levels you
can't really become a fully integrated
person that violence is gonna be
sublimated not having been articulated
in a code right a cultural norms as you
say instead of you know standing up and
sparring with your hands all right you
know no big deal honor was made by both
parties nobody was hurt too bad you know
instead without that kind of contact
finally you know the person that's being
persecuted snaps and you know brings a
baseball bat to school and almost kill
somebody that's what we have instead or
we're still there bringing a gun to
school and I was very intrigued actually
at your the again come to the same idea
from a very different perspective from
the perspective of your culture that hey
you know violence does have a place but
it needs to be acculturated hmm well
it's it demands expression and you know
so we have this idea of the you've got
the euro big power or big spirit that's
in your belly and that mental illness
comes from allowing things to build up
there you know negative emotions and
things like that so you have to give
them expression immediately you know if
you're angry you yell it and if it's if
it's you know a big transgression and
you're very angry about it then then you
have to fight you have to fight the
person that's transgressed against you
but it has to be public it has to be
transparent and you don't want to break
the rules because the crowd will stop
you you know straight up you're not
pulling here you're not hitting already
anybody when they're on the ground
you're not kicking you know it's just
both straight just boxing you know you
know they say every fight like I keep
hearing these Americans saying you know
every fight always ends up on the ground
not for us they don't
on the ground if someone falls he wait
until they get up again episode was true
in my community as well now there was
actually two kinds of fighting there was
this call it ritualistic fighting where
you stand and throw punches right and
then there was the very much rarer
really serious grudge fight
which case people would go to the ground
but that was a different thing and there
was also what I would call fighting with
others you know outside of our community
in which case you modulated the level of
violence based on an assessment of the
risk and you might well go to the ground
but there was a big distinction you know
cultural ceremonial fighting was always
done standing and with your hands it
sounds very similar I'm working on a
research project at the moment actually
it says it's a study myself and another
indigenous researcher where I'm doing a
study on settler on settler violence and
so we're looking at like our data set is
a hundred YouTube street fight videos of
settlers fighting in different settler
states around the world so you know
Taiwan Israel New Zealand Australia
Canada and the US there's heaps there
yeah and we're applying a heuristic of
indigenous rule-governed violence so
we're taking our fighting rules and
we're we're judging the settler fights
are based on our rules it's kind of like
a cheeky reverse anthropology thing I
like it but we're finding governance is
it's almost non-existent in these fights
and it's terrifying
you know like one of our biggest rules
is there's no collateral damage you know
you don't do anything that's going to
injure the crowd but this so much of it
innocent bystanders getting taken out
and all these sorts of things yes quite
a renders
but what we're finding really horrendous
is when there is some attempt at
governance it's usually by women but
that women are absolutely prohibited in
all hundred cases women are absolutely
prohibited from participating as
combatants that that's an absolute no-no
and see it's the opposite if you look up
indigenous five videos most of those
five videos will be women
fighting you know so our women do fight
and naturally human women do you know
it's only these civilized women who are
prevented from fighting they're one of
the groups that are denied access to the
agency of violence you know so you see
even like men who look like big in a big
melee a whole heap of men just
struggling together furiously trying to
kill each other like they're really
going berserk and then a woman will
start fighting off to the side and all
the men on both sides will stop and join
forces and just stop her for her we saw
this time and time again the the only
role a woman's allowed to perform us to
sort of you know try and break the fight
up and go don't touch him
okay that sort of thing you know
screaming from the sidelines you know
the one yes so that's that's that's
yielding some interesting results but
that it's the gendered nature of this
some this problem with with violence in
this imbalance that's kind of disturbing
and I do touch on that in the book like
I feel I feel that Western femininity is
a you know it's it's it's it's kind of
you know projected as this universal
femininity that this is what feminine is
but it's not that's what any person
who's completely confined and
disempowered from their for their whole
life that's how they're going to act
they're going to mince around and
they're going to throw like a girl
you know this through indigenous women
don't throw like a girl it throw like a
human exactly the same way that men
throw you know so I mean this is quite a
cloistered life where these poor women
are at or to occupy less space than
males and all the rest you know it it um
it ends up with women in this weakened
state
and they're basically at the mercy of of
anybody who's around and that's um I
don't know I don't like that too much
yeah you know like word I use as overly
domesticated I mean it quite literally
in the same way that a cow is kind of a
stupid and weak version of a buffalo
right yeah and yes women were overly
domestic especially in the West you know
think of the Victorian or early 20th
century woman in particular you know
well any civilization was I mean it's
the same with in Asia
yeah the foot-binding things like that
yeah Middle East as well you know
anywhere anywhere civilization touches
you end up with this weird kind of
domestication of women that sort of
twisted and mutated into these weird
weak and soft little things and it's
some I think it's it's just an absolute
crime against nature against everything
to do that to a being so yeah and now
we're doing it to the men especially in
the West actually in the more affluent
sections of the West - this thing that
we talked about before this snowflake
ism and super safety and it's the same
thing it's you know taking the self
domestication one step further and that
means that you are now uh turley
dependent on civilization all right how
many people do we know who just that
would have no chance at all to survive
if the support apparatus came down well
I like the tees of when we get into
talks you know I like to scare them a
little bit about POC elliptic
and I say dude you know it's gonna
happen to you if the apocalypse happens
you're gonna end up as jerky smoked over
a burning tire fire I mean this is what
happens to a domesticate of being when
they're thrown into a wild situation
we're into just the reality of nature
that's when you get fight or flight so
fight or flight is not a natural
condition for human like that's that's
one of the the myths of primitivism
that's projected back onto this
Paleolithic past that you know our
entire culture human culture has evolved
from fight-or-flight responses you know
because a tiger right like you never
know you'd be walking along in a tiger
or jump
and get you it's like ah no not if
you're a part of that system you know if
you belong to that landscape and you're
an integral part of it you always know
where the Tigers are you're never
surprised by a tiger
you know nobody in my community has ever
been taken by a crocodile because you
know we know where the crocodiles are
yes you know you're part of it and
there's always another it's it's never
just fight or flight you know so I'm so
I'm walking on the I'm fishing for
stingrays with a spear with my dad at a
place called a collet and we're walking
along there and this is sand banquet so
we're up to about our ribs in the water
and this is sand bank dropping off into
the dark and you can see the dragon mock
from the crocodile that's come down the
beach and he's in there and he's a giant
crocodile like a big very big old
crocodile so we know that he's somewhere
along there he's just resting on that
Bank and looking and we're walking
meters away from the edge of that in the
water and dad says as long as you're not
thinking about that crocodile if you can
have the discipline to know he's there
but not think about him at the point
when you walk past him he won't get you
so that's a hell of a meditation to do
under pressure I got to tell you you
know and then and then we're walking a
big tiger shark
starts just speeding towards us like a
flash of light out of nowhere and dad's
just straight up boom hits him on the
nose with the spear and and it turns and
off it goes you know it's there's not
there's not fight or flight in that
relation there with those predators
there's none of those things there's
just a profound knowingness you know and
then he's trying to train me up to do
the same thing it's it's it's like a I
don't know it should have been a
training montage it's like Iraqi or
something but he's um so there's a big
flock of these stingrays and he's
pushing them towards me and making them
all run towards me swim really fast
towards me and crash into my legs and he
says if you panic and lift your
they'll sting you let's say you've got a
stared so he is making all these
stingrays crash into my legs to sort of
train me up to have that that kind of
fearlessness you know to overcome that
and have that relation come into
relation with those things and if you're
in relation with that and in relation
with your place and you're part of that
complex system and your mind not your
brain and we'll have to get into that
next time is extending out into that
system you're not going to be surprised
by a tiger so it's it's flight-or-fight
responses is a I mean I know that's a
game theorists like to base a lot of
their theory in a lot of you know these
kind of projections backwards onto a
Paleolithic past that they're imagining
but they're kind of imagining what what
it would be like for them now if they
were dropped back there they're not
imagining what it would be like to
actually be part of a landscape to be
part of a natural system and to be
integral to that and what kind of
thinking what kind of genius it would
take to be able to hold all of that and
for that to be the model of your
thinking yeah it's a point about the
genius I mean something that you allude
to you don't give the numbers but you
allude to it it is known in physical
anthropology that our Paleolithic
ancestors had bigger brains than we did
by about 10% because they had to deal
with all this stuff right frankly we can
get a little stupid and we have in the
same way that a cow is the stupid form
of Buffalo you know a domesticated human
is about 10 percent less brain capacity
than cro-magnon man yeah as much as the
capacity it's the connections you got
trillions of potential neural
connections and we're only using about
15% of them at the moment if you're a
genius so you know um if you can imagine
how that brain would have evolved and
what kind of thinking we would have had
to have been doing to even grow that
brain in the first place then you're
getting an idea of what some Paleolithic
and Neolithic lifestyles were like and
that's what you need to base your
theories and your models are
and I needed to apply that complexity
that way because otherwise you're
grounding it in something that's not a
reality and it's he gonna have a flawed
system coming out of that yeah I think
there's a lot a lot to that and again it
comes back to this domestication why
well I will say though I have to I have
to kick back on you which you said a
couple times in the book oh we're only
using 10% or 15% of our brain that's
actually not true
no no of the neural connections of the
potential neural connections of the
brain using the whole brain all the time
yeah all the time right but of course
the way the brain works is by pruning
the connections we actually lose 50% of
our connections between the age of about
one and six and that's how the brain is
sculpted so about a hundred I don't
believe that's a particularly
significant well then the nucleus
nucleus masalas kind of dies off we'll
talk about that next time I actually
called that out as a specific thing to
talk about and I agree with you there
that modern education so-called what I
call the sausage factory does very bad
things to the young brain and again back
to this idea of self domestication that
civilization has been doing to us for
10,000 years in the West at least is one
of my favorite quotes which is the Sheep
spends his whole life worrying about the
wolf only to be eaten by the shepherd
that's it yeah that's that's it all
right one last thing before we go here
and I thought about where to put this in
in my topic less cuz it is important to
the rest of the story but I didn't think
it was good to have up front until we
actually did a little bit of it which is
this concept in your culture of the yard
a form of storytelling but not just a
storytelling in American English when
you say you're telling a yard it's a
little old-fashioned first of all
something my grandfather about is I will
tell you about you know got the yarn
here young feller and it usually means
long humorous and not very serious it's
an archaic Americanism I suppose it came
over for me
somewhere along the line but you use it
in a very different way could you you
know just tell us a little bit about the
art of yarning I guess is the way to ask
the question yeah well look I think it's
um it you know comes back to this idea
of a distributed sort of governance
distributed cognition all of this sort
of stuff it's just a modality that
arises from that so basically the truth
and and the big picture that you need to
form of the context that you're in so
that you can make accurate predictions
moving forward you know so that you can
make plans that are actually going to
work in the real world you have to have
an aggregate of stories so you can't
just have one story dominating you know
you can't have one point of view you
know winning the debate and coming out
on top and then we have to build
everything from that model you know
every different story every person's
story must be heard and the truth lies
in that aggregate of all those stories
you know I think I mean a lot of people
are doing that with through with the
kinds of data that they're gathering you
know in corporations now to help them
out they're getting all those micro
yarns I guess and putting them together
and and analyzing them to come up with a
bigger picture and the outliers in those
in those yards are important to you know
like the ones that don't sort of go
along with the consensus you know that
they actually come out of it as well so
a yarn is kind of almost a ritualized
you know conversation with a group of
people and it's it's quite dynamic and
you know overlapping and and there's
lots of story there's lots of acting
things out drawing images in the air or
on the ground you know basically with
the goal of arriving at a loose
consensus of what the reality is you
know and yeah your decisions come out of
that there's usually food that's eaten
or a cup of tea or something like that
or it's done around an activity of you
know making something or or whatever but
it happens like that is quite ritualized
and good but you see a lot of these
things coming through people talk about
talking circles and yawning circles and
all these things and I'm sure you have
it in the states too you know where they
sit in a circle and go round clockwise
with a bloody Talking Stick or something
you're not I mean so everybody because
people are oh my god you know eat you
know everybody has to have a voice but
people have to be heard you know and
that that that's one of the the most
annoying whining things that annoys me
about the hero we're living in is this
idea of being heard I I don't feel heard
and you know so everybody has to have
their turn to speak even if what they're
saying is rubbish and they're going for
way too long probably like I'm doing now
and you get someone monologuing and then
everyone has to sit politely and wait
for them to finish and then they pass
the stick to the next person and it goes
clockwise too and and they kind of I
don't know that they're kind of saying
they're doing something indigenous or
indigenized and that you know a circle
is you know is is more democratic and
there's no hierarchies here and that's
 you basically turn a circle
into a line hey you know it's it's a
queue that's going around us it's that
or a Boris that snake eating its tail I
mean a real a real yarn is a lot more
complex than that and actually you know
give this rise to some very important
outcomes and you know
let me feedback to you something in my
own experience that sounds fair amount
like the way you describe a yarn you
know one of the passions of my life
since I was fifteen years old has been
deer hunting one of the things I've done
with my best friends and to this day
they're still my best friends goddamnit
fifty years later right and in the
evening after a day's hunt there's this
very strange complicated beautiful
fulfilling conversation that happens
amongst the hunters let's imagine in
later day a typical number of us it will
be cooking together eating together and
drinking together let's not forget that
maybe nine or ten people in the fairly
small little hunt camp and we'll be
telling what we saw during the day we'll
be talking about where we saw deer where
they were coming from where they were
going to what they were eating what
their behavior was like and then oh by
the way we might also do a digression
and to what we were daydreaming about
right or what we're thinking about and
then and to your point about it not
being linear and everybody having their
ten minutes of time I mean it's people
talking over each other but it's also an
interesting one is that some hunters are
frankly better than other hunters right
some hunters are super observant I'm
thinking in our little hunting circle
and so X when X speaks people listen
because X really knows deer
right and if you want to get a deer
especially a big one we're typically
buck hunters trophy hunters this
particular group you listen to an X as
and you'll learn more than what Y has to
say but Z now this Z is the most amazing
one Z is a buffoon at one level in that
he is not super observant of what's
going on around him he's not a great
shot he's got bad eyes but he still gets
his fair share of deer but what does Z's
super power Z is the repository of
cultural memory Z remembers every detail
of every deer kill of this group ever
right typically as related by the hunter
himself you know Z didn't observe all
this stuff but Z listens with great
precision and interest to the stories as
they're told and he turns them into
history
in the middle of one of these wild
floating talking over each other meta
conversations about deer hunting there
may be a story that's sufficiently
similar a piece of data that's
sufficiently similar to say hazy tell us
the story about when H shot that
10-point buck over on Big Buck Ridge
right and then sure enough Z will tell
the story in impeccable detail and we'll
have it more or less right every time
hmm we'll see so the wisdom of your
group the knowledge of your group and
the deer knowledge it doesn't sit with
any individual it's held by the entire
group and all the stories absolutely and
then there's an outcome to it you know
we decide where each of us are going to
hunt the next day that's it and you know
again it makes a big difference because
the the deer run differently each year
depending on how the a corn crop is how
much grass there is how much water how
cold it is is there a full moon or not
is there snow on the ground and so and
further because we're trying to be safe
we want everyone to know where everybody
else is so this whole meta conversation
actually has a result was at the end of
the conversation each one of the nine or
ten hunters has selected one of the
named spots that's the other interesting
thing all these little spots were you
hunt have names right
you know there's big buck there's white
oak flat there's morg hollow there's the
nob you know it's funny and then by the
end of the night it might go on for four
or five hours people will call out I'm
going to the nob I'm going to Nash field
I'm going here and it says your stories
your stories on maps as well it's indeed
and we all hunt at the same place every
time so we have a deep deep knowledge of
place about this place where we hunt see
I mean everything that I write about in
the book you know it's one of the
biggest reactions I get is just how
familiar people feel with with these
things these indigenous ways that go ah
I've done that or I've experienced that
and it's basically that's just it's your
factory settings indigenous is just is
human baseline human who you are
you know um you can be taken away from
that and domesticated into some kind of
shriveled ridiculous other kind of
person but that at your base is who you
are that was who you were born ass every
baby's born the same and it's born in
that wild state and yeah and it's not
until it gets sort of twisted and
domesticated and ruined and broken that
turns into something else this
industrialized thing that we see before
us now that feedlot people that we've
become people are familiar here and I
keep telling people in the last message
I'd say this is doable mining the
margins for indigenous wisdom you not
don't need to be looking for some exotic
other you know you'll find a lot of it
is right there with you if you really do
look into yourself you you'll find
fragments of that and each fragment
contains the pattern of the whole and
the whole can be extrapolated out from
from any fragment I believe so you know
you you find your own way and your own
stories and your own activities in your
own place there it would be my advice to
people I think that resonates true to me
and you know it's one of the thing I
took away from this book is that the
best parts of my life are the ones that
are the most resonant with the
indigenous perspective and well I've had
these great peak experience truthfully
most of Western civilization life I've
led has been a little on the gray side
right and we're gonna build a new
civilization why shouldn't we make it as
wonderful as we can right incorporate
more of these deep real human things
well with that I'm gonna I think we're
gonna end it for today but as we talked
about we're definitely coming back for
for our part too to dig into a lot more
in this extraordinarily rich book we'll
talk about woodworking we'll talk about
sand talk and the drawings that you've
done and lots more you know hopefully we
might be able to do run some thought
experiments and see if we can get that
robot diría as we're kin a bit bad
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music dot-com