we're in a mythopoetic situation we're
like we'll begin the fire with an Old
Testament deity it's invisible and it's
a ubiquitous and it's making us all
distrust each other and it's demanding
horrible horrible you know
world-shattering purity codes that we
have to follow or we or we'll get killed
if we like this is like being in the Old
Testament right and so all of this is
being churned up and we have nothing and
it's deep in our cognitive heritage in
our cultural heritage and we have
nothing to shape that so that all of the
self-deceptive machinery can be
challenged it just runs and so of course
it feel very meaningful so welcome to a
Multiversity project today we're having
John rebecky on to talk about mythology
time and faith as they relate to the
coronavirus and an interaction with the
ongoing meaning crisis so thank you
again for coming on our show John oh
it's pleasure to be here I I enjoyed my
last time so I was looking forward to
this
yeah we're really psyched that you were
able to make it back on oh sure for sure
I like what you guys are doing it's good
work it's good work thank you thank you
yes we're gonna start off with a couple
introductory questions and we'll move on
to our first section which is mythology
so to start off John you just wanted to
ask how are you doing with all this on a
personal level
oh sure on a personal level well it's
been weird like like I said the it's
people are taking my the world has
changed in the way that suddenly made my
work more relevant apparently and so are
more busy and in that way I'm also busy
because I'm I decided in order to try
and help out I would start live
streaming a meditation course over a
10-week period which seems to be helping
people and then I'm continues to like a
lot of my work writing and researching
Kristin Christmas the Pietro and I are
writing multiple things we got chapters
coming out in books and all kinds of
stuff like that
so that's been good the I mean it's been
hard because I don't live with my
partner so we decided if
we got separated by lockdown that I
would stay with my son and my apartment
and she'd stay with her daughter in her
house so I I don't get to see her
physically and it's been quite a quite a
while you know well of course we're
facetiming a lot but that's a bit of
that's a bit of a challenge yeah it
sounds hard it is hard but in some ways
it's been good too I used to talk about
how people say you want to see how a
relationships going or if it's going to
be a good one you know paint a house or
go on a trip but it looks like go
through a pandemic together is a really
good test too because we're we are
discovering I mean I always knew this
but it's been made now very apparent to
me you there's a real significant depth
to our relationship and so of course
where we're exploring and developing
that quite significantly so that death
you know I mean of course I want to see
her so that's been a challenge but I
mean compared to a lot of other people
that's that's relatively minor my son
for example he's like he was all
completely out of work was so it's okay
he's living with me so he's safe and
everything I mean I'm in a privileged
position that way I mean because I I was
able to move almost all the teaching and
research I do online you know the not
that impacted that way I know a lot of
other people are facing much greater
hardships a much greater risk the one
significant thing is it's my it's been
causing my health to suffer partially
it's also the weather here if you
remember in Canada April is a very it's
the cruelest a month as TS Eliot said
right in the weather is very volatile so
my ear has been very bad no doubt both
the weather and all the back the
background stress from the pandemic so
that's about where I'm sitting how are
you guys all doing where are you guys
we're all in Mexico what I thought
you're all in Mexico yeah we're doing
well like we're trying to take on a lot
and like produce a lot of extra content
during the coronavirus yeah good bunch
of other like personal projects and
other projects were working on so it's
it's weird it's hard it's good it's like
it's really tense there
no time for rest but also we're all very
lucky and have a good place to be so
good to hear you guys are relatively
safe though is that yeah yeah we're safe
it's been interesting like I just moved
to Mexico like a few weeks before this
happened so it's few transitions at once
but yeah like Sakata said we're really
lucky good yeah speaking of the pandemic
which we're gonna be speaking about this
whole time we were all kind of curious
in in some of your interviews that
you've done recently you mentioned that
you don't believe this will be the only
pandemic so they're just wondering if
you speak to that I'm just making a
probabilistic causal argument and the
argument goes like this there were
causal factors that probably led to this
they have to do with things like melting
the permafrost and cutting down the
rainforests and disturbing ocean
currents and air currents globalization
of trade etc and those factors aren't
going away they're not going away
and if anything they will probably
continue to accelerate and so I think
it's highly likely I mean the scientific
community has been has been predicting a
pandemic for quite at some time and so
the fact that the prediction has come
true provides empirical confirmation
that those factors do lead to pandemics
and the fact that those factors will
continue on means it's highly probable
that there will be other pandemics yeah
that's interesting I mean one thing I've
been thinking about is like with
antibiotic resistance like stuff like
this might happen more on a bacterial
level sure I think it's gonna happen
more the antibiotic resistance is gonna
happen but I think we're also gonna see
just a lot more viral stuff happening
because we're just done walking a lot of
stuff and we're just doing a lot of
ecosystems and we're causing a lot of
migration of species it's you know and
we're just interacting with each other
at a much more intense level to frame
this as let's just enjoy this we'll get
over this and then everything will go
back to normal for centuries and
centuries I think is I think that's not
a rational framing one of the concerns I
is I multiply have multiple concerns
about that we'll get into them the ones
that I'm sort of concerned that the
socio-economic level is we can't keep
doing this debt intensification every
time we get a pen down we got to come up
with a way of coordinating the financial
aspects of the economy in a much more
resilient fashion sorry I'm not an
expert on that I can't comment on all I
can see is that this pattern can't
continue so I don't know what that means
for us my sin is that what's interesting
is people are considering things like
ubi that were just beyond the pale
twenty three months ago right now it's
like oh wait maybe we need to think
about this and stuff like that right so
you mentioned just increasing
globalization and cutting down the
rainforests and stuff do you think that
maybe maybe these these factors that
these causal factors that lets the
pandemic could have been avoided somehow
or do you see it more as like inevitable
that that that we're gonna have
increasing pandemics and then and that
the way the way back to normalcy is just
going to be that we sort of we weather
the storm in some way and become
stronger as a result so that's a really
good question I think what I would say
about that is that given in our cultural
framing in which the only unchallenged
normative Authority for us was the
market and this is an argument to Thomas
bj√∂rkman made really really well I think
in his work and now how we got into the
medic crisis I think as long as we have
a homogenous monolithic normativity like
that that is in a sense abstracted from
the environment I think that therefore
pandemics are going to be inevitable if
we were to make a change in a deep
change in our cultural cognitive grammar
and we had normativity x' other than the
market and we had a notion of political
economic organization that was deeply
embedded in culture and history and
especially environment then it is
possible we could make the requisite
changes
to reduce or at least ameliorate those
factors significantly so that we could
reduce the probability of pandemics okay
so we're kind of tying pandemics with
capitalism not just I mean not in
capitalism in open up in a particular
way the idea that after the postmodern
critique what happens is the market
survives as the default of normativity
than the default Authority so and then
what happens to that is that everything
else gets bent into this market the
market is basically our God right it's
the it's the hyper object that is
omnipresent right and regulates
everything about how we think and see an
active feel and I don't know that's an
inevitable feature of capitalism per se
but it is it is definitely where we have
gotten to historically I mean there was
a time when we had you know we had the
state as separate from the market and
the church as separate from the state on
the market and they were playing off
against each other and that was perhaps
a better condition for us but we we have
especially over the last you know
basically since Thatcher and Reagan
we've decided no no let's let's destroy
everything that in any way resists the
markets freedom of action because that
will somehow bring utopia and I think
that vision is what I'm criticizing
harshly I'm not right and and I think
that is what we need to take into
consideration and I think what's
happening is people are realizing wait
a lot of that service that I did for the
market it really did not up to anything
I'm now here I'm alone in my home and
what did all that what was all that for
and what's the market doing for me now
in fact the market doesn't seem to be
helping this problem at all
it seems to be floundering around like a
decapitated child right and it's okay
and so what do we do well we tried
gather together the remaining machinery
of culture and what's left of the state
and we try oh can we come up with a
solution yeah that's right and so I
think we're maybe we're coming to a
point where we're realizing
the market isn't a god and we shouldn't
treat it that way now that doesn't make
me a communist and it doesn't make me an
anarchist infected I think try because
all of those are still all pitching
around just different either completely
worshipping or completely demonizing the
market and that is to foreground it in
exactly the way I want to call into
question I want to say we need to
rethink about we used to have
normativity 's of culture and history
that's what tradition used to mean and
we used to have normativity 's around
spirituality that's what religion met
and meaning making and we used to have
normativity 's around you know
reflection and the cultivation of wisdom
there were cultures you know in which
wisdom schools were flourishing and
working we were given high you know high
value within that culture and cultures
other than our own our culture is not
any kind of necessity there we have many
examples of alternatives and so I'm
hoping that when people or people are
now in the place where they can maybe
consider those alternatives more
seriously interesting yeah it's
definitely requiring us to rethink how
we do things for sure yeah well we're
not going back I mean the a great danger
here is a kind of naive nostalgia where
everybody's holding their breath until
we get back to where the way it used to
be it's not going back it's not going
back the way it didn't go back after the
Black Plague it's not going back the way
didn't go back after the Great
Depression in World War two it's going
back it's not going back okay so you
think this this event is sort of on the
on the same level as one of those on
like the Great Depression or the Black
Plague or something like that well what
was the last event that was worldwide
yeah I guess I guess so yeah in terms of
degree it's it doesn't seem to have
gotten that bad yet but I guess it could
it could get there and that's that's
pretty scary
I mean they're projecting deaths in the
United States that will be greater than
the deaths for World War one and might
approach the deaths the Americans
suffered in World War two so could even
get there possibly a degree oh wow
yeah this may be a good segue onto onto
mythology do you want to take a coup d
well yeah one of the things you've kind
of laid the ground
right there one of the things that
you've mentioned is that many people
right now that you've spoken with seem
to be experiencing like more meaning
during this time as opposed to like this
kind of sense of not knowing what the
purpose and meaning is in life and and
one potential explanation of many that
you brought up for that was that the
coronavirus crisis harkens back to
almost mythological times or even
biblical times or like that that kind of
a context might be coming up in our
minds and making us feel like we we have
more meaning in our lives right now
could you expand on that connection yeah
thanks Katie so let me let me try and
let's unpack because I've been putting a
lot of thought and discussion into this
over the last couple of weeks with a lot
of people in waterful I just did a
really had a really great discussion
with David fuller from rebel wisdom on
just all this sort of stuff because he's
doing a thing on sort of conspiracy
theories around kovat so what I want to
do is front because I went on pack the
phenomenology because I think it's quite
complex so people I think are actually
having this very complex relationship to
meaning right now
part of it is what you said Katie but I
want to try to expand it out because I
think that you know I I'm continually
sort of revising how I'm thinking about
this and how I'm approaching it and I
definitely want to get into the
mythopoetic and biblical aspects of this
but so as I've been talking to more
people and more discussion and getting
what news I can and the news is all
weirdly you know one of the my
criticisms as the news keeps just sort
of focusing on you know the biological
and economic aspects and what we're not
paying attention to is we're building up
sort of a mental health crisis
that's going to be quite significant and
we and and and we need to be we need to
start thinking about that and putting in
machinery to try and ameliorate that as
soon as we can why well think about it
so you know in some of the work I did
with Chris and and Chris and I've been
working a lot on this together Chris
master Pietro we're going through Dom
aside and we talked about how the
meeting crisis in the book where we
wrote with fellow
i'ma Civic right and how we also had
something like this in the Hellenistic
. ama site is losing a sense of home and
so a lot of people are losing a sense of
home or at least they're experiencing an
incredible contraction in the sense of
home and where they feel safe and where
they feel at home they don't feel at
home going outside it's almost like a
agoraphobic a lot of people now and you
know they're losing a lot of their other
homes people can't go to their workplace
which is a significant contributor to
people's identity in a lot of way so
you're getting a significant dama side
you're getting a reciprocal narrowing
the world the options in the world are
suddenly collapsing and who and what you
can be is narrowing so you're getting
that happening connections a lot of
connections are being lost so something
that people aren't talking about yet
publicly although it's coming up in a
lot of these discussions I'm having
there's a lot of relationships are
fracturing right now a lot of
relationships are fractured and a lot of
relationships are being strained I would
you know I've mentioned that it's not
strain of it since that I think it's at
risk but you know there's a strain on
the relationship I have with my partner
and because we can't physically live
with each other right now all right
and so you're getting a loss of
connection and then this is again I'm
seeing this a lot and a lot of different
groups of people I'm talking to and it's
not again getting into sort of the
official mainstream media's it's not
catching the eye but many people and I
think Katy was even sort of alluding to
this many people are describing their
sense of the connectedness to the world
being fundamentally changed so an
adjective that I'm hearing a lot to try
and get this complex shift is surreal
everything feels surreal and you know
you guys are known eleda yes that's a
great word right and so that's that's
you know and that's again and notice
that that has mental health dangers
associated with it right if you people
put people in a long-term environment
where they're constantly feeling surreal
they're losing options the world is
narrowing they're losing a sense of home
they're losing their relationships this
is really really dilatory us now so
that's all happening now on the other
hand there are there are people who get
sort of a salience intensity other the
virus it's a very
salient thing that it's very intense and
it keeps their attention and for right
now as long as that the novelty is is is
going that will give them a sense of
sort of meaning the thing we have to
remember about that is we're not in a
sprint were in a marathon and that's
gonna fade and then people are on their
face a kind of eroding endurance that
they have to go through the net then
there's another aspect to it which is
people people are falling back on the
meaning making machinery because it's
what's left it's what's left right and
they're realizing that that's actually
where most of the mattering comes from
is the meaning making this journey and
so they're because of that they might be
experiencing an intensification of
meaning precisely because they're now
much more invested in the meaning making
machinery but there's also an attendant
danger there notice how I keep sort of
giving and taking because the attendant
danger there is that people are being
thrown back onto their subjectivity and
right and that meaning making machinery
and they're finding that their culture
hasn't really afforded them a lot of
depth and resources and resiliency
around all of that machinery so so when
you talk about the meaning making
machinery are you referring to like a
societal sort of collective meaning
making or are you talking about like
individual meaning making well both and
that's the point there inseparably bound
together okay I see right even let let's
just you the prosaic example you want to
think on your own you're gonna think in
English but you didn't come up with
English you didn't make it okay English
is not part really of your subjectivity
although you treat it as if it is right
this goes to deeper points that pick and
shine and Heidegger made about language
I'm just using sort of a concrete
version of their argument to point out
something right a sensor so the and I'm
talking about what the meaning and life
literature shows you know I'm working on
a paper right now is with some
colleagues and arrays of mine you know
the things that really make meaning in
life or you know mattering to other
people you know being a sense of caring
for others being cared for others
connecting to oneself
of to others to reality all the
connection machinery the connection and
coherence machinery so so when you're
when you're saying people are falling
back on meaning making machinery right
so so is that is that increasing the
pressure on the meaning making machinery
and perhaps exposing the the cracks yeah
so I think what I'm saying is remember
one night we talked and I talked about
how we last time where I was with you
guys how we we did this to romantic
relationships because romantic
relationships they involve the
attachments to machinery and the
connection machinery and mattering to
someone other than yourself and caring
of them beyond your egocentric concerns
we then try to load everything into our
romantic relationships and we put a
tremendous burden on it so we intensify
their value or their so important but we
also put them on a terrific strain and I
think what we're doing is because we
have not culturally pursued a deep
education for for people into the
meaning making machinery and its
attendant powers and parallels we're
doing something very similar to what we
did with our romantic relationships
we're putting a terrific strain on it
and that's going to be telling now I
think it's also the fact so you look at
what Witten's work for example 2008
right when people sense a loss of
control they immediately start looking
for patterns so the brain the brain
solution - and by the way she was able
ish empirically show this is distinct
from threat so it's not that you're
under threat that's doing this it's that
the loss of control so if you're under
threat and you don't feel like you're
losing control none of what I'm going to
talk about happens but if you received
loss of control then what the brain
starts immediately doing is looking for
patterns and that's that's a
meaning-making thing to do that's
intelligibility but what our work shows
really powerfully this is what she was
specifically looking for is you are much
more likely to to perceive illusory
patterns to pick on much tighter that
aren't really there and especially to
believe in conspiracy theories because
these are the youth you think you're
pattern is a narrative pattern a story
that makes sense of this and gives you a
role and something you can do and so so
people will be experiencing again a
surge of meaning because they're doing
all this meaning making but it's very
maladaptive right they're using the
Machine right there do you think about
it the right hemisphere what did it
evolve for it evolved for when we're
under predation right the left
hemisphere is you know you know find
detailed certainty step by step right
right though right the left hemisphere
is no no what do you do when there's a
predator coming well you don't look for
the details you don't go I'm not certain
if it's a hawk or an eagle like you
don't care you go for the gestalt and
you tolerate ambiguity and you look for
an you grab for patterns right that
allows you to interact and intervene
interesting so so the so the right
hemisphere is sort of activating when we
lose control sitters the right
hemisphere is activating very much and
this is the hemisphere that is much more
oriented towards sort of mythopoetic
ways of thinking mythopoetic ways of
action
this is adaptive your your your agency
detecting machinery that's always
looking for agency it's adaptive because
it misfires a lot you owe that you see
you see faces in the clouds and faces in
the trees and right and it misfires a
lot but it doesn't cost you much if if
you're back in you know are the
environment in which we evolve but if
you miss an agent you're gonna miss food
or you're going to become somebody's
food are you gonna miss an enemy are you
gonna miss an ally so all of this
adaptive machinery it's kicking in and
it's finding patterns and and that feels
like a lot of meaning being made because
it's the adaptive machinery that gives
us a lot of our interactional
intelligibility but precisely because we
are if you'll allow me this and I'm
happy to unpack it because I'm saying it
could be provocative but because so many
of us are sappy entually and religiously
illiterate when all of this mental
poetic machinery comes up we have
nothing through which we can
reflectively monitor man
and shape it so that it is more
rationally disposed towards ourselves
each other in the world so we just
publish and it comes out feeling so
right because it's so adaptive and so
compelling and he's turning that
nebulous anxiety-producing chaos into a
workable narrative with a workable
villain right and think about how this
is exacerbated by the very situation
we're in a mythopoetic situation Zac
Stein is completely right about this we
like in the old town or like will begin
the fire with an Old Testament deity
it's invisible and it's a ubiquitous and
it's making us all distrust each other
and it's demanding horrible horrible you
know world-shattering purity codes that
we have to follow or we or we'll get
killed if we like this is like being in
the Old Testament right and so all of
this is being churned up and we have
nothing and it's deep in our cognitive
hair or in our cognitive heritage in our
cultural heritage and we have nothing to
shape that so that all of the
self-deceptive machinery can be
challenged it just runs and so of course
it feels very meaningful but it's in a
sense also something that is going to be
long-term very destructive of meaning
what you're describing now combined with
some of the mental health factors you're
discussing before like it's sounding a
lot like psychosis to me yes yes yes
that's exactly so crispy and Berrigan
actually argue that in their behavioral
and brain science article that you can
put people on a continuum for for
salience landscaping but they called it
the autism you take these with like a
like this okay autism and psychosis
there are people who are very future lis
oriented that probably have a left
hemispheric dominance right they're
featuring oriented they they need to do
things very algorithmically they work
under standards of certainty right and
you can see why that helps to explain a
lot of features of some of them
subpopulations of autism that's why I
think they chose that term and then
psychotic people are the opposite right
they tend to find connections and
patterns they're super good salty
where there are none and what we've lost
is we've all
with what we need right are the are you
know the combination of the training of
our aesthetic sensibility so we can and
and you know sort of what we need is
like it's the artists age
so the mythopoetic stuff is
appropriately being shaped in concert
with you know how that the training of
wisdom we've lost that we don't have
that which is unfortunate for us now
such a thing is possible you know I hold
out you know Socrates and the Platonic
dialogues of chronic dialogues you can't
separate the argumentation from the
artistry and you're not just presenting
alternative arguments you're presenting
alternative ways of life ways of being
and let's remember Socrates is doing his
shtick when happens it's literally under
siege by Sparta there has literally been
a plague in Athens and it has literally
killed the leadership of Pericles and
yet he's doing all of that right there
and then so I'm not talking about some
utopic fantasy I'm talking about a
reality that actually happened but we
are not doing it we don't have it now oh
wow yeah go ahead are you maybe we can
move things into like how we hope things
can go or how things can maybe go in a
more positive way with this artists age
kind of figure like you mentioned in
your conversation with Christopher
mastropiero and Andrew Sweeney about how
you think that myth is going to come to
the fore during these times yeah what
what do you think that's gonna look like
and in particular like what kind of
myths do you see emerging well I mean
some of the myths are our artists or
their throwbacks I mean I think you know
conspiracy theories are kind of
mythology they are people are seeing
patterns that they think give a
narrative explanation and so conspiracy
theories are now blossoming and they're
taking off and they're going to be
dangerous apparently they are burning
some people are burning the towers for
5g network in England because there's a
conspiracy theory that the 5g network is
actually emanating the virus in some
fashion and and the fact that they're
burning towers it can you feel how
medieval that is can you just feel it
yeah Towers burning yeah you're a
medieval image
for sure yeah yeah and so we're enacting
mythology and I think other there are
other mythological ways of thinking are
going to come to the fore in connection
with that you know that whatever kind of
kind of Iron Age mythology or even a
Bronze Age maybe in the pre axial where
you the gods are sort of the invisible
ubiquitous chaotic figures that slam
into our life willy-nilly and demand
really you know stringent purity codes
from us so apparently you know various
versions of fundamentalist Christianity
are now trumpet
trumpeting that we need to repent and we
need you know and that's going to be the
solution wasn't the solution for all the
previous plague so I don't know why they
think it'll be a solution this time but
that's definitely they're gonna happen
so I think that's there but part of what
you know especially the conversation
that I just had there's a couple
conversations I've had well yesterday
one that's coming out of my channel
today with Zack Stein and inter Sweeney
Kazak wrote this amazing I recommend it
highly the essay the war in heaven broke
out where he talks about how people are
being thrown into sort of mythopoetic
ways of thinking because we're falling
back on sort of our most comprehensively
adaptive pattern detecting machinery
that's how I would put it I don't think
that would disagree with me and that we
need to properly remember because we
have deeply forgotten that education has
to be much more broad than a narrow
training of a very small part of
productive rationality so that we become
good producers consumers we have to
again remember like you see and play to
know that you have to act you have to
educate all aspects of the psyche in a
highly coordinated fashion so that the
mythopoetic
aspects of the psyche and the rational
parts of the psyche and this
interpersonal parts of the psyche are in
much better conversation with each other
and so we have to we have to develop the
conversation within the conversation
without in a coordinated fashion much
better
so there's all those negative
mythologies coming up but Zacks point is
there's also crisis right critical
period he plays on that beautifully as
like in development you know critical
periods of development the sensitive
periods and he says we are in such a
critical period and he also and I know
this because I talked to him directly
about this he means like a criticality
within a self-organizing system we're in
a I call it we're in a meeting Kairos
we're in a situation where this
mythopoetic stuff is coming up but but
you know like I said we don't have the
proper literacy or psychic set of psycho
technologies for appropriating it
appropriately and he's recommending that
we have the opportunity to
reappropriation Ithaca wedeck stuff and
integrate it through a more
comprehensive educational strategy with
our reasoning capacities so that we like
Socrates we can start to seriously play
with new ways of being member Socrates
brings the actual revolution into Greece
and it permeates out that's a new way of
being a fundamentally new way of being
we and Zacks point is that mythopoetic
stuff coming up is really good
diagnostic that we are in a liminal
period where if we were to do the right
kind of educational program we could
open up new ways to being what does that
mean exactly like what is he talking
about public education and education in
schools is he talking about like the
types of conversations that no that's
excellent and what I think I mean I need
to know more I need you to read his book
and so I've only had a few conversations
with him and I've only read the essay
but what I can gather from those
conversations and Zach if I misrepresent
you I apologize I invite you to correct
me he such as he's such a sweet my gosh
it's wonderful to talk to him he's jumpy
oh my gosh he's his his conversational
presence is so it's like it's it's oh I
love talking with him but anyways I
think Katie what he's recommending is is
a is a rican sexual
nation as fundamental as like what
Socrates is doing with the axial
revolution where all of those boundaries
and distinctions you just mentioned are
challenged that that sort of structure
of intelligibility is undermined in some
significant way so he talks about the
fact that we are already we are not
desert but the fact of we are already
decentralizing education massively right
now and the lines between you know
government sanctioned education and you
know entertainment stuff that people are
doing that's all massively blurring like
what's going on at rebel wisdom for
example you have this huge thing and all
these people talking and there's there's
scientists and intellectual like is that
education well yes but but it's not like
it's not right right and so he's talking
that that's what what he mean he said
we're already doing it but instead of
just letting it unfold you have an
opportunity here to say wait let's not
give up this lets Institute it in some
way and remember people did that after
you know the Depression and World War
two the stuff they put in place the
changes they made right some of those
people said no no we're not going back
to what it was like before this we're
gonna keep these changes in place now
there were there were also
countervailing things because there was
also a huge nostalgic thing and so there
was a battle so you know the whole thing
in the 50s about trying to get women
back into the home right precisely
because why didn't they have to do and
clamping down on movies like camp
clamping clamping down on film noir
right because there was there was there
was an attempt to well that's that's
permeate these changes and make them the
new way and they they partially
succeeded but there was resistance and
they partially failed and I think what
Zak is saying is we're facing a similar
situation with respect to education we
need to we need to we see education in
light of enculturation rather than just
in the light of facilitating market
market functionality yeah I completely
agree with that that education needs to
be revolutionized and and decentralized
as you mentioned actually that was
kind of my original vision for this
channel we originally called it higher
dimensional education as you said like
it you know justjust having
conversations with with knowledgeable
people can can be very educational and
and a lot of times the way that I that I
envision the the decentralization
happening is well instead of having this
top-down thing where you know there's
this source of all knowledge and then
there's there's the kind of elders and
then there's the people that and that
the information of the knowledge flow in
one direction generally and and the way
that I see it working in the future is
that the teacher everybody's a teacher
basically like you you you learn
something from somebody who's
knowledgeable and then you immediately
go and teach that to somebody else well
let me play with it a little bit more if
you don't mind because notice what
you're doing you're saying okay so the
Iron Age hierarchical model we need to
put that aside so but let's look let's
pay attention to what's actually already
happening so think about how the
internet is organized it's not organized
hierarchically and one of the things
that's happening is the attempts to
start that have now been sort of
fractured exactly it has given us not
which is sort of a silver lining I
suppose so how is the internet organized
it's organized as a massively recursive
dynamical small world network it's a
small world networks a small world
networks to dynamically recursive
exactly the same kind of adaptive
structure that your brain has yeah we
could organ instead of just the medium
as actually like our brains are in deep
conformity with how we could be using
this medium for educational purposes
yeah yeah I completely agree as as the
closer that we can get the internet to
model what our brains are already doing
the smarter hopefully the internet can
become well that's that's definitely the
case but also the fact that we like we
all please we're cyborgs we always have
the capacity to also conform ourselves
to our emergent technologies now this is
a hyper object to use Morton's term
technology it has almost like a god-like
status right and so our relationship to
it is going to be very very profound and
comprehensive if we as we try to conform
to it
as I'm saying what if what if we
realized hey things auction can work and
they don't have to belong to Iron Age
hierarchies in order to work what if we
really realize that it's already
happening and it's way our brain is
already set up and ready to work and it
would love to be moving around right in
dynamically recursive small world
network because that's what it likes
that's how it works so what if what if
we really open that up as a way of life
rather than just something that's
technologically happening in the
background what if we said wait wait we
really don't have to have hierarchical
organizations to make things work well
what yeah I mean I would say something
like the Internet I do still see
hierarchies it's just that the
hierarchies are are flexible and there's
like feedback loops within the
hierarchies like you're saying like it's
so I mean if you're if you're looking at
a forum or something like that there's
not much of a hierarchy but if you're
talking about like YouTube channels
there's a person or people who are kind
of leading a conversation but then what
they're doing is influenced by their
commenters and is influenced by the
guests who have their own kind of nodes
that are influenced their commoners yes
their guests but they're still there's
all these mini
hierarchies going on all the time well
it's it's not really like getting rid of
hierarchy but more just like forcing the
hierarchies to constantly adapt and
readjust afire themselves otherwise they
disappear but are they I want to push
back on you because I mean a small world
network is it amorphous you have
centralized hubs right so you have
things that are larger in the network as
their hubs and and that's what but it's
that there are multiple hubs and they
shift around and the hubs are dependent
on their right so a small world network
has it's not you know it's not an equity
structure in which everything is getting
equal input and output that's not what a
small world network is that's not your
brain is either so you think about even
then you'd the YouTube superstars right
they're always they're always in that
even those hubs are dependent on how
they
the other hubs that are connected to
other networks and it's constantly
shifting around that's a lot different
you know so let's take a classic example
of a hierarchy like like feudalism right
and right it's the whole point of that
structure and status the whole point is
you know conserving because you're in a
scarcity situation right you're in a
scarcity situation and that's what
hierarchies make sense in scarcity
situations because they're very
conservative right and and that's what
you need in scarcity but we're no longer
in a information scarcity situation
that's in fact what we're discovering
we're discovering that wait while we're
facing all this economic loss we
actually have it's we're not in
information scarcity that's not where we
are at all so I don't know I don't see
like even think about even like Joe
Rogan I don't like Joe Rogan but I'm
just using as an example you know he was
just doing his thing and his
entertainment and then he got called to
task or when he had a okay member who
was had somebody on his David fuller was
talking about this he had somebody on
his show and he didn't he didn't
properly grill him and all the people of
its network all the people said what
what are you doing there's a of Twitter
I think it was yeah yeah yeah it was
like no no and he then he then had to
adopt a new role and it was not only
that is that you know other other no
other other of the you know of the
central hubs in that small world network
we're also sort of sort of repositioning
it's I think it's it's very different
yeah I agree with you it's very
different I think it could kind of be
seen in both ways maybe where you just
clarify it for me was like I was
imagining when you were describing the
network I was imagining something
flatter that didn't have these like
Peaks no yeah so small world networks
are like if you if you look at them to
Papa graphically like they have hubs
right and like this so you have you have
areas that are tightly clustered
together right and and then and then and
then and then they have looser
connections to other clusters and then
they're constantly shifting around
interestingly when I was talking to
norbade Center she's
oh okay let me talk about her because
this is an example of exactly what I'm
trying to talk about how we can change
the education okay so I'm hoping with
that she and I get to talk again we
really hit it off she's actually the
daughter of Gregory Bateson I don't know
if you guys know he's one of the
founding figures of complexity thinking
and yeah yeah his son Erik of a Tiki
OSIS basin activates and actually design
my program at UBC amazing yeah so she
has a thing that she calls warm data
labs and I'm really interested in
because of the project I'm doing on
dialectic and Dia logos but think about
Katie this I'll show you what I mean so
what you do is you do we have a whole
assembly and then you know a few people
speak or else we have sort of uh here's
the speaker and then it's a hierarchical
now what you do is you break everybody
up into groups small groups and each
group goes and talks about health right
and but what happens is individuals from
group if I'm in this group at some point
I might get up and go all the way over
to that group and then join that group
sorry I'm this disruptive right figure I
come in and I disrupt that group and and
then they reconfigure and then and so
what you've got is you've actually got a
small world network that's constantly
dynamically reconfigure ating
reconfiguring itself and what's really
cool about that is you get like a
distributed socrates there's no one
person that's taking the role of
socrates but the system is set up to
constantly provoke itself and disturb
itself and disrupt itself and you get
this dynamical small world network and
when people come back to the group
discussion they've got sort of this deep
understanding of the topic that that
sounds like the correct way to design a
really good party I'm really bad at
party so I don't know about that
but but she's getting a lot of success
with it what she means by warm data by
the way is many of the issues were
facing our dynamic pretty complex and we
are immersed in them and so we can't
rely on sort of cold data abstract we
have to rely on warm data data that's in
process within the complexity and so
she's trying to can see what like I said
well I'm so interested in this because
this is a way I think of trying to get
you know a virtual distributed Socrates
into these into these situations without
somebody necessarily having
be the complete figure of Socrates and
that's what I mean by you know a
dynamically recursive small world
network okay yeah I like that I see I
see where you're going now so I'm just
slightly unclear on the definition of
warm data yeah what is what does that
mean exactly so III guess the
inspiration I think this is right you
think about like ethnographic data like
what anthropologists do so the idea is
you can't study a culture from the
outside you have to go there and you
have to go through the difficult process
of enculturation because a culture is
something that you could only know well
I would say in a prospective and
participatory fashion you have to be
immersed in its dynamics immersed in its
ongoing complexity in order to fully
understand what a culture is and her
point is that many of the phenomena
cultures of coffee is is a hyper object
right and so many of the things we face
many of the problems we face are also
hyper objective like that and so we can
only understand and and and and we only
can understand them insofar as we are
immersed and participating right within
their commits complexity I see so it's
kind of like you're going around and
trying different perspectives on and
you're and you're able to look at the
data from from different points of view
and and in that way the data is kind of
alive or anything like that and so
you're doing something much more that
like the platonic dialogue rather than
the Aristotelian monologue you're not
trying to say oh I what I can do is get
to the the the you know the the view
from above that's the view from nowhere
you know enables sense you're not gonna
get you can't abstract abstract yourself
up out of it you know you'll in fact
lose it or the phenomena and so you have
to always be looking for warm data data
that that you are actively right and and
I would say also salience like bound to
in order to get into the right
relationship
with the fenomena in order to be able to
intervene in it and modify it as wisely
as possible that's what I think she
means it's interesting and that kind of
also connects to something we wanted to
talk about in our in our time section
relating to time like well listening to
you talking to Christopher and Andrew
you you guys are kind of taught you in
Chris we're kind of talking a bit about
like how this is changing people's
understanding of time or experience of
time and it got me thinking a little bit
like are you familiar with Walter
Benjamin's concept of messianic time I
have a meta memory I know I have come
across this before but I I could I could
not speak to it at all
so start talking I'll probably go oh
yeah okay yeah let's get like a brief
summary it's a basically the idea is
like um they've got a manger because a
conception of time which is very like
view from above mm-hmm according to
Benjamin like we tend to view time as
being kind of empty and linear and it's
just time is just like the homogeneous
in that way whereas he he proposes like
an alternative view of time called which
he calls messianic time where like the
past is kind of illuminated by the
present or like certain moments of the
past are like charged by what said
whatever is happening in the present so
we end up with like a constellation of
events like connecting the past to the
present and it just even like listening
to you now it really makes me think of
it because you can you're invoking like
you know World War 1 World War 2 the
Hellenistic dhama side and like all
these events and I'm just sort of
wondering like in that conception like
how is our past no that's good that
that's really good
so I mean I was using more Tillich here
and but the connection to messianic is
appropriate because the the some
teleca's of protestant theologian right
he's sort of post christian in some
important ways he was the guy who talked
about the god beyond god did that beyond
the god of theism but he is from him
that I learned this notion of Kairos
within Kairos means the fullness of time
rather than an empty time and so what it
means there's mo and there's a sentence
in which most most of the time reality
the unfolding of time has this kind of
inertia to it it's what unfolding and we
are just sort of swept
and we can't do very much but the idea
is there there are points in the course
of time when you think of it like a
river where the conditions that have
been generated by time actually
destabilize and what you have is you
have a bunch of conditions that emerge
such that it is possible for things for
the course of that River to suddenly
change its directions and the idea in
the Gospels was and I think it also in
Paul that Jesus Christ comes in the
fullness of time he comes at just that
moment where if he if he to come
somewhere else and at some other time
then right things wouldn't have shifted
and turned and the kingdom of God
wouldn't have had vented the way it did
and so you can think about it
Kairos carries with it this you know the
past skelion sense of finesse right so
our previous time is like gee like the
spirit of geometry we just calculated
and it's geometrical and we can just
calculate it and move through in it that
it has that inertial inevitability to it
but when we get to Kairos we now move
into finessed where you know a real e
you know
acute and a sensitivity to timing and
placement now become crucial and you can
see this in dynamical systems when they
go into a state of criticality you have
sensitive dependence on initial
conditions when they're in criticality
things that would have not like very
small effects that would have largely
just been absorbed by the system very
small events can have huge consequences
they can suddenly massively ramify out
throughout the system so Kairos is that
kind of criticality and and what what
Tillich was talking about was that you
have this relationship for time and I'm
using that he doesn't use this language
but I think it's fair to him where you
shift from this sort of geometry to the
spirit of finesse in your experience in
time and that's really important because
given what you know given some of Hans
criticisms brilliant criticisms in the
center of time where we had sort of
atomized the time the time in no way
unfolded right it was just atomized
these discrete moments that are
disconnected and just by
and don't matter in any way we when we
come into Kairos that hold geometric
spatialization and autumn ization of our
experience of time collapses and we get
into the spirit of finesse kirkland
interesting actually that that kind of
as you were saying that that that time
had become atomized it reminded me of
how like physically and psychologically
we've become atomized and I was thinking
about how you were you were saying you
know we should form ourselves into small
mode networks and then I was thinking
does time form itself into small small
world networks no time is one of the
great mysteries I mean we try to get
into the ontology of time you're you're
moving beyond I can I'm talking more
just about the phenomenology of it
whatever it is that we're all sending to
in our phenomenology go ahead I'm just
gonna say it's kind of implicit in the
concept of messianic time - and it's
really interesting cuz you're almost
saying that like in Kairos we are more
inhabiting messianic time than other
times yes yeah it's like part of the
idea is that like um instead of viewing
time is like a series of atomized events
like when something happens in the
present that like charges certain
moments of the past we're in a way like
fulfilling those moments yes
we're those moments yeah yeah yeah and
again it reminds me of the the warm data
thing that you were just talking about
where if we if we happen to be at the
right place at the right time then we
get connected with a network of other
connected events in the past and and so
we even get this yeah we can kind of I
hadn't thought about that
yeah that's also a shift between a cold
date of view of time and a warmed date
of view of time yeah that's right
yeah and the idea of charge I like that
I like that Oriole it's like yeah and
that captures the fullness of time
that's in Kairos that somehow the what's
happening in the present discloses the
potentiality of past events that was
buried under the inertial inevitability
yeah yeah yeah yeah that's really good
and and encompass that thing
well but it's still good it's still
apropos and you can see why we would
then be thrown back on mythopoetic ways
of thinking because we're
moving out of geometrical time into
right into finesse time in the chaotic
time yeah yeah and so we're gonna look
for these these sort of deep perennial
narrative patterns to try and get the
fullness of time I hadn't thought about
that but those two belong together very
deeply I think you said something when
you were talking about how you felt like
this might not be or this probably won't
be the only pandemic and I'm referring
to when you were on the the meaning
Kairos conversation you said something
like culture doesn't usually change
things don't usually change the first
time around it's the second there yeah
fourth time around so that that's kind
of reminding me of what you're saying
like in these moments we we think about
what happened in the past that fits this
pattern and so that we can hopefully
seize it this time to fulfill like the
transition into the new pattern that
maybe that past moment was calling for
but didn't push us towards hard enough I
think that's right and even that
language again and and this is not a
criticism of you any the sense of being
called just again harkening right this
is this is a religious sensibility in an
important sense and that and you're
bringing up I think the appropriate
sense of prophecy right the Prophet is
not somebody who foretells the future
but picks up on the Kairos right now by
appropriately picking up all you
security language that you gave to Mira
picking up on the charge from the past
but charge and remember what that
initially meant it meant you know a call
given to you a demand placed on you
right you're charged with something and
so the I I think we are coming into in
that sense and I hope people do not
misunderstand me but in that sense that
I try to articulate very carefully I
think we are coming into a prophetic
time Jordan Hall talks about something
I'm not sure if I'm gonna use his
language exactly right but he talks
about something like attractors like
yeah there's a system that's kind of
revolving around and like working with a
certain attractor but there's always new
attractors springing up all the time and
like
time's a crisis happens and in those
moments patterns that are being like
revolving around the new truck attractor
are revealed so like I'm imagining like
that attractor it could be something
like the call very much it's a hyper
object that is exerting calling us to a
new way of being
and but our relationship to it is one of
finesse and of one data participation we
can't sort of calculate our way into it
it's not going to happen and and I guess
that brings up a lot of stuff that I was
talking with Jordan about because Jordan
thinks we fall back on mythopoetic
thinking because it's they are our
deepest powder well like I was arguing
they are our deepest powder and making
machinery they are the ones that have
survived the most cross contextual
change in our biological and cultural
heritage and so they are the ones that
have the most likely the best possible
chance of being transfer appropriate but
precisely because they are so transfer
appropriate they have to be so they have
to be whole very symbolic because if
they were very precise they wouldn't
transfer well right right that's exactly
so you have this marry it it powerful
it's it's it survived it's wired into us
it transfers well but it's also like
it's it's vague and symbolic and
associational and so again he talks
about a you know meeting to bring any
kind of integrity and he he would very
much like as I know is you've had a
couple conversations about this this
sense of finesse because he and I have
been trying to work out a bit of this
normativity this aesthetic spiritual
religious normativity that we are needed
in this time and we've been doing that
by trying to and this goes with the
discussion we just had about the
prophetic time trying to reformulate the
notion of faith and get it to be
something other than the willful
assertion of propositions in the face of
countervailing evidence which is what it
has come to mean instead coming up with
this idea of faith as that you know
person
the whole person you know so it's an
existential thing not just a skill it's
an existential mode that gets you into a
finessed so you have a continuity of
contact with that course of events that
is moving to the new attractor such that
you get into a right relationship with
it that's the notion of me that we're
trying to bring back I call it Socratic
faith because I think it is exemplified
in somebody like Socrates who is very
unwilling to assert very many
propositions but nevertheless was
willing to go to his death so there's a
kind of it's a different sense of faith
there that I think we need to try and
bring back and it's a sense of faith
it's interwove and with reason and
wisdom and artistry as opposed to
opposed to it and dogmatically trying to
like impose itself another way of
thinking about this sorry for going on
but this is an important point to go
back to Tillich we're starting to do
this with Andrew Sweeney and Zach's 9
you know habermas made this excellent
point that what Kant did right is he
takes the Cartesian subjectivity and
then he turns it into a normativity and
when you turn subjectivity into
normativity you get autonomy and so what
you get are the three autonomous things
the contrary critique you get the
autonomy of reason you get the autonomy
of aesthetics and you get the autonomy
of morality and we have this three
discrete Squiers that are in commence
trouble with each other right you know
like science and art and morality right
and they're all they're all autonomous
and then Tillich has this criticism you
know he says well the advantage of
autonomy is to get you out of heteronomy
heteronomy is when out for and some
foreign authorities tries to impose
itself on you he Tillich uses the
biblical image of like demonic
possession you're you're controlled and
possessed and manipulated and so we
brought up a defense of autonomy the
problem with our normativity of
subjective autonomy is that it has led
to disconnection fragmentation the
meeting crisis etcetera etc and Tillich
is responding to that in the courage of
EE
which is another way of talking about
the faith that I'm talking about the
courage to be he proponent in his work
he proposes in and especially in the
systematic theology he opposed it he
proposes that beyond heteronomy and
autonomy is what he calls the enemy
which you know the normativity of God
but of course he means the God beyond
all possible gods he doesn't mean like
traditional religious authority what he
means is exactly what I'm talking about
with you and you I see it when I'm doing
when I'm in the circling practices with
people what that in that dynamically
recursive small world networks dynamical
system this third factor appears people
start feeling but there is something
above and beyond in them individually
and they aspire to least it's funny I
was talking to Ted about this yesterday
the guy who does the authentic relating
in Toronto
all these secular people start using
religious and spiritual language to talk
about this all of them and and they and
but they don't talk about it like a
demonic force that has come in and I've
been using the term the logos like India
logos it comes up but you feel an
affinity to it it's beyond you it's
beyond any of us but you would feel an
affinity to it and you're drawn to it so
although it's not part of your autonomy
because it's a it's it's it's demanding
it's calling you to aspire and affording
you to do so it's also not something
that is imperious and utter honest
matter you sort of tearing you apart and
destroying your agency it's it's the
it's the kind of normativity that is
inseparably bound up with the affordance
of aspiration an aspiration cannot come
out of my autonomy that's the no that's
that calories argument ala Paul's
argument right you can't get it you
can't get it doesn't make any sense and
so I think that aspirational normativity
is exactly what we need to be able to
come sensitive to again but again it
can't be separable from
chan ality can't be right something that
is proceeding without a concern for our
proclivities - self-deception yeah I was
gonna say one of the pitfalls on that
you've mentioned about like trying about
faith because you talked about this
faith which is just like a blind I know
it's gonna be okay and that's a
maladaptive talked about like nostalgic
faith maladaptive but one of the ones
that that was most interesting to me
that you were concerned about was this
like utopian yes form of faith and I
think like especially when we're in this
conversation right now where we're
talking about like maybe there's a new
attractor emerging or like a new calling
we need to shift towards a different
kind of future like how do we make sure
that we're avoiding that pitfall of
having some kind of utopian faith like
we feel like like we know what what
needs to happen yeah don't say you know
that's what it is
I mean so part of that is to don't say
you know what the utopia is instead say
that you know how to belong to the
course of its emergence you take Athey
animus approach to it you you can at you
at most participate warm data finesse in
its emergence you are not the author of
it nor are you the revolutionary who
knows how it should be and who should to
be killed in order so that we get there
you it does not belong to you you belong
to it that's the difference do you feel
like an important part of like knowing
how to be part of it and and flowing
with it is identifying it or do you
think that identifying what I think
trying to identify know here let me try
it a different way
utopia's so I'm going to use Keeks
instinct in between a goal and an ideal
a goal is an ants is an end state that
you're trying to get to that will be the
resolution of your problem right it's
very much a having mode thing and we
have to have goals you guys know of
course all of us right now I I talked
about that okay the Keeks talks about
and he's
shifted use of this word too he talks
about an ideal like honesty honesty
isn't the goal state you're trying to
get it to you don't get to you don't
ever get to say well you know what it's
May 4th 2020 I'd finally achieved
honesty hey I don't need honesty anymore
I'm done with it I've moved beyond it
there's no right I've satisfied it
that's not what honesty is honesty isn't
a state you get to it is adverbial it is
that verbal is it is a comprehensive
modification of how you are always
developing always developing wisdom is
right like that to you if you ever say
well Jeff I'm wise now done you you've
totally misunderstood what wisdom is and
so the faith I'm talking about is not
new topic because utopias say here's the
description of the goal state and then
here is the algorithmic method that gets
us to that goal state that will be
somehow the cumulation the resting point
the final solution and I use that
deliberately to all of our problems
that's not what I'm talking about at all
and I Jordan doesn't mean that by the
attractor he doesn't mean thus he's
talking about metastability he's talking
about the way the system can constantly
adaptively reconfigure itself to have
constantly complexify and shifting
reality and it will need to shift again
and it will need to shift again and it
will need to shift again just like
relevance realization I'm talking about
a faith of relevance realization not
propositional assertion there are
multiple things that hit me on that it
seems like the problem might be actually
propositional assertion and that the the
the low if you can inhabit the lower
layers then you might be kind of a
little bit more on the right track than
if you try to necessarily put it into
words and the other thing that hit me is
that that it reminds me of like a
Platonic ideal or even like a like a
yoga posture right like there's this
idea of something perfect that we're
heading towards but we we know we're
never gonna get there we're just gonna
become closer and closer and closer to
it does that does that land well though
I like the first thing I want to push
back on the second the first one is
really good right but I think another
reason
so it's concer chling back and
we are drawn to myth the poetic language
is it to use korbin sturm it's
inherently imaginal its gestural and
it's it so it's enacted symbolism and
and why that's important is gestural
imaginal thinking bridges between
propositional and non propositional
cognition part of the reason why we turn
into mythopoetic ways of thinking is
because we can simultaneously engage you
know propositional and propositional or
non propositional I prefer to say forms
of knowing and being and so that's why
that comes up so I think yeah I think
that that is that's right now the
problem with with the problem we've had
with our history with mythopoetic
discourses we've literal eyes it and
fundamental eyes it and then we remove
it from actually being embedded in all
the non propositional stuff and we
actually lose that the the religio the
connectedness and our faith just becomes
the assertion of proposition so I agree
with the first one I'm not sure sure I
agree with the second one because I I
don't even like the idea of like well I
know what it looks like I just admit
I'll never get there um you see cuz you
think about think about phyleus Ohia
what Socrates offered he's he claimed
that we could never be gods we can never
write and we could never be gods so we
could never be wise because only the the
gods are wise what we can do as human
beings as we can love wisdom which is a
very different thing and this is
relevant too because you know the
mythopoetic stuff you start talking
about gods and things like that the
proper relationship oh my gosh you can't
believe I'm going to say this sentence
the proper relationship with the gods is
right is to be is to always be realizing
that we can't be them but in a way that
liberate sus to be more than what we
currently are yeah drop this kind of
makes me think of something that we were
all kind of wandering listening to some
of your range of recent interviews
you've said a couple times that if if
push came to shove your principles are
more important than your own survival
yeah and that you would choose your
principles over your survival so we were
kind of wondering like which principles
you had in mind or how you might see
them come
into conflict contact I won't live a
life of fear so there's this is another
there's you know you're sunk cost and
our arguments that I'm more themselves
from plausibility which is like you know
I take precautions I'm doing everything
that I'm being asked to do right now
because I think that's socially
responsible but you know it's like well
if it gets said well I just can't you
know because if you do this then you
might get sick and then you might die
and death is like you know just this the
the infinite negative and therefore even
if all if that chain of events is so
improbable you matter the most
nevertheless right under and it's not
gonna live a life of fear like that at
some point right if it's gonna if it's
gonna be well that it is in order to
survive I have to be humanized myself to
a significant degree and live you know
in constant fear because of this you
know nebulous threat and and you know
and increasingly put potentially
authoritarian state trying to deal with
it at some point it's like no I just
don't want to live that way that's just
no I don't want to live a life of fear I
don't want to live a life in well at
some point
I mean I'm older than you guys so that
matters you're younger I get it so I get
that okay but at some point my survival
doesn't mean as much to me as the kind
of life I want to live and so that's so
the principles that make you know a life
of of just fear a life I don't want to
be a coward they don't want to just
cower a life in which the capacity for
doing philosophy a-- for examining the
unexamined life is not worth living we
get to a place where we're getting to
that I don't think we're there
but I made a deliberate effort what I
saw especially how many people are
spinning off into a kind of historic
hysterical kind of fear i sat down and I
thought you know where would how far you
how far would you go towards ignoring a
threat
of course irrational that's rational
irresponsible how far would you go
though how far would you go and so I
sort of made in my mind I came to a
decision no any of those things that
would rob me of the Socratic way of life
and dehumanized me into being a coward
and being bound to just the having mode
and maintaining my survival I don't I
don't want that I don't yeah yeah I
definitely resonate with that that's
really interesting and it actually kind
of sparked a bit of an insight for me
about some of the social isolation like
we've had a lot of debate with our
friends about whether to socially
isolate it all and stuff like that
and it makes me think like maybe think
of what we were talking about in your
class where you were saying talking
about like the golden mean when it came
to virtues you know it's not just being
in the middle but it's like being at the
right point at the right time yes
exactly exactly and Jordan Hall and I
talked about that the faith is about
that finesse about you know because
we're constructing virtual engines on
the fly here because we're trying to
find the right set of conditions that
will get us on course right and that he
talked about both tannic and anti-panic
and how we have to steer between the
skill and Charybdis of panic and anti
panic and that's very much like you know
some of the other points we're talking
about like Franklin's notion about the
people who you know who lose the
connection to the logos he called his
therapy logo therapy for a reason
you know and the people who just give up
in despair they lose the connection to
the logos or the people who just you
topically assert we will be rescued on
this day and I know it for sure
we have to we have to we have to sneer
between pain anti-panic yeah reminds me
of like the discussion on flow states
where you know you have like - you have
like kind of boredom and you have
anxiety and you have to kind of like
exactly follow this channel and maybe
maybe that's the correct way to do faith
yes this makes me want to bring up
another potential level for myth - when
we're talking about faith because you
said like maybe people go back to these
myths because they've survived many
transit and transition so maybe they're
most likely to survive but also I was
thinking that a lot of like
powerful myths like I'm thinking Jesus
in particular because hold to call it a
myth but like a lot of these myths are
about a moment where somebody finessed
and rode that wave into the new
attractor and like it's almost like a
story that in a way could show us a
model for how do they do they deal I
don't mean I don't think mr. bad term I
don't regard it as a pejorative term in
all Katie and I mean in Plato in the
seventh letter makes it clear that he's
mythologized Socrates he says I've made
him more beautiful and he doesn't think
he's doing anything duplicitous or
dishonest in doing that he thinks that
what he's doing is putting Socrates in
the form that will allow him to become
mythic in the sense we're talking about
here transferable to multiple situations
and multiple contexts and so I think
though I think that's exactly right and
this is what I mean the fact that we
like many people are people that we just
went through Easter right and a culture
you know we're very illiterate about a
lot of these myths were illiterate about
them that's why I mean what I said we're
sort of religiously and I don't mean
just aren't the Christian myths where
we're literate about a lot of the myths
other Axial Age myths how many people
know all the mythology around Siddhartha
a Gotama or Socrates right and I got
into a great discussion about race Kelly
with this about how we need to
reintegrate the hero with the sage in
our mythology we should need to look for
the sage hero myths rather than just the
hero myths the problem with the hero
myth is this is why I'm critical of you
know some of joseph campbell in jordan
peterson and then Rafe sort of pushed
back on me but then he acknowledged that
I was kind of right so it was a really
good giving back and forth between us
it's not his channel is that you know
the hero myth has become very much in
our culture has become very much reduced
to the warrior meth and the the and the
hero is all yang and no Yin and so the
mythologies and and we forget that the
the take a look at the Greek myths for
every hero myth there's a hubris myth
for every Theseus there is an Icarus
right telling us wait wait you can't
conquer everything and don't try to
count conquer the domain of the gods
because then you're going to fall to
earth or like Faden you're gonna be
struck down by Zeus or like Arachne
Athena the goddess of wisdom is going to
turn you into a spider so I think we
forgotten all the hubris myths we've
isolated the hero myths and then we've
we've identified the hero with the
warrior so I'm kind of very hesitant
around all the hero mythology and I
think we if we go back to we integrating
the hero with the sage the heroic sage
like Jesus like Siddhartha like Socrates
I think that's a much better choice for
us going for it but that's what I mean
about you have to reflect on this stuff
you have to you have to you have to get
educated in it just because a myth comes
up doesn't mean it's the best
so we're I think we have maybe about six
minutes left should we do one more
question or should we just um like
closing closing remarks well why don't
you ask your question Chris we have
moved time for more okay so so John I've
heard a lot of talk about digital tamp
fryers
recently and how how zoom is kind of
reviving the the campfire red wines need
to Bret sort of talked about it Jordan
mentioned it to me then I was so it it's
sort of a it's been a distributed thing
that sort of generated right yeah I
definitely represent that you would that
you would discuss it I was I was just
wondering um so what is special about
campfires and and it is it is it tell is
it the telling of stories is it the deal
logos and and do you think that that we
might see a revival of collective
consciousness due to us all doing this
this digital campfire thing no that's
good so notice that how guys done start
named his practice he called it circling
circle around the logo stand the locus
is like a fire right and that's and
that's the metaphor that's being used
and guys actually explicitly uses that
at times and what we used to have any
fire is we used a circle and that's
really important notice that we we are
in a platonic circle here what I mean by
that is as an abstract circle we're not
actually located in space with respect
to each other so we can't use space to
mark out status we can't we're like in a
campfire we're circled and we're all
glowing and the center shifts because
the zoom will shift right who's on
screen right and it so it's like a
campfire and so we're focused on each
other but we're also focused on this
shared space that's constantly like the
fire changing in front and it's
literally glowing because it's lighted
and notice how our faces are to each
other if you're faced with this large on
my visual on my retina you'd be very
close to me in person in a way that was
socially uncomfortable but it doesn't
matter in this medium the grammar is
different we're allowed to have this
proximity to each other without
trespassing on all kinds of social
niceties so we have these lit and then
most of the person is actually excluded
from our vision like when we're sitting
around a campfire and the people have
their lit face but most of most of us as
in darkness and we're like it's very
much like the the that feeling of you
know intimacy that campfires give us and
that's of course because they also were
you know central to our survival across
several species they had a very central
feature for us
Mattress nano argues I think this is a
plausible hypothesis that it think about
when you're sitting in a campfire so
first of all you're in connection you're
intimate and notice and you know people
talk and you zoom out to the face and
then you zoom in to yourself but on this
meditating object the campfire then you
zoom out and you zoom and you zoom out
and you zoom in and he said that
probably really helps to Train working
memory and cognitive flexibility and so
on
I'm suggesting that this it's it's it's
a provocative suggestion that earlier I
suggested that this medium was this new
hyper object and technology of
dynamically recursive small world
network and it has tremendous potential
and it does and but at the same time
symbol on symbol artless to join few
things that were previously unjoined
together symbol similar at the same time
as it being this you know cutting edge
technology that could cyborg our
cognition in powerful new ways it also
throws us back to the primordial tea of
the campfire that's what I mean by the
digital campfire wow so so maybe maybe
this is a positive sort of a silver
lining to this coronavirus crisis that
that we're all learning how to camp fire
again and maybe this will you know lead
it will cause a dialogue oh you know -
yes - bring us somewhere new I think we
have an inactive symbol of dialo ghosts
we're in we're we are so not only are we
exemplifying it in our conversation we
are also we have an enacted symbol a
shared symbol between us in the
physicality of the medium itself it's
awesome I think that's a good place to
end off and on a positive note is always
nice thanks again John so much for
coming on this is an awesome
conversation and if you're watching
please like subscribe leave us a comment
and we'll see you next time it's great
thanks guys thank you very much
thanks for joining us on the
Multiversity project we hope you found
this episode both mind-bending and
enjoyable we can be found all over the
social media space and at Multiversity
project co if you like this content give
us a like comment follow share or
support us on patreon catch you on the
flipside
[Music]