the future is calling question is will
we answer a call we have no choice but
to answer the call of the future the
future inexorably is barreling towards
us there is no avoiding the call of the
future and we deny the future was it
possible to say no to the future to try
and stay in the present it may be
possible it may be possible to have some
control over what the future brings but
to deny the future to stay in the
present well the call of the future do
we echo it back or do we reply in terms
the present is the future yeah this this
this present moment was the future a
minute ago
so yes it is always the continuing
transformation of the future into the
present there is it there is a
connection the present molds the future
right the future is potential the
present is real 18 - the future from the
present transforms the future what
happens only relate to it from the past
can't relate to it from the past past is
but a memory can't be in the past right
the past is as unreal as the future I've
experienced a trauma then that prevents
me from seeing the future of what it
really is that's a barrier between me in
the future it restricts what you can
pull out of the future and so yeah in a
very real way the future isn't really
anything it is a well of potential for
the next present to be
our memories transform the potential
which is inside of the well of the
future yes our memories our feelings our
expectations our biases our
predispositions our desires our fears
all of those things shape the future
career ourselves from the past would be
to to open up the future yes that would
be to have access to all of the
potential that the future holds to be
free of the trauma of the past would be
to be to accept any future infinite
amount of potential in the future but
the future is being guided towards one
specific path by trauma yes so not
necessarily by drawing that's wrong as
one thing not only by trauma
one path which is being called by then
multiple paths a fight amongst the
players which passes along shall be
chosen there's a fight among the paths
yes that's good that's good and so the
trawler will draw one towards the paths
that relieve the trauma or relive the
trauma share cold reliving the same
moment over and over and over if being
caught inside the past which developing
off topic but is there is there
something in the fact that relieve and
relive are so similar be relieved of
one's life really live one's life and
and never experience relief anyway so
former guiding entry into the future
seems dangerous limiting this guiding us
towards a greater future would bliss be
as narrowing as trauma in a different
way that is it is narrowing as trauma
less news reciprocal opening wiles
Chalmers reciprocal poisoning recovery
from the trauma is a form of blitz right
and so it's a transmogrify years they're
turning the closing into an opening
it is bliss what heals the trauma oh
that's interesting this is a
chicken-and-egg job isn't it is the
trauma healed by the bliss or is the
bliss of consequence of the healing of
the trauma what else is there that could
heal the trauma
looking at the fear in the present in
the eye and overcoming the fear and what
is where does one get the strength to do
that is it the promise of bliss or is
this some other reserve the circus of
energy that the society possesses to
hold the sacred space
the sacred space is where one goes to
look once trauma in the face so that one
may be relieved of it and because space
is where the ritual odors contain the
intergenerational trauma mmm
yeah they have the blueprint of all the
traumas that have gone before and they
relate to your trauma and so you can be
guided out of your trauma yes that's
good the individual healing of the
universal warmer through the ritual
elders who have universal eyes and zones
and then beyond the personal trauma
there is coming to terms with the trauma
of humanity that we all carry around
with us remove life itself of all living
beings from the plant to the line
between human yes yes but particularly
to the human because the human is aware
of it right the human can actually touch
it and experience it consciously
 cool I like that ten-second game
that's a whole different thing innit
[Music]