hello thanks for tuning in again this is
uh I believe video number four of Chris
and I and our series enacting the
Platonic dialogues so before I give some
context of this video some housekeeping
so given the the quarantine in the
corona virus and everything what's
happening my company the circling
Institute has brought all of its is
doing all of its trainings and its drop
in events and training events all online
which has really been quite successful
so far I've been quite impressed with
how deep and meaningful circling can be
online so all the information if you're
interested in the events that you can
find out through the Facebook link below
or from the website link below also if
you're interested in doing one-on-one
coaching with me email me and I'll email
you back and talk about what that
entails and I believe that that's it so
I hope everyone's doing well so this was
the my first venture into reading with
any seriousness the Platonic dialogues
and I have to say I
I was sufficiently profoundly perplexed
and in the way I'm getting if this is
just the beginning the profundity and
the fun of what comes through reading
these dialogues is quite amazing and
what I'm left with now and ask me next
week but like right now what I'm left
with is thinking a lot about this
figure-ground shift or suddenly you're
looking at the foreground and then all
of a sudden the foreground the
background becomes the foreground and
something in that shift in the
something in that shift that reveals
being in this way that's very very
difficult to describe her to put into
words that Socrates seems to be
brilliant in inducing and I'm also
thinking about the relationship to that
and wisdom and about wisdom being
something that is not is something that
one cannot possess but it it is has
something to do with that background and
foreground shift and an awareness of
that and and participial way one
participates in reality in
a way that wisdom may show itself in the
non position of of no one in particular
so it's I had a lot of fun I'm really
glad that we're doing this so also I
will put in scribe and which is a
website that hosts a lot of PDFs for
free I put a link to the translation of
this dialogue that we're reading down in
the notes and so you could just click
that and then you can recommend you read
along with us all right enjoy
sometimes it's hard it's it's like kind
of hard to tell what uh what mood I am
until I hit the I like I start talking
to somebody you ever yes like oh yeah I
had the same experience like that sense
of just like you don't quite know where
you're at until you like start talking
to somebody or some kind of thing comes
out of it so I'm just I'm just aware of
being where am i yeah that's like you
have to wait to encounter yourself with
you first put the contact with first
person you meet so one of the things
that you propose today was you had the
urge Q or the instinct to just start
jumping into the first dialogue a Plato
um what we were doing was reading we
were starting off reading your your
paper with John John and in yourself to
set context but there's a so so what
we're talking about now is is it's just
jumping into the first the first dialog
and then maybe after this one we go back
to the paper and disperse it back and
forth I would imagine that it's
something to do with you so it's clear
that it was just taking a while yeah I
mean it was taking a while and also I
think I mean the papers divided up into
a few sections and we did get through
the first section and I think that there
was a pretty I mean both in the paper
itself but also our conversations around
it we we talked a fair bit about just
the dialectic and the dialogic process I
think we for grounded the process about
as much as we needed to or me even more
than we needed to do so um so I feel I
feel I feel I'm starting to feel the
burn I want to I want to I want to dive
into Plato directly and and bring him
properly into the conversation because
we've just been talking around him so
that that's just my feeling about it but
I've also lived with that that paper so
I don't have as much personal need to
sit with it
so that's why I want to make sure that
you're comfortable with this approach as
well and we can always go back to it if
we if we feel we're so inclined after we
get through the first dialog we can
always circle we can always alternate
mm-hmm yeah well I think it's just
important for me one is it it just be
living right so it's like you have a
strong instinct let's go with it if I
have a strong and Frank let's go up with
it if we both have two opposing ones
it's just like have a fight and like
kind of dialectic yeah well it's
probably think about it yeah exactly but
I actually haven't read much of the
dialogues directly so this is gonna be
my first time and you actually you have
a little bit of experience reading it in
college and stuff like that that we were
talking about earlier so get you know
just kind of getting that one of the
things that we were talking about was
just some that's how how strangely
[Music]
dispersed you like interpretations that
you can have of what what the dialogues
are saying right and like they just so
and the you're talking about that like
as a you know reading it in high school
in college you don't you don't know that
you're inside of an interpretation but
then you find out later that there's all
these display these kind of dawns on you
at some point that there's more than one
way to read this this text yes yeah yeah
exactly and that's yeah it's like the
the the interpretation it's quite a
copic there's so many of them there's so
many of them I mean it's an
embarrassment of riches for a student
and that speaks to the importance of
having good teachers I was lucky enough
for the most part to have a few very
very very good teachers of Plato and
that's a luxury that not not everyone
has in fact I was just gonna say that
that I think I told you before we
started recording that the the
translator for the first dialogue that
we're gonna read was actually one of
those instructors that I had when when I
was when I was an undergraduate so
that's that's kind of fun for me as well
Oh so we're reading oh yeah we should
probably let them know which we should
probably let them know so we're starting
with the Alcibiades and I guess it helps
too
helps to provide some context so for one
thing we're using there are many many
proposed orders in which to reads
dialogues and the order I think we're
going to follow is the Neoplatonic
order that was an order that was
grounded in the principle of self
knowledge and personal transformation
right that the order of the dialogues
it's not chronological it's not in order
of authorship or anything like that it's
an order that was laid out as a
mechanism for actually fostering and
enacting the self transformational
process that that's already implicit in
the dialogues themselves and the
Alcibiades is exemplary of that process
now the about sub IDs for some people
it's a is actually apocryphal the
authorship of the l Spidey's is actually
debated there's not a clear consensus as
to whether Plato actually authored it or
not but I think to that and and now that
now that's a that's a recent that's a
modern debate I don't think that that
debate was my I could be wrong about
this so don't take me as gospel but I
don't think that that the debate around
authorship was as truth the neoplatonist
as it is for sort of modern scholarship
but some people do think of it as
apocryphal but people also say that of
some of the other dialogues and of some
of Plato's epistles as well and some of
those especially a 7th epistle are
incredibly exemplary of what we have
come to what we have come to know as
platonic praxis and platonic thinking
and it's so synonymous with our
identification with Plato but the issue
that the actual issue of authorship is
secondary I think we didn't think of it
as secondary because if it were I was
having a discussion with John about this
not too long ago and we were saying you
know whether or not it was actually
written by Plato it's still exemplary of
Plato and I think that's fundamentally
the more more important thing here so
yeah wait could I ask you to sit what
when you said you were fortunate advance
and really good teachers right what was
it that when you think about it now like
what
that made them good teachers in your
view a Plato um it's a difference that
made that well what it was different for
each of them but what they all shared in
common was they shared an appreciation
of the dialogic form yeah the fact of
the works being dialogues was central to
their pedagogy to the padieu --tx of the
way that they taught it yeah and they
they they in each case they they were
they were inclined to lean into the
format as a way of understanding the
philosophy and so they weren't
interested in just extracting out
theories and expositing them although
they did do that in some cases but the
dialogic format was central to each of
them
and the sense of the the personal
adaptation and the personal cultivation
as a student that was implicit in the
readings was also important to all of
them does that send anything else shared
in common and they just had a way of
they just also just had a gift for they
were they were all just very well well
philosophically trained and had a gift
for being able to a gift for being able
to expound on some of the ideas and riff
off of them very well yeah I was telling
you that that the sort of the political
interpretations of Plato that Plato's
Plato's use in political theory and
political philosophy was was never
really something that appealed to me
very much mostly because I felt that it
abridged and kind of truncated Plato for
its own purposes co-opted him and put
him in categories that he seemed to want
to not you know to circumscribe him in
ways that he seemed as though I could
speak for Plato but that in my mind he
seemed not to want to be circumscribed
by so that never sat as well with me
yeah but yeah that was a feature they
all had okay cool yeah and and so I also
by ADIZ the other thing about our
societies perhaps it's important to say
is that one of the ways in which it's
exemplary is that the whole notion of
platonic love and this the dialogical
wrap whore that you and I have spoken so
much about in that John and others have
spoken so much about a lot of that not
not exclusively but platonic Lev chiefly
is an idea that that is derived from
this dialogue in particular because of
the relationship between Socrates and
Alcibiades which is also something
that's explored a bit in the symposium
so I think that that has something to do
with why it it it comes first in the neo
platonic order there's a quote there's a
quote actually from ProQuest that I have
here but I thought might might be might
be good to read and it's just an
introduction which is to say Brooklyn
says let this lit this then be the sort
of philosophy and of the teaching of
Plato namely the knowledge of ourselves
yeah
so that's so rich already so you and I
have decided so this dialogue is
convenient in that it has two
interlocutors Socrates and Alcibiades
that's uh that's handy so we can each
take one and and we'll alternate so
maybe maybe with each video that we do
we'll swap roles how does that sound
yeah we could both get like equally like
projected on an equally Socrates
yes absolutely I don't know if but which
actually I'm not sure which one I
wouldn't want to be I don't know the end
of the dialogue to figure what's more
painful being Socrates or speaking with
Socrates yeah I guess we're about to
find out okay so you want to just good
thing you're out of striking distance
guy yeah anything else only wanted to
say about just the order so we're so
we're gonna go with the Neoplatonic
order and you said one of the things
that you'd said is because it has so
much of the personal transformational
aspect involved by the time it became
Neoplatonism like the sense of the sense
of the Platonic dialogues and philosophy
being so part of personal transformation
right was was part of the order and
built into the order
this that's my understanding yeah yeah
yeah yeah more or less I just want to
keep just want to keep tracking that as
part of the context as if that were that
we're going through here as we're
reading it because you know like I said
in the beginning like one of the things
that is it has my interest in this is is
the sense of looking at that there's
something essential in dialogue owes in
philosophy a-- that as a practice that
may not be just a good may not just be a
good choice to make but a necessity that
may be lost and so that's I want to like
I want to kind of feel into that sense
of like necessity and it being lost and
hot and bring it back because I mean on
Thursday we you and I you know me you
John and Jordan are gonna meet probably
we're probably gonna talk a lot about
like actually bringing this into the
world in some very concrete way so does
that look like one of the horizons that
this is the background that that I'm
gonna be reading to this and foreground
with yeah yeah and then I added to that
background is obviously everything
that's going on around us right now
right the via the eruption of the kovat
pandemic the the the the the seclusion
that everyone's been suddenly forced to
undertake and and everyone's kind of
hold up and cloistered in their homes
for most part and and and that has
really nothing to do with this
undertaking and so far as we plan to do
this long before this entered our
consciousness but I'm appreciating the
coincidence right now totally you could
I see something about an experience that
I had please are you talk with you about
so you know I've been I've been tracking
everything on the news however I think
on I think it was Saturday evening was
when I watch that the I think it was NBC
Nightly News and it just went I was like
I got it like or I got one at a deeper
level
yeah that kind of figure ground kind of
shift happened where it was like I
wonder how this is this real like what's
that all of a sudden something about
watching it but what was interesting
about that was the whole day I had spent
circling because I had a two-day course
which is where I was spending basically
spending the whole day circling people I
probably probably Circle the total like
about eight hours or so and end and so
as often is the case which i think is
circling is basically kind of in a
certain way is getting at what what I'm
imagining I'm about we're about to read
here right this kind of how I would put
it it is police circles is to is to have
your attention on on on on the place
that's the most stable II unstable right
what's most alive right and in getting
right down to that place where like
chaos and order or right there leading
into novelty but if you lean too far
forward it loses its intelligibility but
if you lean too far back you can't
actually see what's happening right
right is that emerging quality of and I
just noticed doing that through circling
it seems to access all that flow kind of
machinery and so there's a certain kind
of openness to novelty that's also
deeply stable in a in a certain way and
I and I wasn't necessarily like in the
presence of recognizing that or
something but I just like done with the
course and then I'm like oh let me just
check and I listen to the news but I
listen to it from having all of those
muscles or that machinery
opened and attuned and it was so
interesting I like took in the crisis
and I can feel myself kind of implicitly
welcoming in all of the chaos yeah like
as it did I felt this deeper sense of
like refraining from gripping on to some
kind of like contrived order to get
comfortable and instead healing myself
dropping to a deeper level of context as
the sense of as the sense of the chaos
started to come in all the way down to
this point of like where it I almost
felt like I just I somehow just went
into this place of I don't know how to
call it but like a a deeply abstract but
literally system system thinking
immediacy that kind of came on and then
all of a sudden it was like all of my
thoughts were very very cautious of
making any conclusions hmm but just
noticing um where I needed this like
watching my my awareness sit and a level
of intelligibility right that could kind
of see the background of that right it
was so really interesting Wow
various to find myself inside of and
it's funny cuz I didn't even quite
realize it until the next morning when
I'm listening to the people checking in
for the next day of circling where
they're talking about their experience
of the impact of that and all of a
sudden I just started to kind of realize
like oh my god right and I'd written
that that email do you guys to have the
thing and like all these things kept all
of that was part of the flow of that
experience right so I just
I don't know I just wanted to share that
with you I I have this as you were so as
you were saying that you conjured this
image to my mind of you this is gonna
seem a little silly but you sort of
riding the back of some great Leviathan
of a creature as it sinks deeper and
deeper and deeper and deeper into the
depths and I have a I have an image of
you sort of poised nimbly on its back
with one hand on a set of reins and one
hand sort of out to the side steadying
yourself just maintaining your balance
with a kind of cautious curiosity as it
sinks deeper and deeper and deeper it's
a great image it very much was like that
that sense of being you know being an
ant they can see like an inch in front
of it on the back of an elephant right
and then just kind of recognizing that I
it's it actually isn't an elephant that
I didn't know about that I was riding on
like it was it that's right it defensive
both like total like having a clear
awareness of not knowing where I was but
more and more of an innate preparation
for that not knowing in some way and
their responsiveness I just thought that
was just really interesting to kind of
accidentally find myself in that space
seeing the world in its state just kind
of come into that having just basically
done a yoga class like on all the deep
layers of your psyche of where you said
all right so I just thought that was
beautifully described and yeah thank you
for sharing that let's keep that perhaps
in the let's let's let's let's keep that
within sight yeah of these dialogues as
we proceed because I think that there's
something very very important in behind
that and that's gonna remain relevant to
us spoken or unspoken as we continue
very alright Socrates all right okay so
I'm Socrates this time and then we'll
and then we'll swap okay
and incidentally for any folks who might
may take an interest here this is a
translation of alcibiades by des
Hutchinson and I'll put a link to the
version that's a copy that's in actually
scribe so you perfect perfect great
stroke of luck that we happened upon the
same version yes okay I was the first
man to fall in love with you son of
cleinias and now that the others have
stopped pursuing you I suppose you're
wondering why I'm the only one who
hasn't given up and also why when the
others pestered you with conversation I
never even spoke to you all these years
human causes didn't enter into it I was
prevented by some divine being The
effect of which you'll hear about later
on but now it no longer prevents me so
here I am I'm confident it won't prevent
me in the future either I've been
observing you all this time and I've got
a pretty good idea how you treated all
those men who pursued you they held
themselves in high esteem but you were
even more arrogant and sent them packing
every single one of them I'd like to
explain the reason why you felt yourself
so superior you say you don't need
anyone anybody rather for anything since
your own qualities from your body right
up to your soul are so great there's
nothing you lack in the first place you
fancy yourself the tallest and
best-looking man around and it's quite
plain to see you're not wrong about that
next you think that yours is the leading
family in your city which is the
greatest city in Greece on your father's
side you have plenty of aristocratic
friends and relations who would be of
service to you if there was ever any
need and on your mother's side your
connections are no worse and no fewer
and you have Pericles son of Xanthippus
whom your father left as a guardian to
you and your brother you think he's a
more powerful ally than all of those
people I mentioned put together he can
do whatever he likes not only in this
city but anywhere in Greece and also in
many important foreign countries I will
also mention your wealth but I think
that's the least of all the reasons you
hold yourself in high esteem you bragged
about all those things and got the
better of your suitors they didn't
measure up and came off
the worse you knew what was going on and
so I'm sure you're wondering what I
could possibly have in mind why don't I
give up on you the others have all been
sent packing so what do I hope to
achieve by persisting yes Socrates
perhaps you don't realize that you've
just taken the words out of my mouth I
had already decided to come and ask you
that very question what could you have
in mind
what do you hope to achieve by bothering
me always making sure you're there
wherever I am yes I really do wonder
what you might be up to and I'd be very
glad to find out so then you'll probably
be eager to give me your full attention
since as you say you're a keen to know
what I have in mind I take it that
you'll listen carefully yes of course
just tell me watch out I wouldn't be at
all surprised if I found it as hard as
if I found it as hard to stop ice it was
to start tell me please I will pay
attention speak I must then it's not
easy to play the role of suitor with a
man who doesn't give in to them
nevertheless I must summon up my courage
and say what's on my mind so they just
went to pause there for a second so just
like why my sense is so just gonna
follow along so it was really
interesting I'm already having fun yeah
it's like slipping into I wanted to say
so many purposes the jokes like this
it's hard not to ad-lib yeah I was like
I couldn't what was interesting about
like listening to Socrates since I
couldn't tell it was a combination of
praising him Socrates praising him and
kissing him at the same time he has a
way with that yeah I couldn't as as the
person being talking to I couldn't quite
tell which one was happening right yeah
yeah well we're seeing some of that
irony that irony that thereafter he
became so famous for and that so many
people noticed over the course of time
that ironical disposition is in full is
as is on display here info so irony so I
you know it's funny I know what you mean
when you you when you say it but what I
like I could have asked myself what is
irony I don't quite exactly know what I
what I understand about it is there is
there a way of just distinguishing that
quick yeah I think so there's there's so
much to it but I think if so if I were
to at least to begin there's a
cultivated distinction a cultivated in
equality between the the appearance the
countenance of Socrates as presented and
the reality of what is meant and
intimated right there's a sense in which
he is absent from his words something
meaningful is absent from his words and
the absence is meaningful unto itself
alright so that they so that the so that
the the the fact that what is said is in
identical with the truth is purposefully
and I did and took a with the truth is
not in identical for the purpose of
ultimate deception but the that in
identic ality between what is said and
what is meant is a way of fostering an
attention to what is properly meant an
attention to what is properly true this
is kind of like a almost like a negative
theology and there somewhere like an
absence yeah
the absence that's a presence that's
really interesting yeah yeah
and so that factly operates at the level
of the proposition but it also operates
at the level of lay at the level of the
interpersonal dynamic yeah also like
there probably wouldn't be humor without
such a thing yeah
override and he's such a great humorist
and I asked the thing that often gets
overlooked I think it like these are
these are funny yeah
they should be right I mean that's why
that's why great great humor is so
flushed with irony right because
precisely because it I mean even even
contemporary comedians say a lot of
things that are that are like that that
they say a lot of things ironically that
are very very provocative dad who they
don't mean but by virtue of saying it
there there are sending to something
that is has to remain implicit to the
dialogue yeah but that is ultimately
it's subject interest oh wow all right
okay just tell me watch out I wouldn't
be at all surprised if I found it as
hard to stop as it was to start tell me
please I will pay attention speak I must
then it's not easy to play the role of
suitor with a man who doesn't give in to
them nevertheless I must summon up my
courage and say what's on my mind
Alcibiades if I saw that you were
content with the advantages I just
mentioned and thought that this was the
condition in which you should live out
the rest of your life I would have given
up on you long ago at least that's what
I persuaded myself but I'm going to
prove to you in person what very
different plans you actually have in
mind then you'll realize how constantly
I've been thinking about suppose one of
the guards asked you alcibiades would
you rather live with what you now have
or would you rather die on the spot if
you weren't permitted to acquire
anything greater I think you choose to
die what then is your real ambition in
life I'll tell you you think that as
soon as you present yourself before the
athenian people as indeed you expect you
in a very few days by presenting
yourself you'll show them that you
deserve to be honored more than Pericles
or anyone else who ever was having shown
that you'll be the most influential man
in the city and if you're the greatest
here you'll be the greatest in the rest
of Greece and not only in Greece but
also among the foreigners who live on
the same continent as
we do and if that same God we're then to
tell you that you should have absolute
power in Europe but that you weren't
permitted to cross over into Asia or get
mixed up with affairs over there I think
you'd rather not live with only that to
look forward to you want your reputation
and your influence to saturate all
mankind so to speak I don't think you
regard anybody as ever having been much
to speak of except perhaps Cyrus or
Xerxes and I'm not guessing that this is
your ambition I'm sure of it since you
know that what I see is true maybe
you'll say well then Socrates what's
this got to do with your point you said
you were going to tell me why you
haven't given up on me yes I will tell
you my dear son of clintus and dino
mckay i don't think i'm butchering that
do you know mikey something like that it
is impossible to put any of these ideas
of yours into effect without me that's
how much influence i think i have over
you and your business i think this is
whether god hasn't allowed me to talk to
you all this time I've been waiting for
the day he allows me I'm hoping for the
same thing from you as you are from the
Athenians I hope to exert great
influence over you by showing you that
I'm worth the world to you and that
nobody is capable of providing you with
the influence you crave neither your
guardian nor your relatives or anybody
else except me but the gods help of
course when you were younger
before you were full of such ambitions I
think that God didn't let me talk to you
because the conversation would have been
pointless but now he's told me to
because now you will listen to me so
interesting so just I'm just noticing
before before I read here I'm just
noticing this in what Socrates just said
here whose sacrifice is to me became
shifted like now I wonder eating this
who is Socrates right leg ass like who
is he I'm just noticing that he's
shifted in my animal steel yes although
the other thing that's there too is like
I keep noticing like with the help of
the gods
like I'm also kind of wondering that
horizon is open to is like what are the
gods and yes what do they do so those
are open things that are in my mind as
as I read right yeah they're presences
in the wings right and there's this so
this this this devouring ambition that
he's speaking of that Alcibiades has
right an ambition that would very
happily an ambition that very happily
engulf the whole world if he could
Socrates is entreating him to direct the
whole of that ambition through this very
very very narrow conversation take all
of that that you would direct up toward
the world and devour and concentrated
instead on me and you'll find this equal
in its ability to to say to or greater
in its ability to say to you there's a
bit of modal there's a bit of there's a
bit of modal that modal alternation
going on right because he wants to have
it all he wants to be had by all
and Socrates is saying that but but
you're I mean he's not using this
terminology obviously but there's a
there's a there's a modal confusion that
Alcibiades is trapped within right and
Socrates is prodding it from the outside
and trying to get its attention
direct it to himself and all that he has
to to provoke interesting sounds like
from sake that it's very it like like
yeah we perverse yes yes well I think
that what we're seeing here is sort of
the beginning of the transmutation of
their Ross huh Wow right something like
that okay cynical baby says really
Socrates now that you've started talking
you see much more bizarre to me then
when you've followed me in silence no
you were very bizarre to look at then
you well on the question of whether or
not there are my ambitions
you seem to have made up your mind
already and no denial of mine will do
anything to convince you otherwise
fine but supposing I really do have
these ambitions how will you help me
achieve them what makes you
indispensable have you got something to
say are you asking if I can say some
long speech like the ones you're used to
hearing no that sort of things not for
me but I do think I'll be able to show
you that what I've said is true if only
you were willing to grant me just one
little favor well as long as you mean a
favor that's not hard to grant I'm
willing that's also how I begin all my
conversations
I'd be happy to help you but it depends
on how tall the order is yeah do you
think it's hard to answer questions no I
don't then answer me well then ask me my
question is whether you have in mind
what I say you have in mind let's say I
do if you like so I can find out what
you're going to say okay so now he's
willing to play Yeah right let's act as
if the acting as if right my immersion
into the play right right now that's not
now there's an agreement now there's a
dramaturgical agreement that they're
going to play these respective roles
even though ironically they know they're
not identical to them right so he's
going to play a proposition knowing at
least right now as is in situ he does
not necessarily identify with the
proposition credulous Lee but he's gonna
play it anyway right so Socrates is
successfully and treated him to play yes
oh wow that's interesting
okay
right then you plan as I say to come
forward and advise the Athenians
sometime soon
suppose I stopped you as you were about
to take the podium and asked OSA buddies
what are the Athenians proposing to
discuss you're getting up to advise them
because it's something you know better
than they do aren't you what would you
reply yes I suppose I would say it was
something that I'm better than they do
so it's on matters you know about that
you're a good advisor of course now the
only things you know are what you've
learned from others or found out for
yourself isn't that right what else
could I know could you ever have learned
or found out anything without wanting to
learn it or work it out for yourself no
I couldn't have is that right
would you have wanted to learn or work
out something that you thought you
understood
of course not so there was a time when
you didn't think you knew what you now
understand it must have been but I've
got a pretty good idea what you've
learned tell me if I've missed anything
as far as I remember you learned writing
and liar plane and wrestling but you
didn't want to learn our loss plane
those are the subjects that you
understand unless perhaps you've been
learning something while I wasn't
looking but I don't think you have been
either by night or by day on your
excursions from home no those are the
only lessons I took well then is it when
the Athenians are discussing how to
spell a word correctly that you'll stand
up to advise them good god I'd never do
that then is it when they're discussing
the notes on the lyre no never but
surely they're not in the habit of
discussing wrestling in the assembly
certainly not then what will they be
discussing I presume it won't be
building of course not because a builder
would give better advice on these
matters than you yes nor will they may
be discussing
nation well they know because then a
diviner would be better at giving advice
than you yes
regardless of whether he's tall or short
or handsome or ugly or even noble or
common of course and when the Athenians
are discussing measures for public
health it will make no difference to
them if their counselor is rich or poor
but they will make sure that their
advisor is a doctor of course I suppose
that's because advice on any subject is
the business not of those who are rich
but of those who know it quite
reasonably so then what will they be
considering when you stand up to advise
them assuming your right to do so
they'll be discussing their own business
Socrates you mean there are shipbuilding
businesses what sorts of ships should
they be building
no no Socrates I don't
I suppose that's because you don't
understand shipbuilding am i right or is
there some other reason no that's it so
what kind of their own business do you
think they'll be discussing war Socrates
or peace or anything else which is the
business of the city do you mean they'll
be discussing who they should make peace
with and who they should go to war with
and how yes but shouldn't they do that
with the ones with whom it's better to
yes and when it's better certainly and
for as long a time as it's better yes
now supposing the Athenians were
discussing who they should wrestle with
and who they should spar with and how
who would be a better advisor you or the
trainer the trainer I guess and can you
tell me what the trainer has in view
when he advises you who should or
shouldn't wrestle with who sorry who you
should or shouldn't wrestle with and
when and how I mean for example that one
should wrestle with those with whom it
is better to wrestle isn't that right
yes and as much as it's better that's
right and when it's better right
certainly let's take another example
when you're singing you should sometimes
accompany the song with lyre playing and
dancing yes you should you should do so
when it's better to write yes and as
much as it's better I agree
really since you use the term better in
both cases in wrestling and in playing
the lyre while singing what do you call
what's better in lyre playing as I call
what's better in wrestling athletic what
do you call that I don't get it then try
to follow my example my answer was I
think what is correct in every case and
what is correct I presume is what takes
place in accordance with the skill isn't
it yes wasn't the skill athletics of
course I said that what's better in
wrestling was athletic that's what you
said wasn't that well said I think so
anyway come on then it's your turn it's
partly up to you surely to keep our
conversation going well first of all
tell me what first of all tell me what
the skill is for singing and dancing and
playing the lyre correctly what is it
called as a whole aren't you able to
tell me yet ok so right there is one
applause so interesting so he's setting
up a bunch of Socrates is like light
like it seems like I keep getting the
sense he's picking up these dominoes
right and each Domino he's saying that
there's something there's something
similar through all those things that I
want you to comprehend mhm and I think
that he's showing that somehow Alka
biteys does comprehend implicitly
but he's in some way he's he's almost
kind of tricking him to noticing that he
doesn't know how he does how he how he
knows that
right right interested right sorry I'm
feeling this kind of
foreground/background
going back and forth right yep yeah
interesting yep
yeah yeah I think that's exactly right
there's something so familiar about this
and I can't quite put my finger on what
it is familiar about about what
specifically I don't know just just this
the line of the of the way the dialogues
going is like well this this this this
and this is background sense of like how
do I know that but not totally
articulated I don't know there's
something familiar about foreground
background like I think that I can I
think that it's just clearly plain as
day logically all fits together there's
some dim awareness that I didn't learn
that anywhere yet I know it and this
emerge it's like those two things tend
to trick interpenetrating seems like
maybe I guess it's familiar in the sense
of like how I come to start thinking
about something right but I can't tell
you why I started thinking about it but
there's something I'm tracking it starts
to notice that it doesn't understand
something that it understands it's a
mess yes a kind of remembrance yeah
something coming something finally
coming into the light yeah what wasn't
in the light before yeah attention is
precisely but also the sense and being
alka by T's in some way having there's
an identity that alka by T's has that is
by definition has got to play along cuz
he'll never give something up right
there's a sense of of which Socrates you
get this sense that he's trick he's kind
of tricking him into seeing something
that his identity would never let him
see yeah right
well cuz he's he's um he's kind of
seduced him
sadducees - stronger term at this point
but he's he's invited him to
provisionally forego his egoic identity
for the purpose of playing through the
exercise but what's going to happen as
they play through the exercise is his
ego the egoic identity that he
provisionally aggrieved to relinquish is
going to become more and more and more
distant in favor of the the logos that
is becoming more and more visible
beneath the propositions of the
conversation interesting I just saw
something right there in anticipation of
that of how this dialogue could be
transformative
for him right in that if he plays along
he'll play but he'll play himself right
into undoing what he thinks about
himself yes cuz if my self understanding
changes my identity changes so this kind
of way that identity and dialogue how it
can be transformative yeah interesting
it's like Socrates is teaching him he's
leading him through a series of very
simple dance moves and at some point
he's going to change the pattern of the
move right yeah and and that shift after
having learned all of these very basic
steps and become comfortable with them
that shift is going to be there's
there's going to be something momentous
about the transition yeah wow this is so
this is so fun yeah yeah it is so much
going on here I'm all said there's a lot
go there's a lot going on because then
see in addition to the sense of irony
that Socrates and Alcibiades have
between each other I mean Socrates has
the sense of irony that he's that he's
he's presenting one way knowing that
he's going to pivot the other but but as
the reader we're all so appreciative of
the irony too because we see what else
is a dramatic irony a classic form of
dramatic irony because we see when
Alcibiades doesn't at this point right
because familiar as we are with Socrates
we have a sense of what's what's what's
going to start happening more and more
and now sub IDs there's a certain even
even though as of may be as a person
edge is known to be a bit rep reprobate
there's a certain innocence with what
she's entered into this yes or so it's
sort so it seems at least at that face
value you know it's interesting because
in the there is it seems with like deep
forms of identification right where well
I'm insulated in some way and I'm
righteous or I'm dug into some position
that the tightness itself is in a sense
somehow it knows what we know as we're
reading it we can kind of we can see
Alka bodies disintegration about to come
he's naive too but the the thing that's
tight about the identity already is
anticipating that integration or that
disintegration so on some level it's
seeming stability is dependent on it's
the thing it's most afraid of to be
stable yeah it's just interesting to
kind of feel that possibility in reading
it's kind of obvious he's gonna yeah
yeah it's just kind of that sense of
just and which is interesting to look at
that in terms of you know Plato on some
level wrote these as a process of
transformation that we're going through
demonstrating that like even and I was
reading it or acting it out that that
awareness of the trickery that we're
present to as the readers is part of
isn't is an accident that's right
certainly is no accident right
yeah yeah yeah even even though it will
occur to us accidentally you know what I
mean there's like again there's yet
another level to that to because we're
we are also much like much like our
societies and Socrates who agreed to
enter into this this this this dramatise
we too are had been making the same
choice with certain for no knowledge and
yet the accidents that trip these two
will also trip us the accidents will
occur to us even though we've knowingly
engaged ourselves ourselves to them
right right and that's that's that
that's the quality of aspiration at work
right where that there's a that's it's
volitional and so far as we're entering
into it knowingly to some degree and yet
it will still occur to us in some ways
as though we did not know series play
yeah precisely series play so I think we
are at Aqaba visas no I can't right well
try it this way who are the goddesses to
whom this skill belongs do you mean the
muse Socrates I do indeed don't you see
what's the name of the skill that's
named after them I think you mean music
yes I do
now what is correctly for now what is
quote correctly interesting it's an it's
an adverb there what is correctly for
what takes place in accordance with this
skill in other cases I told you what
correctly is for what takes place in
accordance with that skill now it's your
turn to say something similar in this
case how does it take place I think I'm
going to read that one again guy yeah
yeah well now what is correctly for what
takes place in accordance with this
skill in the other cases I told you what
correctly is for what takes place in
accordance with the skill so now it's
your turn to say something similar in
this case how does it take place
musically I I think ah a good answer
come on now what do you call what's
better in both going to war and keeping
the peace in these last two examples you
said that what was better was more
musical and more athletic respectively
now try to tell me what's better in this
case - I really can't do it but surely
it's disgraceful if when you're speaking
and giving advice about food saying what
a certain kind saying that a certain
kind is better than another and better
at a certain time and in a certain
quantity and someone should ask you what
do you mean by better Alcibiades you
could tell him in that case that better
was healthier though you didn't even
though you don't even pretend to be a
doctor and yet in a case where you do
pretend to understand and are going to
stand up and give advice as though you
knew if you aren't able as it seems
likely to answer the question in this
case won't you be embarrassed won't that
seem disgraceful yes certainly then
think about it and tried to tell me what
the better tends towards in keeping the
peace or in waging war with the right
people just want to pause there that
strikes me then think about it and try
to tell me what better tends toward
mm-hmm yeah I don't know why yeah yeah
in keeping the peace on waging war with
the right people attending toward what
the better tends towards yeah what is
common what is common among these what
is common among the correctly answers in
each case what do they have in common so
there's this kind of like like toward
has this facing quality like I'm I'm
tending toward and seems to have this
kind of future quality to it like
something's coming mmm I'm tending
toward yeah okay
that was that was good guy thank you for
pausing us on that I think that's
important yeah okay talk about it says I
do we say that they're playing some I
think I think he jumped online um waging
war with the right people
okay there we go I'm thinking but I
can't get it but suppose we're or with
somebody surely you know what treatment
we accuse each other out when we enter
into a war and what we call it I do we
say they're playing some trick on us or
attacking us or taking things away from
us hold on how do we suffer from each of
these treatments try to tell me how one
way differs from another way when you
say way Socrates do you mean justly or
unjustly precisely
okay so right there there are two ways
of reading that question right yeah yeah
do you want one way is do you mean
justly or unjustly or do you mean justly
or unjustly and he says precisely so
they get say it's like there is that
sense of a tyranny of it's funny I've
never quite thought about it so
explicitly as irony being presencing
something by its absence right and in
holding that absence as it grow and then
he goes precisely and somehow I just
felt the tickle of that not more the fun
or the non or so yes that right yes yes
interesting yes how does that see I do
we say they're playing some trick on us
and wait a minute is that that's find us
just let's go from there that's fine
people um I do we say they're playing
some trick on us or attacking
we're taking things away from us hold on
how do we suffer from each of these
treatments try to tell me how one way
differs from another way when you say
way Socrates you mean justly or unjustly
precisely which but surely I mean it's
no wonder they killed him yeah but
surely that takes that that makes all
the difference in the world really
who will you advise the Athenians to
wage war on those who are treating us
unjustly or those who are treating us
justly that's a hard question you're
asking
even if someone thought it was necessary
to wage war on people who were treating
us Jesslyn he could you wouldn't admit
it because I think that wouldn't be uh
wouldn't sorry because I think that
wouldn't be lawful it certainly wouldn't
nor would it be considered a proper
thing to do
No so you would also frame your speech
in these terms I have to I'd have to
then this better quote better I was just
asking you about when it comes to waging
war or not on whom to wage war and on
whom not to and when and when not to
this better turns out to be the same as
more just doesn't it it certainly seems
so but how could it my dear are sub IDs
don't you realize that this is something
you don't understand or perhaps when I
wasn't looking you've been seeing some
other teacher seeing some teacher who
taught you how to tell the difference
between the more just and the less just
have you well who is he
tell me who he tell me who he is so that
you can sign me up with him as well stop
teasing me Socrates I'm not I'll swear
by friendship yours and mine
I'd never perjure myself by him him him
referring to friendship which is one of
the one of the in this case an aspect of
a deity friendship being a deity that's
why it's a hymn I'll swear by friendship
yours and mine
I'd never perjure myself by him so tell
me who he is if you can and if I can't
don't you think I might know about
justice and injustice some other way yes
you might you just found it out well
don't you think I might find I might
find me it out yes of course if you
investigate the matter and don't you
think I might investigate it yes I do
if you thought you didn't know and
didn't I once think that gets it gets
just like it goes pure pure farce
sometimes isn't it right right okay
why don't we do where do we actually die
I actually recommend we go through that
again I'll go from the Tufts tell me who
he is so you can sign me up as well top
of the page okay tell me who he is so
you can sign me up with him as well wait
a minute I think
tell me who he is insane so you can go
from stop teasing me Socrates okay let
me just find that place there sorry guy
I didn't mean to throw a wrench in this
oh it's just a few lines up okay I will
go aye-aye
I don't think I might invest um and
don't you think I might investigate it
yes I do if you thought you didn't know
and didn't I once think that pause
actually pause right there that one's
like that that one really strikes me
like now as now he's asking Socrates
what he whether or not he just thought
that right that just that there's
something about that that just really
yeah
pulls a both a confusion like a like a
radical confusion right because you know
I thought it or not like I'm the one
that has authority but all of a sudden
like I'm asking you whether or not I
thought that that's right that's right
and as soon as it occurs to him yeah cuz
insisting yeah I once thought that ah
exactly you did yes good answer
okay now we're onto something let's go
from there okay cuz you did learn it by
some other means by what means okay you
admitted it now let's yeah didn't I once
think that ah yeah good a fine answer
interesting so like there's a it's
interesting that the role the roles here
are interpenetrating like and also
didn't die once he's asked he's
answering at Socrates with the question
right what Socrates has been doing to
him right this is great and it's about
stumbling off pun supposed to look upon
the right question yeah right I mean the
quest questions are what they're trading
right now which Socrates is you can tell
he's trying to strengthen
maneuver him into the position to ask
the right question and then of course he
does approximately ask the right
question I think it's also I also think
it's important that the the the god of
friendship as a God as a as a persona
has been conjured here for a moment
right yeah that struck me - yeah that's
why I yeah I put him point on it right
yeah
applying it okay a financier can you
tell me when this was when you didn't
think you knew about justice and
injustice well was it last year that you
were looking into it and yeah sorry let
me try it made me take that yep now well
was it last year that you were looking
into it and didn't think you knew or did
you think that you knew answer me
truthfully or else our conversation will
be a waste of time yes I thought I do
didn't you think the same thing two
years ago and three years ago and four I
did but surely before that you were a
boy weren't you yes well now at that
point I'm sure you thought you knew how
can I be sure of that when you were a
boy I often observed you at school and
other places and sometimes when you were
playing knucklebones or some other game
you'd say to one or another of your
playmates very loudly and confidently
not at all like someone who was at a
loss about justice and injustice that he
was a lousy cheater and wasn't playing
fairly isn't that true well what was I
to do Socrates when somebody cheated me
like that do you mean what should you
have done if you didn't actually know
then whether or not you were being
cheated but I did know by Zeus I thought
clearly that they were cheating me so
it seems that even as a child you
thought you understood justice and
injustice yes and I did understand at
what point did you find it out surely it
wasn't when you thought you knew of
course not let's pay attention to that
line for a second actually at what point
did you find it out surely it wasn't
when you thought you knew
classic Socratic line right what is that
reveal it god that's reviewing something
that's I'm having that familiar that
familiar sense of something being
disclosed that feels so familiar but if
I try to turn towards it and explain it
goes right away right well actually
that's right that's kind of what's
happening with Elka biteys I think so
very funny did you find anything so
Socrates very very funny indeed
Alcibiades okay I'll take that again and
then go forward um at what point did you
find it out surely it wasn't when you
thought you knew of course not then when
did you think you didn't know think
about it you won't find any such time by
Zeus Socrates I really can't say so it
isn't but by finding it out that you
know it that's not very likely but
surely did you want to step in guy no no
no okay but surely you just finished
saying that it wasn't by being taught
either that you knew it
so if you neither found it out nor were
taught it how and where did you come to
know it maybe I gave you the wrong
answer I knew it by finding it out
myself then how did it happen
I suppose I learned it in the same way
as other people that brings us back to
the same argument from whom do tell me
from people in general when you give the
credit to people in general you're
falling back on teachers who are no good
what aren't they capable of teaching no
they can't even teach you what moves to
make or not to make in knucklebones and
yet that's a trivial matter I suppose
compared with justice
what don't you agree yes so although
they can't teach trivial things you say
they can teach more serious things I
think so at any rate they can teach a
lot of things that are more important
than knucklebones
like what well for example I learned how
to speak Greek from them I couldn't tell
you who my teacher was when I gave the
credit to the very people you say are no
good at teaching impose one second so
you know that it's kind of coming to me
here is is Heidegger hmm right this
sense of this sense of the that's how
high they were often for at least for me
there's something familiar about this in
and now Heidegger kind of reveals this
fruit these this pre apprehension
mmm-hmm for me to ask the question
precip up for example to ask a question
presupposes knowing something for which
I don't know something about what is
right if you ask me to account for in
any president hand object directly
looking at an oriented way of knowing it
just disappears I can't explain it but
the ability to hold that hand right is
can't account for itself
as an object so I'm just kind of feeling
that kind of built like a hermetic
phenomenological bleeding back and forth
and I'm literally gripped as we're
reading this I'm like yeah what how did
I know that like oh must yeah of course
what's the a priori here yeah I think I
mean I in in many ways it's like
Socrates Alcibiades it could much of
this could be much of this could be
unfolded to the question you know what
what's draw your attention to the soles
of your feet you've never drawn your
attention to the soles of your feet
before have you right you know not the
ground on which you stand well what
ground do you stand how long have you
been standing there I don't know I've
just I'm just standing here I know but
but how long right how long have you
been standing here oh well I don't know
how long I've been standing here well
you're clearly standing here right what
does it feel like to stand and um right
what's the point at which you acquired
this knowing right how do you source
yourself as a knower yeah right um and
and of course he's struggling too he's
struggling to write find find find the
ground find the ground of your knowing
its origin and he can't like it's it's
yes and you can feel it's F it's so
effortful that you can like but I mean
that's why that's why it that's why it
descends into such amusing reposts
because it's like trying to get to the
he can't draw he can't draw his sense of
presence down far enough to where
Socrates is trying to indicate in fact
the thing that is interesting is that
what did shooting something is becoming
more stable and some things be kind of
coming unstable it's interesting with my
my my I think what he's what he's doing
here is alka by these normal way of
knowing is becoming less and less stable
because it's he's being shown that he
knows something that his knowing can't
disclose so there's this instability
that's actually kind of funny right
but it's it's interesting on this other
way there's something whatever it is
it's coming into more stability is
making itself known
but isn't revealing it through his old
way of knowing so I'm just I can feel
that a a new strange attractor starting
to organize around and do some kind of
state shift or something or yeah exactly
exactly exactly I think that's well put
he's back his he's backing into
something yeah he's backing into himself
he's backing into something of himself
and that he's never been able to back
into that's something interesting in
itself that I am about which I back into
and everything his other his other way
of knowing is so forward-looking right
but to know the answer the question I
have to back away from what I know into
myself to find out that I already knew
but I can't account for right it's right
right and Socrates is essentially
leading him in these backward steps but
you and you and you were saying before
about Heather's of bidirectionality
right there's that there's a forward and
a backward motion simultaneously and as
that that plugs into this metaphor
perfectly so now I'm just I'm noticing
it like if I just ring the tone on this
feeling right here this is what I was
talking about and circling like whatever
that spot is where you don't quite know
but you know something's falling apart
and something's becoming more stable and
you don't know what it is but it's
really fucking interesting like you
right there right there right there
right there right there yeah very
similar this is one of that feeling I
get I think what circling Pratt has me
practice doing which is interesting
because it's like it's dialogical it's
that it's its relationship yes exactly
cuz does eje exactly does he do as he
draws him closer to the center of his
presumed belief the center of his
presumed belief is ultimately going to
be in our ear and and and so the app the
presence of the app Perea which is the
same presence in absentia we were
talking about ironically yeah that
presence engulfs him more and
more and more as he backs into it right
at the center of this presumed beliefs
is the operatic darkness so a poetic
sick can you say something about opera
like is there a poor a pyretic just the
adjective form of our Perea which is to
say the the prep the precipice beyond
which your knowing trails off well
interest right opens into a kind of a
kind of a kind of it is the dista
dissolution of knowing yeah right
yeah but seems to it but not a
nihilistic disillusion right it's not a
nihilistic dissolution it's it's that
it's right through that the Theia
beyond the the unseen but ever-present
structures of belief bought him out
somewhere yeah kind of point at which
they bought him out is the Opera okay
is that similar is that probably
something similar to like what a co and
like a Zen : yes I very much so I think
I think he could make yeah I I don't I
don't know that I I don't know that I
understand the philosophy of the : well
enough to make an identity claim here
but I think it seems to me that that
there's something very very similar
going on if not the same thing that the
Cohens decided designed to induce a nap
Korea right and designed to dissolve
dissolve your proposition because the
whole point of a Cohen is that you can't
rap you can't thread a cone with
propositions right right you you you you
it'll write propositions will boil away
this is really like this is you can't
get propositions can't get a purchase
around a Cohen right and in the same way
the propositions can't get a purchase on
the Apple right well this is so this is
so being this is really but like I'm
just kind of really getting the sense
like the emergence of being as it as it
withdrawals and becoming present to what
isn't here is
somehow having it be here in this way
that can't become an object a being but
reveals the thing that is doing
something as it withdrawals and yeah
tuning into that something that as it
withdrawals you can feel its
intelligibility that oh so good to
tuning it exactly right so good I turn
to get white I'm starting to get why
people would talk about Socrates for all
this time Wow yeah yeah so wit see where
were we here I can't remember let's see
yes my noble friend people in general or
good teacher
I think it's C I think so
at any rate hmm they can teach a lot of
things that are more important your
knucklebones like what for example I
learned how to speak weak from them I
couldn't tell you who my teacher was but
I give the credit to the very people you
say are no good at teaching yes my noble
friend people in general are good
teachers of that and it would be only
fair to praise them for their teaching
why because they have what it takes to
be good teachers of the subject what do
you mean by that don't you see that
somebody who is going to teach anything
must first know it himself
isn't that right of course and don't
people who know something agree with
each other not disagree yes if people
disagree about something would you say
that they know it of course not
then how could they possibly be teachers
of it they couldn't possible well then
do you think that people in general
disagree about what
Wood is or stone is if you ask them
don't think of the same answers don't
they reach for the same things when they
want to get some wood or some stone and
similarly for all other such cases I
suppose this is pretty much what you
mean by understanding Greek isn't it yes
so they agree with each other in these
cases as we said and with themselves
when acting privately but don't they
else to agree in public cities don't
disagree with each other and use
different words for the same thing
do they know so it's likely that they
would make good teachers of these things
yes so if we wanted somebody to know
these things we'd be right to send him
to lessons given by these people in
general certainly now if we wanted to
know not just what men or horses are
like but which of them could and
couldn't run but people in general be
able to teach this as well of course not
isn't the fact that they disagree with
each other about these things enough to
show you that they don't understand them
and are not Foursquare teachers of them
Foursquare teachers of them yes it is
now if we wanted to know not just what
men are like
but what sick and healthy men are like
what people in general be able to teach
us of course not and if you saw them
disagreeing about it what would show you
that they were bad teachers of it yes it
would
sorry sorry I misread that I misread
that I formed it as a question let me go
for again and if you saw them
disagreeing about it that would show you
that they were bad teachers of it is the
wood very well then does it seem to you
that people in general actually agree
among themselves or with each other
about just and unjust people in actions
not in the slightest
Socrates really do they disagree a huge
amount about these things very much so I
don't suppose you've ever seen or heard
people disagreeing so strongly about
what is healthy and unhealthy that they
fight and kill each other over it have
you of course not but I know you've seen
this sort of dispute over questions of
justice and injustice and even if you
hadn't seen it at least you've heard
about it from many other people especial
homer since you've heard the Iliad and
the Odyssey haven't you I certainly have
of course Socrates
aren't these poems about disagreements
over justice and injustice yes it was
over this sort of agreement to serve is
over this sort of disagreement that the
key achæans and the Trojans fought
battles and lost their lives as did
Odysseus of the suitors of Penelope
you're right I suppose the same is true
of those Athenians and Spartans and be
twins who died at Tanagra or later at
cornea including your own father
the disagreement that caused those
battles in those deaths was not other
than a disagreement over justice and
injustice wasn't it you're right
are we to say that people understand
something if they disagree so much about
it that in their disputes with each
other they resort to such extreme
measures obviously not but aren't you
giving credit to teachers of this sort
who as yourself admit have no knowledge
I guess I am
well then given that your opinion waiver
so much and a given that you obviously
neither found it out yourself nor
learned it from anyone else how likely
is it that you know about justice and
injustice from what you say anyways it's
not very likely see there you go again
Alcibiades that's not well said what do
you mean you say that I say these things
what are you saying I don't understand
justice and as justice no not at all
well am i yes how here's how
[Laughter]
[Laughter]
here's how if I asked you which is more
one or two would you say - I would buy
how much buy one then which of us is
saying that two is more than one I am
wasn't I asking and weren't you
answering yes who do you think of saying
these things me the questioner or you
the answer er okay Buzzard there okay so
pause right there so like okay how do we
okay so we end
that's very funny Socrates I just wanted
looking where am I like something new
just that than there's just something
got revealed where let's see so Socrates
says how do you think um who I'm sorry
who do you think is saying these things
me the questioner or you the answer
okay so there's he's he's he's revealing
again there's this kind of bleed there's
this transference of like who's asking
the question and who's answering and who
knows and who doesn't yeah who do you
think now he's posing a question who do
you think is saying these things so he's
saying he's basically putting a question
mark on who who when I was speaking as
it as Alka biteys he's putting a
question on something that should be
certain right that's right you need a
questioner or you and then saying well
who is the one that's speaking right now
yeah so now I'm starting to get this
sense of the of this third is this is
this the introduction of the third of
the overarching relationship starting to
I think so it's yeah the question of who
is speaking is an important one here
because what Socrates effectively does I
think in this moment is he does that
damn right
wake up wake back up because because he
starts to he starts to his
are becoming more and more roped more
and more automated he speaks he's being
spoken through but he's not actually
speaking and so by by by a repositioning
the questioner and the answerer Socrates
is bringing him back to himself very
abruptly by saying look you're the one
who was answering all of these questions
don't presume you're speaking through me
right you're speaking so speak yeah Mike
awakened to your speech and become
conscious of the beliefs that you are
giving voice to the perspective that
you're giving voice to right awakened to
it own it in a sense right because
there's a sense in which alcibiades's
disowning dissociated dis identified
from the propositions that are washing
through him right right in the carriage
of Socrates and Socrates is
repositioning that perspective so that
he comes to himself and realized that
he's become voice for a perspective or
or witness to a perspective that he
hasn't been properly conscious to until
this this moment of repositioning it's
almost like the the propositions that
you don't own own you
yes I think that's exactly right he was
easy he has had by the propositions yeah
yes interesting okay
Bosh I got to learn I gotta learn enough
potions I think potions who died it to
Niagara I gotta look that up um anyway
yeah okay so so Socrates get going to
read um who do you think is saying read
that again who do you think is saying
these things me the questioner or you at
the answerer
I am and what if I asked you how to
spell Socrates and you told me which of
us would be saying it I would come then
give me the general principle when
there's a question and an answer who is
the one saying things the questioner or
the answerer the answer I think
that would be my answer to it's a really
good question though I'm actually gonna
repeat that I think it's a it's that's a
heck of a question there's so much more
in that question than meets the eye
come then give me the general principle
when there's a question and an answer
who is the one saying things
the questioner or the answerer well the
answerer I think Socrates wasn't I the
questioner and everything just now yes
and weren't you the answer I certainly
was well then which of us said what was
said would you pause this what a pause
on that one thing I don't know if I have
anything to say yeah I I this is a great
question yeah I think I'm more you dig
into that question the deeper the
Wellborn is that the killing of that of
realizing that the true speaker may be
anonymous or at least ambiguous is
leaving yeah it's leaving oh it's like
there's yeah that's funny
I'm feeling again this so interesting I
had no idea about this but like what's
becoming more present is what I don't
know somehow yes like it's actually I
think that's why I wanted to pause and
go wait a minute yes I wanted to feel
what was present and it is nicely the
thing I don't understand like yes so but
it is it does have a presence to it yes
when you pause yes interesting Who am I
to this question right Who am I before
this question yeah is is I think
implicitly is being asked right yeah Who
am I before this question just the
question somehow gives the answer right
there
at the same time right
well it's funny it's like I noticed my
attention goes Who am I before this
question and then I end up kind of
everywhere yeah yeah it's interesting
I feel pregnant somehow was something
that's what the word is I feel pregnant
or something or the airs pregnant or the
space is pregnant or something's
pregnant yeah yeah ah midwifery
midwifery midwifery right because
they're both starting to identify so
much with the process that the sense of
the sense of distinct identity within
the process is starting to dissolve I
think right wait Who am I in this
process these B's this identification
with process itself is now becoming so
indistinct that that both of them are
somehow dwelling midway between the
question and the answer yeah as they
take it in turns yeah and that's why
when he rotates the roles or at least
throws them back into sharp relief
they're still somehow suspended in
tension between them the both of them
Socrates knowingly of course and
Alcibiades unknowingly in giving this
sense of just I've always thought a good
a good metaphor for the ego is a
sphincter hmm right cuz it's like and
especially especially I thought about
this in times of just when I would do
like you know years ago when I would do
these like really intense psychedelic
journeys like with a lot of intention
with the teacher and everything there
was always this kind of very aware thing
that you're gonna be taken somewhere but
that the whether or not it was painful
is whether or not you couldn't let
yourself be taken right but the act of
trying to let go
was a holding on right right so then you
realize you're holding on and then you
then you try to let go and you hold on
more right right in that sense of that I
feel very similar as I'm talking about
this is like I'm starting to well the
kind of stretch is a little graphic but
like I'm straight I have this sense of
like some kind of egoic sphincter is
starting to relax that's that's an
analog worthy of Socrates himself yeah
Alcibiades is the ego not like a
sphincter yes yes of course it is
Socrates you know what it what just
answered that question and there's a
quiz there is quality in like ticket
track part of it is a contract the whole
of it right right and it does see it
seem like that there's something about
going back and forth in this that is
something's getting another sensibility
is opening up and it's it is really
interesting how it feels present in
reading it like yeah like what he's
going through I'm going through on some
level absolutely it's so interesting
absolutely so so so let's each you want
to go I I wonder how long we've been
going now I don't know how long well we
we were chatting from rollio two hours
not we haven't been recording that whole
time yeah maybe maybe an hour and a half
I mean let me take let me take a look
and actually just go ahead a little bit
see how much is actually after the
dialogue yeah there's a fair bit there's
a fair well let's yeah yeah let's not
have the ambition to to devour the whole
thing right now but yeah what do you
think couple couple more pages yeah okay
we'll find we'll find a natural end
point for now right
so where would I am okay so how about I
how about I repeat I had this book
balanced perfectly now it's falling
slanting I mean you start from the top
of page 569 okay now it'll start oh yeah
that I am and what if I asked you how to
spell Socrates and you told me which of
us would be saying it I would come then
give me the general principle when
there's a question and an answer who is
the one saying things
the questioner or the answerer the
answer I think Socrates wasn't I the
questioner and everything just now yes
and weren't you the answerer it
certainly was well then which of us said
what was said from what we've agreed
Socrates it seems that I did and what
was said was that Alcibiades the
handsome son of clintus doesn't
understand justice and injustice though
he thinks he does and that he is about
to go to the assembly and advise the
athenians and what he doesn't know
anything about was that it a pair then
it's just like in Euripides Alcibiades
you heard it from yourself and not from
me I'm not the one who says these things
you are don't try to blame me and
furthermore you're quite right to say so
this scheme you have in mind teaching
what you don't know and haven't bothered
to learn and your scheme my good fellow
is crazy
actually Socrates I think the Athenians
and the other Greeks rarely discuss
which course is more just or unjust they
think that sort of thing is obvious so
they skip over it and ask which one
would be advantageous to do that though
what's just is not the same I think as
what's advances and Beck and MGS many
people have profited by committing
committing great in justices and others
I think got no advantage from doing the
right thing so even if just an
advantageous things happen to be
completely different surely you don't
think you know what's advantageous for
people and why do you what's to stop me
Socrates unless you're going to ask me
all over again who I learned it from
before how I found out sorry what's to
stop me Socrates unless you're going to
ask me all over again who I learned it
from or how I found it out myself
what a way of carrying on if you say
something wrong and if there's a
previous argument that can prove it was
wrong you think you ought to be given
some new and different proof as if the
previous one were a worn-out scrap of
clothing that you refused to wear again
no you want an Amir an immaculate brand
new proof I'll pass over your
anticipation of my argument and ask you
all the same how do you come to
understand what is advantageous who was
your teacher and in my one question
asked everything I asked you before
clearly this will put you in the same
position again you won't be able to
prove that you know what is advantageous
either by finding it out or by learning
it but since you've got a delicate
stomach and wouldn't enjoy another taste
of the same argument I'll pass over this
question of whether or not you know what
is advantageous for the Athenians but
why don't you prove whether the just and
the advantageous are the same or
different you can question me if you
like as I question you or else work it
out for yourself in your own argument no
Socrates I don't think I'd be able to
work it out in front of you well then my
good sir imagine that I'm the assembly
and the people gathered there even there
you know you'll have to persuade them
one by one isn't that right yes
if somebody knows something don't you
think you can persuade people about it
one by one as well as together take the
schoolteacher don't you think he
persuades people about letters
individually as well as collectively yes
and what the same person be able to
persuade people about numbers
individually as well as in groups yes he
would be a mathematician somebody who
knows about numbers clear certainly so
won't you also be able to persuade an
individual person about the things you
can persuade a group of people about
probably obviously these are things you
know about yes is there any difference
between an orator speaking to the people
and an order speaking and this sort of
conversation except insofar as the
former persuades them all together while
the latter persuades them one by one I
guess not well then since it's a plain
that the same person can persuade
individuals as well as groups practice
on me and try to prove that what is just
is sometimes not advantageous stop
pushing me around so you know I'm
starting to kind of PICUs it's its way
through something about listening and
speaking it's starting to show itself
that like because I think what he's
doing he's saying he's putting different
listenings in front of him and I think I
think I'm starting to kind of come I
don't know I'm starting to come I think
I'm starting to get something about that
whatever it is that I say is in some way
a tune to a listening right that is as
much generative of the answer as the
person who's saying it right right I'm
spillin and that and that goes back to
what you what you notice when you when
you notice the the emphasis on tending
towards speaking into that we're
speaking to the harkening ear the
harkening ear is determinate
of the speech and so far as it contains
and constricts the number of pathways
that will be available to that
particular proposition speaking into a
certain constraint possibility in each
in each distinct threat of the
conversation just so now I'm starting to
get this sense of like self world like
agent arena Nicole how it how you kind
of always already arrived as a speaker
speaking into a listening as a listening
gas being spoken to that everything has
this kind of quality of a conversation
on some level right right exactly so
every time Socrates changes resituated
the conversation and alters the topic
what he does is he pre fits the scope of
the conversation with a with it with
with with a set of provisions that were
different than they were a moment ago
this when the situation changes the
characterization and the identities of
the of the lit of the questioner and
answer are also slightly changed so in
each case the world as it were of the
dialogue is changing on a sort of a
moment-to-moment basis right almost in a
cascade it's almost like if you were to
grab like you know these existential
words you just grab the - and you just
turned it at the - you'd still have the
- but the just all the positions change
but yet the - is the thing that's
actually the most true ooh very good I
like that
I like that yeah I like that metaphor I
like that metaphor that's good well
that's a classic that's a classic
paradigmatic and that in the semiotic
sense a classic paradigmatic change
right as though you're as though you're
changing the syntax yes the the syntax
of a sentence right you swap one word
out for another it changes both the
denotation and the connotation of the
meaning of that sentence and and and and
in a way Socrates is doing something
analogous to that or Plato is you know
what I mean doing something analogous to
that in these conversations that he's
paradigmatically swapping and
changing and playing with the syntax of
the dialogue and and and seeing how the
world that is constrained within that
dialogue changes as a consequence of
that those those those syntactic
exchanges why is it so ecstatic though
waiting for us or for them well I could
well I want to sit for us like but it
seems a property of the of the
experience
I don't think subjective there's
something about well to ache stasis
right to stand as is an interesting word
is yeah yeah yeah out and over yet
without so yeah we're standing out of
yeah that if there is that kind of but
it's not just changing it and noting it
but in in noted noting how something is
revealed in as you grab the - in you
turn it right and yes it's in text do
you see what you were seeing with but
then that somehow is transformative
right right it's like you don't please
you don't simply understand them sorry
sorry no keep going yes it's it's like
you don't understand that it's like what
happens is you don't you don't simply
understand the meaning that you've now
but voice with as a consequence of that
paradigmatic change you understand the
meaning that you've just abandoned that
you've just left vacant huh
and then you don't like but then there
yes
Oh interesting so again the backing away
let's go back to the metaphor right
we're backing into something we're
backing into something we're backing
into something in the relief of the
landscape before us is is increasing in
its breadth as we back away from it
right Socrates is leading us backwards
into something and so that this does it
were changes widens then I can't help
but think of
paj who I think I think borrows it from
hit like Hegel but the sense of develop
right of the piece sorry you you liked
there for a second what did you say
well I can't help but think as we're
talking about using this backward
backing into something about this sense
of the way that Keegan who is you know
is grounded in in Piaget so Piaget
basically looks at development is that
you you see with the level of
development that you're at right at some
at some point right when when what
you're seeing becomes too complex for
your level of development to be able to
see it then that dissonance that
depending on a lot of things but like
that dissonance somehow sees has you
book pop forward for to where like that
which you were seeing with becomes that
which is see and now you're in a higher
level of complexity reorienting and
looking at what you were looking with
yes yes transparency opacity shift right
until it gathers into that level of
complexity gathers what you were seeing
with into a dichotomy right or paradox
that you can't solve and then book and
you just keep going like that it's right
you have that that's right and of course
you it is you were doing this the
gathering that's that process right
there that's the locus of the process
you we've been used the term yeah even
the yeah there's a grasping the grasping
the cohering the gathering the putting
in order the logos as the logos of the
conversation right is is the perceptual
putting in order yeah as he continues
his steps backward right you think uh I
don't know what do you think we chose a
heck of a line to pause on what was it
something like I hate you Socrates
around Socrates
stop pushing me around Socrates let's go
for another page okay let's do it let me
find the line again though where is it
it's like Socrates says well then since
it's which we're on the page at the
bottom bottom third on page 570 got it
okay no in fact I'm going to push you
around and persuade you of the opposite
of what you're not willing to show me
let me read that line again no in fact
I'm gonna push you around and persuade
you of the opposite of what you're not
willing to show me just try it
just answer my questions no you do the
talking himself what how could anybody
how could anybody sorry I'm just I can't
help but wonder at a moment like this
like how can anybody read how could
anybody hope to sterilize these by
extracting but you know what I mean by
by dissociating the conference from it
by dissociating the content from the
character of its torn ass okay
like you could just cut a wonder like
yeah anyway like it's almost rating
before yeah exactly like how can you
hope to extract and sanitize a
proposition dust you know peel away
everything that encloses it all the heat
that encloses it and and and say that
that's the best extract yeah right to be
gleaned from this it strikes me is just
it's just an it's crazy yeah anyway
sorry okay where were we
what don't you want to be completely
convinced absolutely I'm sure
oh guy you're oddly oh just conked out
on me oh okay
hey guys so I said he said hang on hang
on
yeah sorry I'm not hearing you all of a
sudden Oh what is that I just got to do
a quick check my no you do the talking
yourself what don't you want to be
completely convinced absolutely I'm sure
wouldn't you be completely convinced if
you yourself said yes that's how it is
yes I think so then answer my questions
and if you don't hear yourself say the
just then answer my questions and if you
don't hear yourself say that just things
are also advantageous then don't believe
anything else I say I'm gonna read that
again
yeah then answer my questions and if you
don't hear yourself say that just the
ings are also advantageous then don't
believe anything else I say no I'm sure
I won't but I better answer I don't
think I'll come to any harm
you're quite a prophet now tell me are
you saying that some just things are
advantageous while others are not yes
really are some of them admirable and
others not admirable what do you mean by
the question
have you ever thought that someone was
doing something that was both just and
contemptible no I haven't so all just
things are admirable yes now what about
admirable things are they all good or
are some good and others not good what I
think Socrates is that some Admiral
things are bad and some contemptible
things are good yes are you thinking of
this sort of case many people get
wounded and killed trying to rescue
their friends and relatives in battle
while those who don't go to rescue them
as they should escaped safe and sound is
this what you're referring to exactly
now now you call a rescue of this sort
admirable in that it's an attempt to
help the people whom you should help and
this is what courage is isn't that what
you're saying yes but you call it bad in
that it involves wounds and death don't
you yes
now courage is one thing and death is
something else right certainly
so it's not on the same basis that
rescuing your friends is admirable and
bad isn't it is it sorry apparently not
now let's see whether insofar as it's
admirable it's also good as indeed it is
you agreed that the rescue is admirable
in that it is courageous now consider
this very thing courage is a good of bad
look at it like this which would you
rather have good things or bad things
good things namely the greatest goods
very much so and wouldn't you be at
least willing to be deprived of such
things of course what would you say
about courage how much would you have to
be offered to be deprived of that I
wouldn't even want to go on living if I
were a coward so you think that
cowardice is the worst thing in the
world I do on par with death it would
seem that's what that's what I say
aren't life encouraged the extreme
opposites of death and cowardice yes and
wouldn't it hurt sorry and wouldn't you
want the the former most and the latter
least yes is that because you think the
former are best and the latter are worst
certainly would you say that courage
ranks among the best things and death
among the worst I would say so so you
called rescuing your friends in a battle
admirable insofar as it is admirable in
that it does something good being
courageous I think so anyway but you
call
bad in that it does something bad being
fatal yes now since you call this act
bad insofar as it produces something bad
wouldn't you also in all fairness have
to call it good insofar as it produces
something good I think so isn't it also
admirable and so far as it's good and
contemptible insofar as it's bad yes
then when you say that rescuing one's
friends in battle is admirable but bad
you mean exactly the same as if you'd
called it good but bad I suppose you're
right Socrates
so nothing admirable to the extent that
it's admirable is bad and nothing
contemptible to the extent that it's
contemptible is good apparently not now
then let's take a new approach people
who do what's admirable do things well
don't they yes and don't people who do
things well live successful lives of
course aren't they successful because
they've got good things certainly and
can they get good things by acting
properly and admirably yes so it is good
to act properly of course and good
conduct is admirable yes
so we've seen once again that the very
thing that is admirable is also good
apparently so
if we find that something as admirable
we'll also find that it's good according
to this argument at least we'll have to
well then are good things advantageous
or not advantageous do you remember what
we agreed about doing just things I
think we agreed that someone who does
woods just must also be doing what sit
viable and didn't we also agree that
someone who does what's admirable must
also be doing what's good yes and that
what's good is advantageous yes
so Alcibiades just things are
advantageous so it seems well then am I
not the questioner and are you not the
it appears I am so if someone who
believed that he knew what is just and
unjust were to stand up to advise the
Athenians or even the pepperi thien's
and said that some things sometimes just
things are bad what could you do but
laugh at him after all as you said as
you as after all as you your shall say
the same things are just and also
advantageous I swear by the gods
Socrates I have no idea what I mean I
must be in some absolutely bizarre
condition when you ask me questions
first I think one thing then I think
something else and are you unaware my
dear fellow
of what this feeling is completely well
if someone asked you whether you had two
eyes or three eyes or two hands or four
hands or something else like that do you
think you'd give a different answers at
different times or would you always give
the same answer I'm quite unsure of
myself at this point but I think I give
the same answer because you know it
isn't that the reason I think so so if
you give conflicting answers about
something without meaning to then it
would be obvious that you didn't know it
probably well then you tell me that you
are wavering about what is just an
unjust
admirable and contemptible good and bad
and advantageous and disadvantageous
isn't it obvious that the reason you
waver about them is that you don't know
about them yes
would you also say that whenever
somebody
whenever someone doesn't know something
his soul will necessarily waver about it
of course really do you know any way of
ascending to the stars I certainly don't
does your opinion waver on this question
- of course not
do you know the reason or shall I tell
you tell me it is because my friend you
don't understand it and you don't think
you understand it and what do you mean
by that
let's look at it together do you waver
about what you realize you don't
understand for example you know I think
that you don't know how to prepare a
fine meal right quite right so do you
have your own opinions about how to
prepare it or a waiver about it do you
or do you leave it to someone who knows
how the ladder well if you were sailing
and a ship would you be out there
wondering whether to put the helm or
port or oh sorry whether to put the helm
to port or starboard and a wavering
because you didn't know or would you
leave it to the skipper and take it easy
I'd leave it to the skipper so you don't
waver about what you don't know if in
fact you know that you don't know but
I'm gonna read that again yeah so you
don't waver about what you don't know if
in fact you know that you don't know
well apparently not that seems like a
good place to you read my mind
yeah so you don't waver about what you
don't know if in fact you know that you
don't know mm interesting
hmm
well it's nice not knowing who or where
I am with you Christopher
likewise my friend likewise this is
really something yes something I have a
feeling I'm gonna be walking around in
this inside somehow inside this
conversation in this conversation inside
of me it's really and it will it will
have done its job I think the same will
be true of me yeah so then this was
great my friend theirs was great really
great thank you so much thank you thank
you for the the ingenuity this was your
idea and it's it's already it's already
bearing itself that's fantastic this is
great fun I'm so glad I knew that I
didn't know hahaha yes you're put your
particularly good at knowing that you
don't know yes when I think in the
spirit of Socrates I think that's the
highest compliment that a philosopher
could be paid why thank you
and I ask again in answering the
question and asking the question who's
speaking it hmm and I ask again why are
you pushing me around guys hands don't
know actually one of the things that's
really interesting about this so again
kind of starting at the starting point
you know who is um alka biteys to
himself hmm right who is he now hmm like
he doesn't know he's precise question
that he thought he knew but he he's now
starting to know that he doesn't know
that's right and that's right where we
leave off it's so interest right because
who he is to himself has become in this
particular dialogic dance utterly
beholden to who he is to Socrates and
who he is to Socrates is constantly
constantly mutating yeah and so there is
reflection of himself
and the eye of Socrates is also
constantly mutating so good alright
that's so good well let's well the will
this will be L Spidey's part 1 and well
we'll do part 2 shortly okay I'll send
you the link when it's upload just
wonderful
can't wait goodbye doctor soon