to reify a false and truncated
metaphysics for example to say love
doesn't exist freewill doesn't actually
exist so you really try to build
institutions based on that which would
result in Iraq the authoritarian society
you know these things have been done but
never with the technological power that
we now have to for example build a
school around the hypothesis etc or an
army and so there's this very you kind
of think sincere need to make sure that
as we move through this period you know
we're keeping the voices you want to
simplify and reduce and return to
modernity and the monological keep those
voices at bay
so like applaud the post modernists but
then we also want to you know in a sense
can beyond this postmodern critique and
the whole spirit and emotion of critique
and somehow move into a space were
reconstructing a a new meta-narrative
provisional right polycentric built
iteratively through collaboration but
there needs to be a project in good
spirits in that direction greetings
future fossils this is Michael Garfield
welcoming you to another episode of the
podcast that explores our place in time
now a lot of people will probably
consider it ridiculous that I talk about
our place in time at all the scientific
culture that I went to school and
doesn't see the evolutionary process as
directional regards our adaptations as a
kind of random drunkards walk across a
landscape that just shifts and doesn't
go someplace and then the cultures that
I've hung out in since then both the
postmodern philosophical as well as
new-age festival scenes dismiss the idea
of a universal truth at all regarding
all perspectives as somehow equally
relative and thus unfounded in some kind
of common human universal truth that we
can pin a planetary culture to but
neither
those angles leaves us any room to come
together as a species and answer the
most fundamental questions that we've
been asking since the human species
started namely who are we what are we
doing here where are we driving this
thing what matters if you think that we
can't come up with answers to these
questions you're as lost as all of us
are lost right now in this post truth
era I'm doing bunny ear quotes you can't
see but the whole problem with this
regressive returned a racism nationalism
religious fundamentalism on one hand and
then on the other hand this bizarre
Silicon Valley authoritarian behavior is
the Borg assertion that the human being
is just a machine that can and should be
programmed this is the kind of lesser
sense that oozes in to culture when the
greater sense of rigorous and open-ended
inquiry together gives up yes it's hard
to keep an open question and yet push
into the mystery with everything we've
got
but that is the work cut out for us my
friends and so it is with pleasure I
introduce you to Zack Stein one of the
more articulate and thoughtful people
that I know addressing this in both his
writing and his teaching and the
conversations he facilitates as an
active member of an emerging
philosophical movement called meta
modernism which builds upon the insights
of scientific modernism as well as hosts
modernism honoring both the objective
and subjective realities and positing an
evolutionary and provisional new way of
being in the world that can adapt to the
shifting turbulent conditions of our
century and the decay of centralized
powers and the stories they entranced us
with Zacks latest essay love in a time
between worlds on the meta modern return
to a metaphysics of eros is a delicious
jaunt into a provocative but sensible
argument that what we need on earth
right now is a return to an a
reclamation of both the subjectivity of
the individual from which scientific
inquiry emerges in the first place as
well as the humble acceptance that all
scientific knowledge is bound to our
cultural and linguistic contexts and
constantly up for review yeah we can
make science even more scientific we can
make our humanities even more human and
to do so requires a meta perspectival
approach the kind that Zack outlines in
his more than 10 years of writing and in
this piece and conversation quite
deliciously
before I begin I just want to thank
every single one of the patreon
supporters as well as the over 1,500
people in our Facebook group for being
the lifeblood of this show I may be its
bones but the bones are really there
just to support the conversation maybe
that's not the best metaphor whatever
I just am super grateful to every single
one of you if you'd like to help me keep
this show untethered from the
dehumanizing demands of the market you
can chip in on a monthly basis at
patreon.com or you can send payments on
venmo to add future fossils everything
helps of course totally unnecessary I'm
super glad to have you listening at all
and sharing the shows that you enjoy
with your friends it means a lot and
again this really is just about creating
a space for an even wider and more
crucial conversation about the things
that are discussed on this show so if
I'm doing that mission accomplished
that said it is a one-man operation
which means I do not have an audio
producer or an editorial team and it
takes about ten hours to edit and
produce every one of these episodes and
sometimes I screw up the recordings like
I did with this episode so I apologize
for the somewhat allows the audio
quality my end was way way WAY quieter
than it should have been and I had to
compress the hell out of it but the
human project is a rough affair right
now right so in the spirit of loose
weaves and raw brilliance
I am honored to present to you this
conversation with Zach Stein on the
metaphysics of Eros and an evolution
into the meta modern thanks and I'll see
you next week
[Music]
welcome on board is Eckstein are you
doing and well and well some
thunderstorms rolled through so it's
that kind of fresh after the storm here
in Vermont mmm well it's it's after your
storm but before our storm here in
Austin Texas which is due to hit us
sometime this afternoon
so we exist you might say between things
then right between worlds this sort of
are we after the storm or before the
storm is something that I feel
characterizes our our moment right now
like a moment sort of where we've we've
taken apart I'm doing a very awkward
painful segue into your your work here
but we like it at that moment where it
you know the question of have we just
survived this sort of shattering of
reality of the postmodern philosophical
project or are we only preparing
ourselves for the magmatic nonsense of
you know what is to come and so I think
that I told you this before the call we
didn't get into I didn't make it all the
way through your paper which I found
very disappointing as far as my own
discipline is concerned but your piece
on on on the metaphysics of Eros I found
really stimulating because these issues
around reality what is real are popping
up in everything now and it's becoming a
prime concern of your average person I
feel like in our time and it's a really
I think that's a really important thing
to be riding on so why don't you
introduce this piece to people Oh
wonderful yeah thank you
it's a great pleasure to be in her
podcast too I have to say I've been
waiting to talk to you for a long time I
feel like it's a conversation we've been
both wanting to have that for whatever
reason has
and yeah now it's happening so it's
exciting yes so the the paper
it's just published an integral review
you can find that online or probably be
linked on your on your site there
Michael I the paper stems fundamentally
from my collaboration with mark Gaffney
and my long-standing movement in this
kind of world of integrals theory but
the reason I even was in that world of
integral theory and the reason I
continue to work with mark who's a rabbi
and has a doctor Tom Oxford in religious
studies and the reason why I do even as
a psychologist dabble in metaphysics is
because of what you just said that we
actually live in a time between worlds
and the time in which the deepest
questions about what it means to be
human are kind of on the table again
it's like there's neuroscience it's
seriously suggesting we don't have free
will and arguing we can like change the
legal system which is predicated upon
free will by the way like we can change
the legal system we can change the legal
system to say that there is enough room
well like serious suggestions and also
of course does God exist is there an
afterlife is the reincarnation the
nature of illness nature healing all of
these things are scattered in this kind
of post truth cultural desert where
you're not sure which ones you know with
a thriving oasis and which ones
basically a mirage
and part of that student to the Internet
and I talk about the kind of structural
way that the post truth culture has been
generated by the very logic of
communication technology but it's also a
moment properly speaking in the
evolution of culture which is to say
it's a rightful overcoming of the
singular logic and logo centrism and
mano centrosome of modernity and so the
postmodern proliferation of perspectives
and the and the concomitant confusion is
is par for the course but it's of course
a dangerous critical global path now
through the confusion back to reality
and so
talk about a return to eros and a return
to a metaphysics in which not just
physical things are real but also the
things that populate the human interiors
and especially the constellation of
emotions around love that these things
are as real as any of the physical
properties and so this gets to again the
nature of reality and the need to have
it more nuance to metaphysics that
doesn't just materiality and meaningless
matter in motion and Darwinian dynamics
but that includes meaning value the
interior is consciousness etc yeah let's
I mean you do this by sort of starting
from the philosophical position of the
meta moderna strands which I you know
I'm not as deep in this sort of culture
of the post postmodern as I used to be
as I was when you and I encountered each
other for the first time but it seems as
though it's very much in keeping with
and sort of growing beyond the
conversation around integral philosophy
and this desire to recognize all forms
of knowledge as socially constructed and
it bound by this interpretive framing
that you know everything is an
interpretation but that it doesn't
satisfy itself in stopping there right
so it's like if we just assume that
everything is equally illusory then
we're left with no sort of practical
action and so you start this paper with
like a list articulating the meta
modernist perspective on science and on
reality but what do you think the the
quicks that you know that the takeaways
are for people listening to this who are
struggling with the idea that we could
place consciousness on a ontological
e-equivalent
plane with matter or you know that kind
of thing right totally so yeah
absolutely I mean the framing of the
papers in terms of
the cultural epic or kind of historical
period designation right which is saying
slice history into consistory is a very
complicated stream you can slice it in
two periods or box and so there's a
group that is you know mostly in kind of
Europe and there there's some American
representatives who have kind of dubbed
the emerging period of history that we
are entering as meta mater and I think
it's an important conversation because I
was convinced long ago by Habermas and
others that what we call a
post-modernism is actually most of the
traits of modernity just with the volume
turned really way up like his subjects
you know subjectivity increases you know
contextualization and increases instead
of one perspective you get many
perspectives not the pre perspectival
pre-modern where the individual and the
group refused but this hyper
individualism flourishes more under post
monitors so this idea that there must be
an a cultural turning in which we can
critique both the postmodern anumana and
we can value both the postmodern a in
the modern which is to say there's
something that's distinctly non modern
or meta modern which will get a name
later we're not sure what it will be
that's the way I hold it then an
integral theory which I discovered very
young like in my 20s like I was 20
literally when I read in sex culture
spirituality
um you know this was I see this now is a
species of meta modern philosophy and
there were many varieties of meta modern
philosophy not all of them are integral
theory
intro theory is one that I started with
and like a lot but there are other
candidates meta modern you know meta
modern world views and so you know one
of the things that makes a cultural
period a period is that there's some
coherence to the structure of it and so
this list you talk about in the
beginning of my paper
it's it's a list of the things that kind
of characterize the meta modern
historical periods view of reality in
science and it's distinctly different
from the postmodern in the modern right
so the modern view of science is that
science is truth period like in the
period it's very definite the postmodern
view of science is like science is one
view dot dot dot right like there's
actually many and Sciences one the meta
monter view essentially tries to say
that both of those are true and as you
were saying within specific context
science works and actually discovers
things the problem is that it's
overstepped its context and so it takes
for example an experiment that was done
in a very closed condition in a
laboratory and pretends that what's
discovered there applies to radically
open systems outside the laboratory
right you get pharmaceuticals in the
drinking water because we're cisely push
this thing through
no that's and that's perfect example you
know and that's exactly the danger of
the modern view which is correct in the
laboratory guys like don't take em this
other postmodern sees that moment of
error in the modern and then wants to
throw science out the window completely
the meta modernist says hold on
something happened in the laboratory
like we we have to actually pay
attention to the moment of truth in the
modern and then you know contextualize
it with the postmodern you know
alternative which says well let's do a
bunch of other experiments let's do
things that don't even look like
experiments right and let's look at
methodologies that are non quantitative
and methodologies that are
phenomenological and purely subjective
which a modernist would never even touch
so you get this proliferation of methods
proliferation of perspectives all good
but now a total fragmentation and like
out of the Academy comes totally
confusing gobbledygook about what is the
nature of the human you know the
humanities will say what we've been
saying since ancient Rome which doesn't
apply and the sciences will say in same
things like there's no free will or
we're just crazy monkeys that want to
like kill and that's it
and so that fragmentation of the the
weird combination of the modern and the
postmodern without a recent
this is without a meta modern
reconvergence which is what neutral
theory attempts to do and interfere is a
very early attempt by the way in the
modern in the meta modern historical
period one of the first really charles
sanders first
charles sanders purse from the 1890s I
think being actual first and I mentioned
him in this paper and that we're talking
about so yeah so the thing that
characterizes this new period is in fact
the integration of the modern and the
postmodern in some new view of science
specifically right and so that would be
a science that includes interior teas
and that puts all methods and contexts
and this is what we're getting into this
list now so there's a whole bunch of
characteristics that would allow for the
best most rigorous science to then be
put through the kind of culturally
sensitive kind of matrix of
post-modernism and then to result in
action in an actionable and coherent
worldview and there are very few
examples of this kind of science but
it's a very distinct possibility for a
new historical epic a non reductionistic
complex system of science this is what's
been promised to us for a long time i
think the new paradigm and so we know
non-linearity exists you know that chaos
is a is a factor that needs to be dealt
with in the very nature of the universe
Sahn a mistake or something to get out
at the laboratory we actually need to
look at chaotic phenomena that's a very
meta modern view um the idea of
distributed causality your right not
just one-to-one causal systems but where
there are systems with many multiple
causes you know these things are in the
air and many people on the fringes know
this but building institutions building
medical practice building educational
practice around that quote new paradigm
is is what the meta modern attempts to
do and most of the meta mounter work
right now is in aesthetics and politics
and that's not a coincidence because in
order to even do science and I met a
modern way
the political conditions and economic
conditions and subjectivity need to be
you know available basically so I'll
pause there okay so that's a great place
to I have been pulling quotes from this
to read and I think that this this is a
good one to give people an idea of not
only your writing style and the
Cheesecake juiciness of it but also the
what the stakes are in this like very
cerebral conversation where you say
right-wing and authoritarian political
thought is resurgent today because of
the absence of reasonable discourse
about metaphysical realities during a
time when exactly these realities are
being put in question due to the
apocalypse of global capitalism and the
accompanying of planetary transition
into the Anthropocene I think about this
a lot like I run social media for a
local fresh water conservation
organization here in Austin called save
our Springs Alliance and they do this
thing every year called Barton Springs
University which is like a day of
outdoor educational programming about
hydrogeology and environmental ecology
and all this stuff and someone on
Facebook commented in the thread that
this was fake news because it's not an
actual University I was like this is not
the hill to die on in this fight this is
but this is where people are you know is
it's like there's we've developed a kind
of an allergy now like we haven't really
figured out how to handle this stuff at
a at a social level right you know that
this is a constant theme on the show of
you know knowledge management talked
about with this with Hunter mots with
Dennis McKenna with Charles Eisenstein
this issue of when you get into the
specifically complexity Sciences
specifically this issue of nonlinear
causation and they're always being as
sort of a deep web if you will of causal
influences that you're not detecting or
differentiating through your
experimental design then it's a very
serious assault on the practice of
science as we have been used
it understanding it and on what kind of
truth claims it can provide to us so I
guess I'm curious how do you see this
practically resolving and and and why I
guess maybe even more importantly why
why metaphase now like why why
specifically this thing and you go it
into this integrate detail about this in
the paper why is this thing that we it
seems like we're saving it from the
trash of the pre-modern world you know
these conversations about the crystal
spheres of you know the higher realms or
you know the like you know Rudolf
Steiners anthroposophy and it's sort of
metaphysical cartography of you know the
etheric and astral planes and all this
stuff is this the kind of metaphysics
that you're talking about bringing back
into the conversation about these much
more rigorous and robust practice of
science yeah yes and Rudolf Steiners an
interesting example because he's so
close to the realm of Education and you
know I say yes because what Steiner
offered was a a complex metaphysical
characterization of the human and the
humans place in the universe and that's
essential for education unless you want
to make education about getting a job or
being a citizen and so I was a you know
graduate student and a teacher at the
Harvard School of Education I had a
student who came from Egypt who was
raised in a traditional Islamic context
they're very intelligent very
progressive thinker actually I lost
touch with him and I wonder what
happened to him
sometimes during the political upheaval
in Egypt but in any case he said to me
once after this long course that we were
teaching and constructivist education
which is like the calls of cutting-edge
theory in education he said to me this
is never gonna work he said the problem
with modern education and with what is
happening here is that there's no
conception of what is the human rights
like there's there's no answer to what
is the human or what is the meaning of
life and
putting on this whole complex
institutional arrangement and giving
people direction and actually spiritual
instruction in a way by shaping their
skills and shaping their capacities and
potentialities and yet you're not
answering the most fundamental question
which is what is a human and that was a
question that Steiner set out to answer
and answered it well enough to give
teachers a pedagogy to create one of the
most successful international
independent schools and so it's a
phenomenon and whether you believe his
metaphysics or not you have to see that
the pedagogy is incredibly effective and
one of the reasons effective is because
it relies on a science of interior tease
it says precisely that the meaning and
the ideas and the sense making as a
child is as important as any of the
reading writing and arithmetic as it
were right so you need to mend and pay
attention to the soul its qualities of
interior T and not just the external
personality that will eventually fit
into the modern world system and so
again the bringing up the Islamic
student that I had and then the sense
that we have in general that truth is
not readily available you know there's a
resurgence of fundamentalist religion
for example there's a resurgence of
racism justified through pretense of
biology right there's a reassertion of a
kind of nationalism that espouses an
essential ISM that is basically uh a
metaphysics of the person so if we don't
provide a metaphysics of what it means
to be human and we don't provide a way
of understanding the relation between
the human of the universe it'll be given
to us it could be coming from a movie or
a comic book for a lot of people but we
need a story a universe story a story of
self story of cosmos and so in the long
absence of that through modernity which
is predicated upon not worrying about
how many angels dance on the head of a
pin it anymore right
we're modernity was predicated upon you
know no more witch trials at least not
that kind of witch trial where there's
actual witches and demons and things we
just don't believe that and so science
became the replacement and the absence
of metaphysics is what's characterized
the capitalist world system so in the
absence of metaphysics there's this
vacuum of meaning a kind of element in a
vacuum of power and yeah
what can step into that is not always
pretty and so there you know the reason
why I actually wrote this paper and
think I made to continue to work in
metaphysics and perhaps even leaning on
Steiner because of his because of the
power go to this um you know is to
answer these irrational metaphysical
views that are just popping into
people's minds because there's just a
vacuum right like it's a historically
it's a historically unprecedented
situation to have a whole global society
predicated upon the absence of a shared
metaphysics or worldview universe story
story of cosmos itself etc and so yeah
just you know you you're bringing up for
me to put it into like concrete examples
there is you know Richard Dawkins is
very fond of telling people that their
particular sub positions are not even
wrong as in there
empirically unfalsifiable and so
therefore they're not worthy the time or
attention of anyone that you're like
textbook modern vacuum of subjectivity
that you're you're talking about there
yeah that these issues but in a sense
that position you know is is not even
not even wrong right because it's
seemingly willfully blind to the social
psychological cultural consequences of
insisting on reifying that vacuum in the
sense that you know it may not be I by
reducing everything to the empirical you
squash the
all side of the conversation and the
moral said this is you know this is
where I think years ago Tony Blair and
Christopher Hitchens had a a televised
debate about whether religion does good
in the world or not and you know I think
that it's funny how science seems to
open us up into this kind of discovery
where we realize that you know like the
people who have something to believe in
are happier people they live longer
healthier lives you know so I'm I'm
curious how you see this contest over
the definition of humanity going in the
next couple of decades and then also
whether you think we're actually ever
going to arrive at a new like globally
shared definition or whether you think
we'll end up in in some sort of
synthesis or I mean I know that that's
one of the that's actually one of these
sort of piers of or like tenets of meta
modernism is that things are held in a
sort of provisional loose proto
synthetic way that we can come to a
conclusion but we we never crushed the
egg in our hand so I mean how do you
think this is gonna go as far as
defining the human I mean the last thing
you just said is it's just correct
I mean if after post monitors and we
can't return to some kind of pad
totalizing answer for everybody
I mean after post-modernism when we
begin to kind of build a new coherence
it's gonna be a polycentric and dynamic
and always renegotiated coherence and
that's what science ought to be and so
it which is to say this knowledge
building not knowledge finding period
and so the new metaphysics or the new
kind of humanism as it were that would
bring some consensus would need to work
with a new definition of empirical right
now to dismiss someone czar
out of hand and kind of shut down a
conversation as is done by some
scientists to me is always more sounded
like a personality trait then like us
then like a structure in the discourse
because you can always hear somebody out
and be curious even about why they would
say something or what their emotions are
and holding a belief so to just shut
someone down this is uh it's not great
but to claim that the nature of what it
means to be empirical is to be verified
we're actually literally seen physically
is also tremendously naive philosophy of
science and there's a whole kind of
bouquet of methods in the human sciences
in which there's nothing like simple
visual verification or that kind of
confirmation that many simplistic
materialists empiricists would demand
and so in fact part of building the new
metaphysics is expanding that definition
of empirical like what does it mean to
do empiricism William James Wright
claimed to be a radical empiricist and
exactly because he included the data of
consciousness right it's actually more
radically empirical to include what
you're actually living with every day
right so for example if you're a
neuroscientist and you write a paper
where you claim that love for example is
just certain hormonal tendencies and you
try to basically explain love away as a
materialistic kind of epiphenomenon that
kind of excretion of the limbic system
and bright but then you go home and you
look at your kid at the dinner table
right and you've experienced love what
do you do in the moment as a
neuroscientist right and so this is Hume
and a whole bunch of other people like
Charles dangerous purse and other
philosophers who said listen once you
leave the laboratory once you leave the
study leave the armchair can you still
deny the reality of interior tea and
value and do you still want to claim to
have no free will and that the love you
have for your wife and your child or
some kind of illusion and some kind of
epiphenomenon so there's a lack of
seriousness to these types of proposals
that come from the radical empiricists
and it shows you know that others
things are at stake when you publish
papers than the truth because the truth
is sitting there at the dinner table
with them every night not in the fMRI
scanner now part of the truth and a very
important part of the truth is in the
fMRI scanner right so this is about the
meta modern contextualization of the
limited moments of scientific truth and
that allows for including a science of
interior tease and then you start to
build this very complex picture of the
human as both a dynamical complex
physical object but also a dynamical
complex emotional and ID aiding and
imagining what's an object and you know
again this is for example what Rudolf
Steiner was working with very rigorous
understanding of human anatomy and
physiology Steiner was actually a
student of Goethe and a student of all
the leading physical scientists of his
day there was probably actually note
book on metaphysics and neuroscientist
that was published that in that time
that that Steiner hadn't read and was
respected actually in the mainstream
discourse about biology because of his
work with Goethe kind of actually
bringing Goethe scientific writings to
light and so he knew the physiology of
the human and actually the evolutionary
dynamics of its current kind of form and
yet also had this deep understanding of
the nature of these against soul
characteristics or ideational and
imaginal characteristics which at the
end of the day gives shape to even the
physical body the depressed man's
physiology is different from the man who
lives with a deep sense of purpose and
meaning and so this is very important
that ideas matter and right now we live
in a context in which ideas matter only
insofar as they can be leveraged for
clicks on websites that generate
advertisement revenue I don't want to
just like reduce it to the economic
structuring of the media on which the
whole thing is run but it's hard not to
see the linchpin of the whole system
having to do with Internet content
that's provided on advertising revenue
as opposed to subscription basis
and that was a key moment that actually
Micah white notes in his really good
book the end of protests where he looks
at the documents from the meeting of
these advertising companies who got
together and they said listen if the
Internet runs on revenue from
subscription then we'll lose commercials
and everything on TV and in magazines
and everyone get everything from the
internet and so they flipped it and it's
so radically to store just the speech
act in the paper that you're talking
about I write six characteristics that
are kind of amplifying the post truth
culture and these characteristics have
to do with the inevitable suspicions one
has if they are reflective whenever they
read anything on the Internet
like the idea the technologies ation of
our attention because of the
technologies ation of this because of
the battle for the monetization of
attention and the meaning of that is
that you can't separate information from
disinformation that people are spreading
for advantage and you can't separate
valid information from information
that's spread to you know essentially
convince you to buy something so it's
quite a mess and it's it's it's a simple
I mean it really is like as simple as
finding a way to break that cycle of
generating content based on
advertisement revenue then you could
look at something and say okay now I'm
back to the old position of you know
looking at the merit of something not
its ability to just capture my attention
but actually the merit of what's written
so yeah so what we're even losing that
ability to use our consider judgment
around complex texts and claims and so
there's a longer discussion about what
happened to the human during modernity
and postmodernity but one of the things
was that we gave our choice making power
over to authorities and experts kind of
gladly and with great relief can we go
to a doctor and just totally understand
trust what they say okay glad read
advertisements for exhibit yeah a pack
of cigs in his lap you know smoking
right exactly gladly do we give our kids
to the expert teacher gladly do we bring
our car to the mechanic you know this
idea that many of our choices which are
instrumental to our life we give the
choice making power over to others and
we lose our sovereignty and autonomy but
we gain the expertise and lighten the
cognitive load so there's a weird flip
taking place now with the availability
of information on the internet and the
radical questioning of expertise and the
wanting to reclaim sovereignty or choice
making power at the same time we have no
idea if the experts were always lying to
us or not and we have no idea if the
current people who are in those
positions who would say they don't go on
the internet looking for medical
information or or whatever yeah yeah so
that's again this crisis of post truth
there's a good there's a good moment in
this but it's this dangerous moment
right so it's good people are reclaiming
sovereignty over their choice making
power and yet experts have expertise
often even more necessary for us to rely
on experts in the right time and again
it's so just like you would
contextualize these scientific finding
in the laboratory
you must really contextualize the
exercise of expertise um and so you can
engage an expert without being
infantilized right
that's possible you can engage a
bureaucratic system without being
dehumanized possible but it doesn't
happen a lot often part of what it means
to get involved in these things is to
have the choice making power actually
kind of taken from you a little bit too
strongly as it were and again there's a
deep hermeneutic of suspicion that runs
through the psychiatric and medical
profession this world is a distrusting
of patients it's a long history of this
but you know the point being is is that
it's hard to reclaim sovereignty in the
context when experts still reign were we
to find a way to better democratize the
availability of access to expertise
change the incentive structures under
which the experts work change the
insurance structures under which the
patients are brought to the experts etc
you can imagine a situation in which
there's actually co-education between
patient and doctor she's use one example
that type of
modern dialogical relationship as
opposed to the modern monological and it
is very important right now we're stuck
between in this a perspectival madness
when you don't trust the expert but you
also can't trust the information gonna
online and you certainly can't trust
your crazy friend you know I mean it's
just like who do you who do you trust
who knows you know it used to be you
just watch the news they know CNN knows
you know now if you're reflective you're
like whoa no CNN doesn't know and
neither does the Washington Post and
neither does Fox News you know if you're
working with a media outlet and you
think yours is the one that has it right
there the other guys are brainwashed
you've been brainwashed by your by your
own meat outlet like you have to have a
reflective metal view of all these
things like Seth Abrams this great meta
modern journalist who's got this very
popular Twitter feed where he just
synthesizes all of this journalistic
output tries to read the deeper reality
like the actual reality not what do we
say to get people to come to our site to
sell advertisements how do we send this
a tional Eisen and package it such but
actually what's the reality under all
these things what are they pointing to
so that kind of synthetic curation of
the modern news media is necessary now
that's one thing that worries me
Facebook worries me and as an acacia
Nastase things worry me the way like
nuclear reactors worry kind of nucular
activists like there's a there's a
serious cultural kind of radioactivity
that could spread through the new Oh
sphere and we're kind of already wary
witnessing that as personality is kind
of atrophy under the weight of the
postmodern kind of cyber static you know
it's just it's uh you have to unplug a
lot for that at least I do personally
and that how do you get back to reality
your body just you know through your
body you vision god this is book a joke
right the body itself is the most
refined instrument of reality of
perception available how interesting
that you I was just on a morning bike
ride this morning and
a free library in the neighborhood in
front of somebody's house grabbed a copy
of Tom Robbins even cowgirls get the
blues out of it my opening quote from
that book is the lust of the goat is the
bounty of God the nakedness of woman is
the work of God excess of sorrow laughs
excess of joy weeps it's William Blake
right you know and that that in anti
a'dreea they're the the pushing so
forward so so deeply into the the decay
of one thing that it creates its
opposite you know right listening do you
speak about all this it really it
reminds me of this story I heard from
the guy selling me a guitar a few years
ago yes I know you're a musician's that
conversations buying guitars actually
they were very profound I there were two
of these koa Taylor's right next to each
other the same model the same the same
tone wood and one of them sounded
dramatically better looked better to it
had this gorgeous shimmer to the wood
and I asked him about it I was like what
why is one of these guitars with the
same within the same price so much nicer
than the other
and he said well koa is a funny thing
koa can only be harvested after its
fallen as a tone wood and I think it's
maybe possibly because it's protected
because it you know it's very limited in
range I'm not sure but he said it can
only be harvested after its fallen and
so you just sort of spined it you know
and depending on the conditions of the
wood at the time that the koa grew you
get different kinds of koa things like
this koa that you like this is the curly
koa and this stuff happens when a tree
falls and suddenly there's an open patch
of sunlight in the woods and all of the
saplings around it compete they have to
rush so it grows the wood in a different
way the wood itself is nonlinear it
doesn't form these long straight fibers
it like bundles and and like curbs on
itself and forms what produces a much
more complex like
acoustic character something you call
you know it's got its got more soul to
it right and so it's funny you know
there's just something in there I feel
about the the decay of authority and
expertise so like the crisis of
legitimacy that we're going through this
and the the reassertion or the
resurgence of the considerations whose
soul in this but and yet like you know
fifty different versions of that
everyone that's racing for the Sun
that's exactly right and that's why
there's this actually even though we
don't know it right now it's taking
place as a race for the meta modern
metaphysics it's a race for the answer
of what is the human as we're kind of
like transition within what I think is
gonna be a very dynamic and complex set
of decades into a really truly
interlinked in the sense of politically
global minister I'm sorry happening you
know stack as it were about a Benjamin
Bratt ins idea you know that the whole
world is being housed in a a giant
computer essentially which means that
we're all gonna be in the same giant
shopping mall together you know that's
John David Ebert talks about hyper
modernity yes and you know he talks a
lot about the global shopping mall you
know and and and leverages a similar
critique that post-modernism is actually
not post at all it's just right
potentiated its modernity exponentiated
and and but the point is that there's
this sense that because the transitions
happening like this is a again the meta
modern historical period has to do a
signaling like at the beginning of
history like the beginning of a new kind
of history and that has to do with the
making of the earth into an enormous
building basically this is a dying idea
Rudolf Steiner brought down and you know
that one of the tasks of humanity
misstep Bach is actually to to to relate
to the earth as if it was its own
construction so it's kind of a biblical
idea but there's a way in which the meta
modern signals the Anthropocene which
signals the inextricable link
the human and the ecosphere and that
requires that we can touch with the
realities of the ecosphere so there's
there's a there's the coming of a new
sense of their real and a new sense of
what's out there this is kind the cloud
of of confusion and the kind of the fog
of war in fact as we shape that new that
new sense of what the world is about so
yeah it's a it is an interesting
historical moment and this is what the
papers about yeah that in a sense we
need to we need to seize the moment and
create a vision of a human that is
positive because you can imagine
regressive returns - kind of weird
amalgams of pre-modern metaphysics and
conventional religion and the sort Arian
political regimes you know that could
clamp down after let's say a natural
disaster and justify themselves with a
new metaphysics not just a political
efficiency or economic efficiency but
with a metaphysical value or mission you
see we haven't had politics like that
for a long time learning aspect that
actually I think you know William Irwin
Thompson kind of saw that as an
inevitable Dark Age of transition yeah
that whole idea of the personality
dissolving in the chaotic soup of the
postmodern that's basically plagiarizing
William Aaron Thompson he's so brilliant
and he was seeing this from from you
know from his lighthouse in Maine you
know just this is the way that the whole
kind of soil in which the humans grow is
changing and so it just is something new
is emerging and so they have a new meta
modern metaphysics we need to be the
avant-garde and begin to articulate
positive visions or what it means to be
human and human potential to counteract
for example things like race realism
where they were Sergent kind of
nationalisms um and all those like
you're saying when you quoted my paper
these return of these kind of weird
Roback right-wing political formations
which always signal a return to a kind
of they share some weird metaphysical
belief like racism for example we're
just weird about a physical place no and
where they share some weird metaphysical
belief like Americans are the greatest
people on earth like this weird value
judgment about a particular group is
another example of where in the vacuum
of an absence of metaphysics these views
come in people shape their whole lives
around a fundamental value which is you
know more or less insane and it's and so
there's this need to just have available
other resources by which people can
build their identities and right now the
resources are they'll it looks like it's
a concern I'm like a huge riches when in
fact it's it's all this kind of strange
commodified social media and you have to
succeed in building your identity
despite the system trying to essentially
trap you in some form of prepackaged
like you know identity so I'm just yeah
as you can see itself that whole like
you need 20 different choices of coffees
so it's it's you it's the copyright you
want yeah it's all the same puffy
repackage in different cups you know
returning to your paper or like sort of
focusing in on your paper a little bit
more you talk about the emerging
synthesis being a Cosmo erotic humanism
which is a phrase I love and it reminds
me you know in talking about being the
new myth that we need for years I've
been thinking and joking about how the
first space race was done at least you
know ostensibly it was done as a show of
military prowess across the Iron Curtain
you know and so war was the first global
motivator to transcend the you know the
biosphere in some sense but then I don't
know this is a squishy assertion but it
seems to me like you might be able to
trace a lot of the development of
technologies sort of
up a spiral from for lack of a better
shorthand from like first chakra
survival needs to second chakra
reproduction you know and then like
onward to social and ever more sort of
subtle nuanced creative self
transcending demands and I was like well
so clearly what we need for this the
next space race is I mean right now what
we're seeing is like vezo sand blue
origin and and musk and SpaceX is is a
asteroid mining it's a very you know
second chakra in the acquisitive sense
but I was like well what if we what if
we shot for a zero-gravity kamasutra and
we put together like you know a lucky as
an eclipse station that was at the
Lagrange point with the moon so that it
was always in eclipse and we could have
a resurgence of the black madonna in
orbit where you know people from all
over the world you know met in a in a
zero gravity sex university and then it
wouldn't be about you know who came
first you know I feel like you're you
probably have a much more like L acute
way of articulating this and so you know
what how do you see a Cosmo erotic
humanism unfolding and specifically for
you know for people who are probably you
know possibly still hung up on you know
your eros Thanatos thing pause and
google it but you know how do you see
these metaphysical forces in a meta
modern metaphysics area notice right
right yeah I mean so the phrase that
Cosmo around acumen ISM that that's
Gaffney and me came up with dad along
with Barbara Marx Hubbard Wilbur was
involved in the conversation she mocked
and burger Christina Kincaid it was this
kind of conversation that was happening
at the Center for interval wisdom which
is kind of like you know this cul-de-sac
in the integral scene where a lot of the
the conversation kept going even though
a lot of what surrounded integral
seems to not keep coming but in any case
so in Cosmo erotic humanism became the
Stettin and it became a theme about yeah
this new positive evolutionarily
optimistic form of humanism which was
wedded to a metaphysics of eros which is
to say a metaphysics that believes that
evolution is not simply a random and
chaotic material process but that
evolution has a certain teleology and
that's the teleology moves towards
increases in the quality like love which
is to say intensity of interconnection
depth of consciousness creativity
emergence and all the kind of qualities
that fall under this heading of the
erotic and it's important not that it
had all reduced the erotic to sex but I
think your idea is actually amazing one
of the lunar tantric University and
todrick's to the point you know if you
look at Jeffrey cry pal at Rice
University and other modern thinkers on
Tantra like Daphne for example you
realize that the point of erotic energy
and the point of Tantra for example is
that not it's it's not about sex per se
it's about the emotional energy that can
be invested in sex the erotic energy
right which is to say the feeling of
total significance and and utter
transfix Ness like the flow state that
expanding beyond sex such that your
whole life becomes a kind of erotic
merger with what you are engaging with
and we have this experience of basically
you know for lack of a better phrase
like a book that we were reading
right we're going or going out into the
wilderness and feeling kind of ravaged
by the beauty of the place we're
literally or like almost gasping because
the sunset is you're you're you're one
with it so these two books at once and
it's just sitting there and I'm like and
the problem with many societies and this
gets into some of the details of the
second half of the paper is that you
know we we truncate the erotic to the
sexual specifically
and so we make the kind of dyadic sexual
relationship the core of all our most
important emotional energies and we we
kind of don't allow ourselves to office
eyes the other parts of our lives I'm
not talking about like other sexual
partners at all I'm talking about like
having around relationships in the books
outside your marriage right having
having really deep and dynamic natural
mysticism um right so these forms of
erotic expression and deep emotional
investment and deep emotional expression
you know where are those available in
our culture outside of this outside of
the kind of soul mate the sex of that
subjectivity when you erase the subject
from the educational curriculum you lose
any kind of transmission of knowledge
about how to deepen and enrich that
erotic encounter right totally and so
and I'm talking about erotic encounters
with treats and ideas and people who
again so this is what's what is a human
relationship so there's the first
question what's the human which we were
saying is a metaphysical issue and then
there's this other metaphysical show
what is the relationship what is the we
write to us write the co person write
the shared subjectivity that develops
between people when they're for simple
and low or deep collaboration and so
there's this whole space of merger and
cooperation beyond the personal which
has been a part of human existence for a
very long time which again modernity
didn't quite know what to do with it you
know there's been a lot of collective
efficiencies which is to say we've
learned how to build mega machines who's
a Lewis Mumford idea where you know
machines out of people right
bureaucratic efficiency and kind of
top-down centralized authority command
and control you build pyramids build
assembly lines et cetera Collective
efficiency has not had a lot of
collective intelligence or a collective
consciousness right and this has to do
with the best hopes of what democracy
would be which we define a way to
synthesize the best notions
to make a sum that's greater than its
parts out of a group of people these
things happen but they happen not by
design at a large scale
they have been usually at a small scale
so you know one of the tasks that we
face in the project of Cosmo erotic
humanism and in the metaphysics of
arrows is again re understanding
reframing relationship dyadic triadic
larger right what does it like to be
with other people and to not pretend
like the modern and the postmodern would
have you do that you're all
self-contained
and that you're you know not dependent
upon one another when in fact we're all
radically dependent upon one another and
actually subject to the and at the mercy
of one another and social media allows
us to forget that and we treat one
another quite poorly people we
supposedly hate who were we had a
town-hall meeting having coffee before
the conversation would probably be quite
polite - hmm and so there's this sense
of the missing humanity and that has to
do with misunderstanding what a
relationship is
and we misunderstand what it's like to
meet a person because we don't know what
a person that's a person is just this
stupid monkey that evolved randomly
billions of years why should I show them
respect they're wrong they're
politically biased or whatever it's like
them person a person has a soul you know
like just saying that in a modern
context you get laughed out of the room
you say a person has a soul in a
postmodern context no believe whatever
you want that you can ask your truths
right totally but if you say a person
has a soul and you meet it in this kind
of strict for example Asafa consents
then the implication of the soul is that
the person has reincarnated many times
right that one is done to them and what
they do will impact future lives and
it's also the result of prior lives etc
etc etc you know you talk a little bit
of in the piece about object-oriented
ontology which is you know I'm really
delighted by the writing of Timothy
Morton
yeah this notion that I think you know
he puts that in what he calls the
strange stranger or the future future
you know that there's you know the
withdrawn and unknowable mystery of even
your own body right and and that that's
where the soul enters the conversation
yeah I mean it's a it's a soul is
certainly a hyper object in that sense
right which is to say the this object
that no matter how hard you study it it
will exhaust your attempts to fully
capture it and you know an airplane is a
hyper object you could break an airplane
down all of its however many hundreds of
thousands component parts and ultimately
have just a complex system you can fully
understand the airplane as a closed
system but something like a rainforest
right or the hue or a single human body
or your brain even just a stinking brain
let alone something like the universe
where the whole earth these are what's
been called an object-oriented ontology
hyper objects so that's a first step
towards a meta modern ontology where a
certain epistemic humility is at play
right and and we allow ourselves to say
listen we're never we're gonna know
exactly how your body works right so how
dare I have the hubris to make an
intervention that could form irreparable
damage why not do no harm first and and
work in a state of not-knowing
and approach the hyper object with sort
of reverence right and so you have soul
qualities certainly have that and anyone
who has been an educator and work with
students over almost any age if you
really let in the student you realize
that this is a very complex
responsibility being an educator or a
parent for example because the
individual is a hyper object and this
gets to that the metaphysical importance
of uniqueness as a category now we're
back to cosmo around humanism which
would posit that that evolution actually
developed towards increasing uniqueness
so that evolutions in the business of
creating ever more complex hyper objects
the human being in our local environment
obviously the most complex hyper object
aside from the universe itself no and
raining as you said that nice and so
like the question of why did it start
raining is confronts us with a hyper
object of the global ecosystems the
question of why it started raining away
when I said that confronts us with
potentially other metaphysical realities
and this gets into other conversations
about like Colin Wilson and and those
people who've studied the scientific
realities of synchronicity and
occurrences that defy chance and seem to
imply a relationship between human
intentionality and the material
substrate of the universe right so again
and there's good evidence that the mind
affects the body in your own life every
day because you move your arm by
thinking about it
and what you eat can change your mood
and yet we think that that's where the
mind ends and matter begins but in fact
the mind extends far beyond the skin
encapsulated ego as it were right you
brought up synchronicity so we're gonna
we're going there because it would be I
would be remiss if I didn't give you an
opportunity to talk about what a meta
modern understanding of time looks like
yeah I actually don't have a super
coherent answer to this um you know
before the call I I said that time is
probably the most complex metaphysical
subject you know if you read a book like
for example Alfred White Alfred North
Whitehead 'he's process a reality that's
a metaphysics that place is essentially
time or sequence at the heart of
creation itself which is to say that the
universe is by definition temporal or
sequentially unfolding so that you don't
get a universe without getting something
like evolution and compounding or non
arbitrary sequence or kind of like
unfolding um
now in the paper I write about how as I
just mentioned that the mind itself is
actually extended beyond the nervous
system this is very important point it
was raised in the cognitive sciences in
the late 90s and it was under the fear
of the extended mind David Chalmers was
involved in the conversation and it's a
basic idea being that once I'm used to
my phone were either used to the library
that I have in my house my mind ceases
to be limited by what I have like within
my skin in intradermally and the mind
now actually includes the books and
includes the affordances of my cell
phone for example now and so that's the
thing that humans have been doing for a
long time we've actually been using the
environment as a way to offload and
capture cognitive stuff and so if you
look at sundials and things like
Stonehenge or the pyramids or other
sacred archaeological sites built by
ancient humans most of what these were
were actually architectural II designed
time capture devices right and so what
this shows is one of the first attempts
of humanity to touch the real beyond the
imagination and beyond the ego-syntonic
defense mechanisms and beyond you know
the illusions of the the nervous system
itself and to try to cash your
subjective time which we all feel is
this kind of like temporal duration
something's far away and it's actually
odd the more you try to feel into time
but that's another topic so their
subjective time which is tricky and
which is why we have timers and
calendars and so the some of the first
things ancient humans did were to codify
subjective time into objective time
through the creation of technologies
that were basically externalized time
capture like a sundial
for example works and so yes precisely
that's actually William Aaron Thompson
he suggests that the first measurement
instrument ever found was on a medicine
woman and she was essentially marking
for her menstrual period and the moon
cycles for ritual purposes
but again it was like you need to have
the you know the chalk marks on the wall
with a slash through room for the five
if you're the prisoner you know I mean
like you time needs to be captured kind
of outside the mind in a way and the
objectivity of time is tricky no more so
than the objectivity of Iraq hitting you
ahead is how long were you unconscious
for when you wake up right it's like
it's this traffic unis because has to do
with awareness and kind of the alertness
and consciousness that characterizes the
human so you'll note that the animals do
not build sundials even though they
could benefit greatly from them and so
one of the things that actually sets the
human apart is that the human can make
metaphysics they relate to things that
are objectively real like time did we
just go tautological here did are we are
we suggesting that the ability to make
metaphysics is what separates us
metaphysically from that could be a
tautology it could it could be I mean I
think maybe dolphins probably have some
very complex views about the nature of
the universe and they live in I would
actually totally believe it so I'm not
trying to and I say this in the paper
you know I'm not trying to draw a stark
line between animals and humans but I
but I would suggest yes that in the kind
of hierarchy of beings as it were in the
evolutionary chain there was this moment
when the humans became kind of radically
separate almost a good glitch in the
matrix
due to this reflectivity and due to the
ability to externalize the mind into its
environment and a kind of very
cognitively powerful way and yeah so and
that led to the seeking of understanding
the nature of causality which led us to
where we are now question past you just
because it's my hope that in every one
of these episodes we can quote-unquote
break a little new ground on the topic
and you know this particular issue of
the issue of of time in a you know what
at least Ken Wilber was calling it at
the time I post metaphysical meaning you
know like I think he's just trying to
like sanitize the conversation for
people because even that stuff was
deeply met
physical but this this understanding of
time where we're inhabited this vastly
you know like you said polycentric
nonlinear conceptual space seems to be
well you point at the you know in that
list of meta modern statements on
reality talk about actuality and
potentiality to recognize the potentials
and potentiality rather than facts and
actualities constitute the most
fundamental or more real reality this is
quoting free knock what we usually call
reality is only actually one slice of an
infinitely larger hyper complex pie
actuality is only a case of a deeper
reality called absolute totality this
seems it seems to align with you know
various interpretations of quantum
physics you know that talk about the you
know and enacted like the decohere world
emerging out of this space of
possibility and that it sort of affords
us a couple different ways of possibly
looking at time one is I think more
intuitive and conventional that the real
sort of accretes or compresses out of
the actual in some sort of step-by-step
fashion that's the you know whiteheads
exact sort of view of things and then
but you know before our conversation you
suggested that you thought that the
accretion view was mistaken I think
there's another view which is that maybe
there's like a spatialized way of
looking at this where past and future
are on horizons of the present at which
our observer is located and that on the
other side of this hyper sphere of
possibility is the unthinkable and at
the horizon is these sort of imaginable
you know the history or the future you
know the origin and destiny of our
narrative and then you know around the
horizon we have a sort of that that
spectrum of what we ordinarily call the
possible but the pasta that's really
only
one axis of several in which you know
we're talking about the difference
between the possible and the actual and
so we stand on like this this notion
that the actual may be somehow less real
than the potential reminds me of to call
into the idea of the life of a soul
beyond the life of a person that you
know sorry about this is my friend the
other day that if you do sort of accept
like Timothy Morton says about the body
as a hyper object that it's made out of
all this stuff that's dead in at least
in you know the traditional sense of
thinking of it and it has existed for
vastly longer than you have and will for
vastly longer than you have that the
majority of your sort of life as stuff
is actually dead that like you're
actually much vastly more dead one
perspective than you are alive a Steiner
said basically the same thing yeah so I
mean do you see in a way that that sort
of suggests a time of like a universal
simultaneity
in which the ancestors and the the
unborn are present in every moment I
don't know maybe I'm getting a little
flowery here but I feel like this is
this is great this is exactly because
it's kind of like you know sleep and
death right this is what Steiner talked
a lot about this because this is where
time gets really weird because time
seems to stop for those who die and for
those who are asleep and this question
of you know is there some kind of a
temporal simultaneity in which
everything exists at once you know that
has been a resounding I think yes from
the great esoteric sides of the
religious traditions and the theologies
from a bunch of different traditions
that there's there's kind of an internal
in excuse me internal to the material
there's an internal eternal so if you go
into the material you'll find something
that is timeless and yet in the in the
dead matter in the
the mineral kingdom and his diner would
say you know you participate in the
mineral kingdom you're like moving
around with Stardust like you've
organized it magically to do things that
you call you with your hands but it's
actually this ancient stuff which is
dead and dying and then a process of
decay which is continually rien de
kind of influxes of novelty and
creativity at the edge of time so you
have to say that both are correct
there's both in a temporal simultaneity
in which in quotation marks also all
souls are in communion right with the
one but then there's this radically
contingent temporal unfolding which is
kind of like trickles down from the from
the a temporal and eternal and so the
eternal is different from the
everlasting the everlasting is the soul
that moves forever through time right
and again so it's like if you begin to
work with this type of metaphysics which
is very in holding what's
anthroposophical or rudolf steiner
tradition then when you when a child is
born it comes to your school this child
has an everlasting soul right be careful
like like have reverence and likewise
with yourself when you look in the
mirror so there's this sense of a
inviolable dignity to every being
because it participates in the
everlastingness of time and the eternal
so again it's like am I allowed to stay
this stuff in a post right seriously in
a postmodern and modern context not
really allowed to say this stuff now if
I like got some kind of degree or did
something in religion then maybe I'm
allowed to so there's this question of
who gets to decide and how do we as
individuals decide on the answer to
these deep questions which of impact as
I'm saying it's how you treat a child in
a school for example right do you treat
them as basically something to be used
for economic efficiency right or do you
treat them as somehow this much more
invaluable resource uh-huh with a
certain sovereignty and autonomy
that would you work with the right would
save the world to get a little dark
maybe in a modern thing it's both right
right well I mean it's potentially both
right now we're out of this this moment
when we're gonna see it worse my
favorite quotes from shri orb another
great Indian sage he said somewhere
towards the end of the life divine you
know as we reach the limits of Planet
ization which is to say as all the
humans become connected and we build one
giant shopping mall heaven we'll race
with hell miss sunshine
and and so there's this sense that then
beginning of a new historical period is
usually a time of people and also a time
when we kind of make some critical
decisions about you know how we'll move
forward because you could Rhea if I a
false or truncated metaphysics and we've
done it before humans have to reify a
false and truncated metaphysics for
example to say love doesn't exist free
will doesn't actually exist till you
really try to build institutions based
on that which would result in Iraq the
authoritarian society these things have
been done but never with the
technological power that we now have to
for example build a school around the
hypothesis etc or an army and so there's
this very do kind of think sincere need
to make sure that as we move through
this period you know we're keeping the
voices the voices you want to simplify
and reduce and return to modernity and
the monological keeps those voices at
bay so like applaud the post modernists
but then we also want to you know in a
sense get beyond this postmodern
critique and the whole spirit and
emotion of critique and somehow move
into a space were reconstructing a a new
meta-narrative instead of taking
potshots and deconstructing anyone who
steps up to try to offer a method
narrative and so it as I said after
post-modernism it needs to be
provisional right polycentric will built
iteratively through collaboration but
there needs to be a project in good
spirits in
because the regressive tendencies on the
right who want to drive us towards
racism and nationalism are having good
questions about what is the human you
know and and and answering them
irrationally we need to have very
reasonable and profound answers to
questions about like one's the human
what are we here on earth to do what is
a relationship how important our
relationships
right what is love is love real what's
the significance of love like these
things are a part of what it means to be
human and we are relegating them yeah so
I could just keep going so I'll pause
I'll pause I think you're getting you're
getting the drift you're getting the
drift yeah so let's let's map out we're
getting close here I think to a bowtie
on this let's map out what we kind of
know for sure just based on the general
tendency and I will argue this with
sceptics if necessary and I'm sure you
would too
towards that greater more complex hyper
object we know that poly centrism is
ecologically resilient and robust so
that that's sort of Trent that's a
that's a universal trend in this
biosphere you know we know that again
like resilience is itself an attractor
pulling everything toward it what do we
see as the characteristics that we can
kind of sketch out as more or less
guaranteed about a future that has found
its new you know a planetary human
culture that's found a new equilibrium
in this meta-narrative how do you think
it's gonna look how do you think we feel
not just look right not just to be seen
not just the science of the visible but
how will it feel you know I mean so the
most like when I try to think about
future it's quite scary
you know the most potent sense I have
for what like the other side will be a
sustainable post-transition
civilization I think about the interior
T of that culture not about like the
technological socio-economic
socio-political and I can talk a lot
about that and I have this whole thing
in my book that's coming about these
thirteen social miracles which include
things like basic income guarantee and
you know taking down national borders
and returning to permaculture and
because it lays out this whole kind of
integral parlance lower right and kind
of stuff that would have to happen to
have something like a sustainable just
civilization on the other side of what I
see as the kind of crisis of the
Anthropocene and the crisis of the
Anthropocene is going to be difficult
and politically contentious and it's
kind of the bridge of fire to the cosmic
age that Sun would say yeah so when I so
when I think about the other side I
think mostly about what it takes to live
in a post tragic culture right this is
one of the facets of cosmic humanism
this teaching by gaffney on the post
tragic and so this question of you know
modernity was pre tragic right modernity
was just like triumphant meta-narrative
massive historical progress boom like
don't listen to the people we colonial
eyes and don't listen to the women and
the duelists like just go be happy
because we're progressing technology
succeeding diseases ending universal
education everyone can read but we
landed on the moon
 modernity yes like a positive
pre tragic you don't even look at the
tragedy like you that's part of the
thing is keeping the tragedy out of
public a high in fact post modernity
flips the script entirely post modernity
is stuck in the tragic entirely and
anyone who's experienced tragedy knows
that there's a moment to be in tragedy
and there's a moment to actually really
process tragedy and to not avoid the
emotion and the intensity of tragedy but
then you need to get after the tragic
and find a way to love and laugh again
and to think optimistically
even though you know that tragedy is the
real part
world No and so the situation with post
modernity in the postmodern identity is
often one of getting encased and
entrapped tragic without a larger metal
narrative that can frame it and then
provide an exit into the post tragic and
so when you're in a pre tragic culture
like modernity you confront tragedy by
essentially ignoring it occluding it
getting it out of you pretending it
doesn't exists or you can spiritually
bypass it you can say everyone karma
through reincarnation brought the poor
people to be poor the rich people to be
rich so that's just how it is right your
classic bad metaphysics of reincarnation
well you can justify it's a pre tragic
level you can you can explain away all
this so-called tragedies is not being
tragic and you see that even that with
some post modernists they escape the
postmodern tragedy by adopting a kind of
pre-modern or modern religious view
where they they meditate themselves out
of both the tragedy it doesn't actually
exist it's all samsara it's an illusion
it's a real actual tragedy so getting
stuck in the conversation you can
possibly have as well any people well
and it's also emotionally a very
dangerous position because tragedy is
actually something that needs to be
processed which is why the moment that
post modernity is stuck in is actually
it's excellent sometimes called
complicated grief right yeah it's like
this very delicate and difficult
emotional transition that needs to take
place where we need to say essentially
yes tried to take human history tragedy
yes and in fact make reparations in some
cases and then somehow find a way to
look each other in the eye again and
laugh and and build a positive future
and that requires again a return to some
kind of metaphysical narrative that can
make sense of the evil that happened it
can make sense of human folly a mistake
right creed say this of all of these
things that are part of the tragedy how
do we make sense of that if we're just
monkeys that evolved in a meaningless
material universe
can't we're just just tragic to all the
things is tragic there's no escape from
the postmodern tragic critique unless we
go back to a triumphant pre tragic
scientism right which isn't again the
transhumanists escaped they escaped the
postmodern tragedy into the basically
hyper-modern pre tragic view where you
can explain away yeah but so I'm seeing
the future has to be some culture of of
the post tragic some way of again
telling a broader metadata that allows
us to basically all lose face and then
regain face together oh you know because
the more tragedy is a great leveler
that's the thing like tragedy is
something all humans share no and you
know the the needs and again this is why
every religion has always existed
because religion provides narrative
beyond the tragedy I'm in Christianity
being the greatest example of a post
tragic religion I mean they didn't nail
Buddha to the cross but it died
peacefully lying on the side uh uh a
shock you moon a Buddha anyway whereas
Christ on the cross
and so there's this way in which we need
culturally to think about a resurrection
if I can speak in these terms because
it's like there's gonna be a lot of
tragedy
both are revealed in terms of what has
happened in the recent history that we
don't know about yet and ongoing and
escalating into the near future decades
and so whole groups of people need to
think about how to get into a kind of
post tragic consciousness to remain
productive creative positive solution
building because there will be a
tendency especially amplified by the
commodity market dies social media etc
to to wallow in the tragedy to the
extent of this week decimating the
morale of the entire culture if that
hasn't already happened as a result of
post modernist but it may have already
happened that we're we're so mired in
the tragedy that it's you know
something's have to
get out of it and so these are what my
reflections yeah the whole technical
question about how do we weather this
transition through the kind of birth of
a Anthropocene into the into the kind of
new earth and then the technical
questions of what that post transition
civilization looks like I mean these are
some of the conversations I have with
she walked in Bergeron Landry and green
Hall and there's this there's a sense of
needing to answer those questions very
carefully both how do we get there how
do we weather the storm and then what's
the other side look like and what do
these post transition technologies look
like both social and material
technologies and the key social
technology is going to be building a
kind of meaning-making culture that has
a certain resilience and coherency to it
and you know the Middle Ages are
interesting like they were terrible and
of course many ways when you look at the
monastic traditions that spread you see
during these times of darkness there
also are attempts to preserve access to
a very important truths especially true
Civ the interior so I foresee a new
monasticism as part of the transition I
foresee many modes of alternative
education and kind of mystery schools in
the wilderness I see a number of
intentional communities and basic
questionings of democratic process
experimentations with domestic
collaboration households and so I think
a lot of what we've taken for granted in
modernity especially in America will be
shifting some of it by choice some of it
on the back goes climate change induced
disaster or political conflict that's
the you know the refugee crisis alone
makes this world a new world in which we
need to find a way to house millions of
people on an ongoing basis and so again
we need a metaphysics of love or will
fail at that because but then we will
house these people and they will be seen
as parasites on the productive people
and the tent cities will be these
terrible places
it's not love it's a competitive
Darwinian universe these are the losers
that film looper kind of portrays the
climate change refugees yes you know yes
totally totally and so there's that
sense of needing to give ourselves the
moral courage to embrace the stranger
and to hold humanity as one family even
when they're misbehaving members of the
family you know and so it's you have the
resurgence of hate and the resurgence of
dehumanization on both the left and the
right yeah both the modernists and the
post modernists are missing in the point
essentially which is the point were
being called to by the global crisis
which is that we need to return somehow
to our humanity some kind of humanism
some kind of love based a relationship
based sovereignty paced way of thinking
about who we are what we do otherwise it
will be just basically a kind of a race
to the high ground you know or like who
gets on the ark as the world burns it's
just or floods or whatever it ends up
being like this was expressed recently
in a conversation I had with my father
who is he's a retired successful
businessman you know is used to seeing
things sort of from the generals
seat and making what in mataró you might
call king of swords
style decisions and we were having a
conversation about conflict minerals
because I have this problem with
constantly getting into difficult
conversations with my father just to see
what sticks you know see how it goes and
talking about you know just how
indefensible it is that Apple worked out
this arrangement with Foxconn but
Foxconn who manufactures iPhones and all
this stuff and you know the for those
who do not know you're listening to this
on a device made in the factory most
likely in Asia somewhere where they have
Nets installed outside the building
because so many people throw themselves
off the roof
years ago there was an arrangement made
you know that Apple was like wait a
minute we can't have this for the people
making our our stuff you guys need to
improve your working conditions here and
then there was really no you know it as
is often the case in like this kind of
situation where corporations are being
relied upon to enforce morality right no
follow-up no enforcement I mean
nothing's substantial you know worker
conditions at Foxconn haven't really
improved and you know the people who are
you know mining in Africa for these
things you know the the work conditions
aren't being enforced they're my dad's
like well you have no high ground to
stand on here you're using these devices
all the time I'm saying well no actually
that's exactly why it matters is that we
don't know these people but we are
dependent on them we'll never meet them
in a way but we do need to find a way to
be able to have that conversation beyond
the conversation of well you're
implicated in this therefore you have no
you have no valid stance you have no
ground to stand on which is I think so
often the case in a sort of perverse
reciprocal in identity politics you know
but I bring that up as a way of just
sort of attempting a human example here
and that's a very good one
I mean it's when I've used myself when
giving talks because it's just so
poignant to be giving a slideshow on a
Macintosh computer that you know was
kind of built using a global supply
chain that's just kind of demonstrable
both unjust and detrimental to the
ecosystem right so it's like we are all
dependent upon systems that were built
in a fairly half hazard accidental kind
of profit driven makeshift way and there
was a certain amount of kind of bad
intention and there was a certain amount
of just history unfolding extremely fast
out of the pressure of extremely complex
technological innovation and so this is
part of the meta modern move is to
realize that historicity not just the
kind of
um you know the intersectionality as
they say with the historicity which is
to say you don't choose the place where
you're born it's back to death birth
sleep right why is one person born
somewhere in what a person was born
somewhere else in the global world
system you know in the global capitalist
system it's this is what Abraham Maslow
called being in justice right different
from the kind of forms of injustice that
are created by humans which of course we
have some control over even in the most
just system there would still be the
position of the least well-off and
someone will be born into that position
and so we need to be concerned about
what is the position of the least wealth
offices are allsey an idea and then
realize that you know anyone in any of
those positions now is related to us
because we live in a totally
interconnected system in which there are
no externalities right that's the logic
of the meta modern global ethic has to
be one in which is the logic that where
there are no externalities the whole
logic of modernity and postmodernity is
built around creating externalities
right if you hate someone as a
postmodern let's say leftist like with
you hate the people on the right
you just hate them like you literally
think they're just just maybe be killed
perhaps you know you're creating
externalities hate creates extra
analogous it creates more hate love does
not create externalities love creates
containers Communion and so similarly
capitalism is built on this logic of
externalities the factory produces the
commodity but it also produces waste
water and stuff out the smoke pipe and
depressing lives for its workers its
produces all of those things but it's
perceived as only producing the
commodity right all the rest is what's
called externalities of commodity
production and we live our lives both in
material systems with externalities and
socio-emotional systems of externalities
which is to say when you're rude to the
person who gives you your coffee you've
just created an externality different
from if you were very polite to them in
terms of the ramifications and kind of
ripple effects those of mo
life in communities so we need to change
away from the logic of externalities in
a very rigorous way and actually very
quickly and I don't know exactly how
it's going to work because many of the
global supply chains are extremely
interpret and extremely kind of fragile
and we've built up very complex
technological systems that depend upon
massively distant kind of relations of
production as you already said they're
mining the rare earth minerals in Africa
right there's some house melting them
putting or whatever they do to them
somewhere else and then they bring in
the China for the actual assembly line
and that's why they end up in California
you know at an Apple Store and we take
this for granted like this is just how
the world is but this is actually very
recent product post 1970 neoliberal
supply chain dynamics at a global scale
and talks are going on right now for
those wanting to situate this
conversation in the historical record
the the conversation around it you know
it replacing NAFTA with some free trade
zone agreement between the US and Mexico
and Canada and that this issue of you
know Trump's famously narrow-minded
perspective on this stuff where you know
he's trying to to punish people with
with tariffs in this global supply chain
where you know if you try to enforce a
tariff on Mexico and Mexico it is
getting their parts from the United
States right in other factories then
you've actually in an attempt to achieve
some sort of superior political position
you've injured your own face your own
constituency yeah there's no
externalities that's why we came if I
wars anymore like a reasonably and
that's the thing is that at some point
it'll it'll click even for people who
are purely selfish and just want to
survive actually there's it's not that
it's like a nice hippie idea like this
is a warm fuzzy idea there's no
externality it's like it's actually
literally true about the nature of
material reality and the eCos and and so
it's this will eventually at some point
have to dawn like that's the nice thing
about reality is that as charles sanders
purse this was his best definition of
reality reality is that which resists
interpretation you can only go on so
long in a reality avoidant culture
eventually it bites back as it were and
so the externalities things this is as
part of that and I think again it's
about the tragic in the post tragic
onboarding a ton of guilt to the point
of disabling your own agency and
sovereignty because you know about a fox
gone that's not the answer
but you do need to know about Fox Cal
right so it's like how do you hold this
sense of living in the midst of tragedy
and yet still participating in the
creation of some kind of post tragic
world that's a very deep emotional thing
that I knew a lot of people personally
just work at you know and so there's
some kind of new metaphysics of the
human is part of that work it's part of
thinking about reshaping our emotional
lives and allowing a better world to
emerge through our choices and
relationships yeah
and that's you know that's probably a
good place to to call it man I really
there's so much more that I would like
to you know another conversation
focusing on the actual tools of
transition and the techniques and
methods right well in education I'm an
educator that books mostly about whether
future of schools and schooling and
educational relationships don't look
like and you know it should be out in a
couple months hopefully so what is it
what would that be called this book is
called education at a time between
worlds essays on the future of schools
technology and society and the paper
which I will post in the show notes is
love in a time between worlds on the
meta modern quote return end quote to a
metaphysics of eros quite quite you see
yes has this conversation been man where
can people find you on the webs so I
have no social media presence but I do
have a website just Saxton org za k st
ein dot org and my my emails on there
on the about page if you want to email
me awesome and your why is your why is
in the tradition of Jaron Lanier to have
no social media it's it's what allows
you to write papers like this it is in
part that's another conversation but yes
I'd advise everyone to unplug at least
rhythmically it's not entirely so before
we call this one I want to invite you to
do what I love to ask the guests to do
which is if if you're in a conversation
in whatever kind of sense you take it
with the future listeners of this
episode you know the ones that will be
born after you die what would you want
to know from them and what would you
want to say I think I would want to say
that myself and those I know have done
our best and I think I'd want to know
basically how's it going in the future
that's what I was just a general
check-in from the future all quadrants
all levels all lines how are you that's
what I would ask awesome thanks so much
for being on the show yeah thanks again
for listening I hope you enjoyed that
episode as much as I did future fossils
is part of the mind pod network along
with third eye drops the astral hustle
synchronicity podcast and in Moodle of
other fascinating programs I encourage
you to go to mind pod network.com
and subscribe to them all and stay tuned
because we have some awesome episodes
coming up on future fossils but for now
may your now be exquisite long and
wonderful
you