[Music]
hello and welcome to another episode of
relationship alive this is your host
Neil satin how do you really see another
person and how do you allow yourself to
be seen how can you deepen into knowing
the people around you especially your
partner more honestly and more fully
these seem like they would be obvious
questions in the case of relationship
and yet so often we plunge into
partnership driven by chemistry and
desire only to wake up later sometimes
years later and find that we're simply
going through the motions vaguely or
extremely dissatisfied and knowing on
some level that something more is
possible today we're going to take this
on directly to go to the heart of
vulnerability opening up to the
experience of the moment with another
person
today's guest is guy sang stock the
earliest founder of circling and will be
chatting about what that is he's also
the co-founder of the circling Institute
he's an exceptional coach with a gift to
help you see the water you're swimming
in something I hope we'll talk about
today now circling is a practice that
allows you to experience what it's like
to be fully gotten by other people and
for them to get a sense of what it would
truly be like to be in your shoes if you
enjoyed a 13 on a tune mint with Keith
wet or episode six on developing shared
consciousness with Patricia albear and
you are going to love this deep dive
into how to really get related with
yourself and another human being
guy has also generously offered a free
to our coaching session to one lucky
listener so to qualify all you need to
do is download the detailed show guide
for this episode at Neal satin calm
Circle or simply text the word passion
to the number three three four four four
and follow the instructions guys sang
stock thank you for that offer and thank
you so much for joining us today on
relationship alive thank you so much I
was so struck by I was so struck by how
well you did that introduction the sound
of your voice oh it's like I just was
I've almost forgot I was being
interviewed I was yeah guy sings doc be
seen as like the resonance of your voice
just took me into a place where I was
kind of in a flow state almost just
listening to you so when you pause all
of a sudden I realize oh wait a minute
I'm being interviewed that's right
[Laughter]
that's awesome well we're off to a good
start we're already in the flow yeah
we're and we're just starting um
guy it's so great to have you here and
the people listening don't know this but
I worked with you as you were my coach
almost two years ago now and actually I
think it was two years ago that we
started and such an amazing experience
that was and during that time was
planted the seed for this podcast so you
know we might talk a little bit about
that later but I just want to offer you
my own personal gratitude to your help
on this journey and and this podcast as
I've mentioned before and I was telling
you earlier has I've heard personally
from so many people that have been
positively impacted by the information
that we're sharing and I'm really happy
to have you here to be a part of it and
just so thankful that you you
contributed to it's actually being born
so thank you for that mmm they think you
received my friend that feels really
great and you're completely welcome
awesome awesome
so you know I started out by talking
about you and talking about circling and
let's since I know we're going to be
chatting
about that maybe we could just start out
by saying what is circling and and
bridge from that into how can the ideas
of circling the experience of circling
be helpful for people listening them in
terms of their relationship okay great
well a couple of things um you know it
circling to me circling for me is it's
been something that is uh has been has
caught my attention in 1996 and has kept
my attention and even deep in my
attention on it ray on circling and
circling itself has deepened the quality
of my attention for constantly and is
growing and given that might like a
incredible amount of a DD for me to keep
my attention in one place something must
be really really alive for me to stay
focused like that you know and I think
that speaks to what circling actually is
which is you could say it's a it's a
practice that when done in a group is
simply following and giving ourselves to
what is most alive in that moment in the
relationships that are there so you
could say it's a presence practice just
like you know you could say that Yoga is
a kind of presence practice or
meditations a kind of present present
practice whereas like maybe the presence
were the object like maybe in meditation
is on something like the breath or a
mantra right in the object you could say
in yoga is the body right and in the
postures for circling and you could say
that it's a present practice where the
object is the relationships that are
happening in that row and so it's really
simply like you take particular you know
you have just like what in yoga you have
downward dogs and you have the asanas
which are you could say ways of
intentionally being in uncomfortable
right so that like moving in that
discomfort right when you get done with
with downward dog when you're walking
out on the street not thinking about
downward dog your posture is just
naturally a lot more open without
thinking about it right mm-hmm
so encircling we have various you could
say asanas relational practices that
that are designed to have one be
uncomfortable in a particular way such
that when they're out walking it around
in their life they're just naturally
more open to to relationship and to be
nourished by the relationships in their
lives yeah so what what would some of
those relational asanas look like when
you're practicing circling well it a
couple of things so it's like when one
one that actually comes to mind that I
would say is is it the heart of of
circling would be simply like speaking
the moment with the person who's being
circled or whoever it is that you're
relating with such that your own that
you're speaking what you're noticing and
what you're feeling and what you're
experiencing with that person or with
that group of people as your experience
again right and in just to give
something some context to what that you
know the significance of that is that
most you could say most human
conversations are triangular where were
you and I talk about a subject right we
talk about things right mm-hmm very rare
right and some people go their whole
lives actually well without ever
actually entering into a whole other
universe of conversation which is not
talking about something but speaking and
in in listening in talking about what's
happening right now in this moment with
you and when you do that like you're the
moment that one does that I've never
seen it not be the case the moment we do
that I never know what's gonna happen
after I get done sharing and my level of
aliveness right both excitement right
and anxiety like increases right and you
could say that that is definitely an
asana and so one of the ask for this
circling yeah and one thing that I
really appreciated about the experience
that I had with circling and was this to
say and I described it this way in the
intro that it's getting to know what
it's like to be in the other person's
shoes but that's a phrase that we toss
around I think without really parsing it
apart because my experience was circling
was that I really felt like if if
someone asked me to make a decision as
if I were that other person I could have
done it in that moment yeah which is a
lot different than just being like oh
yeah I kind of like I get where you're
coming from which isn't quite as
connected and so what is it about
circling that brings about that
experience of mm-hmm
what's it's interesting when you say
when you talk about that like you know
you'd say I really like the way that you
put that but if you were to be asked to
make a decision as that person you felt
like you could do that
right I think the differences is is that
really encircling we really one one is
we acknowledge ourselves as as you could
say nervous systems right yeah that are
inherently open to the world transparent
like like permeable to it and
transparent to it and we just live
consistently as if that were actually
the case okay so like when I when I when
I look over at you I can start to I can
actually start to imagine what it's like
to be be in your nervous system right to
like if I understand whoa what you're
afraid of right or or even notice how
what I'm saying is impacting you right I
can start to get in I can circuit I can
start to get close to things that you
actually care about and I think that
that's one of the things that's circling
and in all deep conversations and all
deep levels of intimacy really I think
in you can sum it up is like is is is is
that when I'm close to you it really
what I'm saying is I am close to knowing
understanding and caring about what you
care about and that you care about
things so it's it's kind of like you
could say that we we get together and we
care about each other explicitly and
then caring about each other we find out
what we care about right and when I get
really close to Karen when I care about
what you care about all of a sudden I
start to naturally find myself looking
out of your eyes
right I start to be able to be able to
anticipate like oh if you're if you
really care about how you're showing up
in in the world and in that person
wasn't paying attention to you like I
can imagine I can imagine for example
that that would that you could easily
feel rejected right or very Thanks right
yeah yeah and it strikes me that there
are these two polls that we often move
between one being like everything is
going great and and great in a
relational space and so I just assume
that we care about the same things and
we're operating from the same place and
everything is really good until all of a
sudden like or the record scratches and
it's like wait a minute we weren't
seeing things the same way now we see
things totally differently and you get
in a disagreement or an argument and
then I think it can be so challenging to
really like those are the moments where
it's like okay I'm either assuming that
everything's that I get your world and
we were in the good place or now we're
in this like really challenging place
where we don't understand each other and
it's like in those moments it can be so
hard to like how do I get your world in
those moments
um but but usually that's not the
question that people are asking people
are asking just like
you know either how do we get back to
safety I think that's an important
question if they if that's made
conscious or just like how do I prove to
you that I'm right or that you're wrong
or you know that's maybe those are some
less productive questions to ask in that
moment mm-hmm
well I really appreciate what you said
it's like like the record goes and then
all the action stops and what I
basically what you what I'm hearing you
say is like how I respond right to that
moment right is is gonna make a huge
difference
yes next moment is good to go right so
so you could say that first of all in
terms of in terms of as you're talking
about we're going along and I'm assuming
that like I'm talking you know that
we're talking about the same thing right
because we're having this conversation
talking about it so naturally I'm gonna
like I'm gonna go left here because we
just were talking about that thing and
so I'm gonna go left there and so when I
go left there right like all of a sudden
you know you your eyeballs pop up right
and in a range or something like that
right and you're like huh right and and
so in that moment he could say that I
was I was I had an assumption that we
were talking about the same thing in in
how do you know that you have an
assumption you don't right that's the
nature of assumption just right is is
there there in the background so it was
om in a relationship those moments just
simply make me make myself aware of an
assumption right it's not bad that I
have them we all have them in fact if I
know about it that it's not an
assumption so that I think the first the
first thing they get is like it's so
natural in fact it's beautiful in
deepening relationships to actually find
places where I was assuming and I didn't
know it because in in so so so that's
the first part which is like really
really like looking forward to
places where there's dissonance is
because then we can stop right and you
could say like like in that moment where
where I noticed that were like I had an
assumption and we're talking about two
different things um rather than trying
to get you to get that I was talking
about the right thing and you were
assuming the wrong thing okay
and rather than all the things that
would like like probably result in some
kind of argument or some kind of
repression of somebody on some part what
would happen is if actually those were
moments where I got curious yeah right
like what would happen is like in fact
if you just think about it like what
would become of our relationships if if
my response to being triggered or to
disagreement right my response was to be
curious about you about us and about
what's happening for me and you and us
in that moment yeah yeah I love this
because actually this is something that
we talked about on last week's show
which was an episode with me and Chloe
where we were talking about how much
curiosity and the practice of getting
curious has transformed our relationship
in moments of being triggered so yes a
hundred percent yes and what what are
some ways that you get curious in those
moments what are the what are questions
that you like to ask well I like what
you said what in those moments what do I
do to get curious right that's the one
one person so sometimes really good
years ago somebody sent me a text and in
it there's this kind of big question
that they sent it shows up on my phone
this is yes what is curiosity I was like
I had no like I had no idea what exactly
what is curiosity but think about it and
I was like I don't know if I can tell
you what curiosity is but I can tell you
this it's the first thing to go
that goes when I contract right yeah so
it's like and it's also it's also one of
the first primary things I often notice
when I'm open right so so yeah whatever
whatever it is that curiosity is it
seems to be connected to like to my
level of openness or mine that level of
closure closeness and so so in those
moments where I it'd be a good idea to
get curious are usually moments where I
don't feel pyrius right so so getting
curious is the is is a kind of I find is
a walk right it's a walk that I
consciously take right I practice
curiosity and and then oftentimes the
feeling of curiosity comes before I even
recognize it or you could say I notice
that curiosity is there and I'm open
after already being open and then I
realize it so that it's just it's like
those like that that walk of being in
relationship with that person and I
would say that like simply like it
starts off with one is like
acknowledging that something just
happened right hey hey so so pause right
pause I just noticed I noticed like when
I turned laughs it seemed like your
eyeballs popped out with like was I
correct with that yeah the one is just
acknowledging just what what's happening
with with with the intention to relate
right and then it just simply be this
it's like oh so what so for you like for
you what was that right right what like
for you um what way did you want to turn
and and also what was the impact of of
me turning left like was I like you know
getting curious like one thing one big
one is to find out and to get curious
about how I occurred for that person and
it could be like oh so when I turned
left like was I ignoring you
was I not considering you right it was I
was I
blaming you what was turning left for
you right hmm yeah and I like how I like
that combination of taking just a simple
action like the turning left and then by
adding like so what was that action for
you
it gives that person a chance to reflect
yeah in a moment that they are also
probably not feeling very curious
totally and you can be like and it's
just it's simply like in in a sweaty as
it you actually as I was even just like
giving that example I felt my I felt my
chest open up right I felt myself
leaning forward just the just the act of
finding out like how am I like what what
was I doing
for you like in that like there's this I
find myself leaning in because I think
that a lot of times right a lot of times
when with relationship when I just
demonstrate the intention to know you in
in a implicitly acknowledge right and
show you the fact that I actually care
and acknowledged your other this right
then I acknowledge that you're a being
that I I actually don't have a heat I
don't have any authority to know what
you're thinking or feeling unless you
you share with me and I want to know I
want to be like I want to share I want
to I want to give my awareness over to
you and share it with you right yeah
yeah and I'm well I'm having so many
thoughts and feelings as you were
describing that like on one thing I
noticed was when you were talking about
that experience of leaning forward and
like the act of offering to someone
wanting to really fully understand them
and where they're coming from like I
actually got a little teary when you
were saying that and then I started
thinking about I wonder for the people
listening like some people it might be
really easy for them to say oh okay well
when you turned left I was thinking
about that time that we blob you know
and it might be really easy for them and
then it there might be people who hear
that question you know what was turning
left for you and be kind of stuck with
like I wouldn't even know how to respond
to that question so what could you offer
someone who doesn't know in that moment
like like someone asks you what was
turning left to you or what was like
when I when I ordered dinner for you and
instead of like I thought that would be
this act of chivalry and like I was you
whatever I was showing up for you but
instead I could see you got it seem like
you got livid mm-hmm-hmm what was that
for you yeah what about the person in
that moment who's like I don't really
know how to respond to that totally you
how to restore maybe hints for how to
respond to that in a way that's
generative yeah totally totally well I
think I think the example that you just
gave and I'm imagining most of the time
what what I don't know means I actually
don't know right so like actually I was
imagining I was imagining in that case I
don't know means I'm too bad at
you right I ain't giving you right
like like I'm not gonna offer you
anything right yeah and in that moment
and here's here's the deal with like is
the deal with with with with closeness
is that you just it's not something that
you can do it's something that happens
and we both end up in it and it's
definitely not something I can force so
it's like if the bottom line is somebody
is somebody don't want to say anything
we're free right we're free to like like
what it takes to be close really is is a
function of disclosing only that which I
can only disclose like no one you can
take away every freedom I have right if
I if I tied you up and I put like you
know things in your eyes and and took
away everything the one thing I can't
manage or take away from you is how you
are experiencing me tying you up right
mm-hmm
like that in that that experiencing and
how that occurs for you the only way I
would know is if you told me so the
first thing to get is like is to really
get that like man when some when
somebody reveals what's true for them it
is it is really a it is really an act of
their own human freedom in which it's a
it's really like a you could say when I
receive it it's grace because it's
something I can't do for them right and
I can't make it happen
so it's like in that sense it's like
really I just want to acknowledge that
that that there's no thing that I think
I've been able to find in terms of
intimacy that can actually make intimacy
happen I can invite it out right mm-hmm
so in that case so the thing I just
noticed I got curious about is like you
know is I don't know and it'd be like
huh I'm imagining I would say it's
probably something like oh I don't know
I'm imagining you maybe maybe you're too
mad to talk right now or is that true
right
right or or it's like or it's more like
it's more like oh it's like in asking
you like how that is for you if you feel
like I'm in my a my invading you am i
pressuring you is is it like right am I
am I trying to draw something out of you
what what is that like what is what it's
just my question right about how your
feeling for you
right so it's a I think it's inviting
like Who I am in this moment in your
world out like I want to know which
implicitly acknowledges that I care
about
that yeah I'm I'm imagining the the
scenario of like that typical pattern
that comes up in relationship of
pursuing and distancing and like one
person always being the Oscar and the
other person always being the Stonewall
ER and and then I'm also imagining
people who are blessed in relationship
with someone who's a real partner in
relating with them and and I feel like
what this conversation is getting at is
is both of those because I want like if
you're at home or in your car wherever
listening to this and you have a willing
participant who at least wants to try I
want you to come away from this with
some tools to enhance that practice that
you have with your partner and and and I
really love that it's like it's for me I
think it will change the experience of
it to just think about it as an offering
as a gift in my partner revealing to me
yeah and then I and then I was also I
mean I was imagining the dinner table
scenario that I had concocted and I'm
like just seeing this one person like so
when you're not responding to me now
like I am imagining that's because and
then finally just like it like I'm
done you know I'm a you're always like
this you know and then they're out of
their way and it's like it's like in
another and a you know in another in
another way I would say approaching that
to is is more of my own
so there's being permeable to who you
are and what's happening to you and
really wanting to know and showing
curiosity and genuine interest and and
also there's also like just really
revealing who I am right to you in a way
that's unarguable like it's like it's
like we're we're and that's that's the
thing is one of the things about
circling we also talk about is like
really sharing communicating with the
intention
relate right through sharing just the
gift of your own personal experience and
how I know whether or not I'm sharing
something that is is on my side of the
street is it it can't be argued all
right so for example if I say hey you
know when I when I when you said I don't
know I just noticed that I was feeling
anxious and leaning forward right when
you said that and then and then when you
actually said the word I don't know I
felt even a little bit more anxious
right and then I didn't feel like I felt
nervous and they didn't know what to do
and what I really just want is to feel
close to you right so it's like in that
act like if you could just imagine like
like imagine hearing that it's like
there's nothing about what I just said
that was like a an assertion or an
assessment right it was more of a
revelation or revealing um and
disclosing and a displaying that had me
open and communicate the intention to
relate and it's something that the other
person can't really argue with you think
can't really say it's like no we'll know
you weren't anxious right right although
some people do try to argue someone else
out of their feelings for sure but yeah
yeah totally totally and they need to
argue it because they can't control
their feelings
[Laughter]
yeah yeah totally and so and with that
yeah you can see why this dance is like
what you said at the very beginning that
this is something that it has a gift in
it and it has the potential to make you
really uncomfortable because it's
confronting I don't know if I like the
way can that word confronting
necessarily but it's immersing yourself
in whatever could happen yeah it's
unpredictable really like what you just
said I'd have to say that we just said
like points to something just so print
it's just so personal
so so pertinent for me and it's and then
when I got this just reminded me when I
got this this this distinction that like
getting this distinction it was a
game-changer for me and it's when I
realized it's when I realized right an
intimacy right that what intimacy was a
function of right was simply it's a you
could say intimacy is a function of my
ability to tolerate anxiety right it's
just like and I and I realize like I
realized that you could say that in you
could say that like it there's
tolerating anxiety and what I mean by
that is it's just what you're talking
about is like when I move towards
aliveness I'm entering into a moment
where if I say that I'm really gonna be
it's like what's true for me all of a
sudden I'm walking along I realize is
like oh what's true for me may actually
if I say it to you may make you go away
right yeah but here's the thing is if I
don't say it right in order to keep you
around right in that moment intimacy is
like the the possibility for intimacy is
diminished and I would also say the
aliveness of mine myself and what's
possible starts to diminish and it
becomes harder and harder to actually be
intimate because I'm relieving myself of
the excitement the aliveness and the
excitation right that that that that
comes with actually when I say it and I
crossed that line right and I take that
risk I have no idea actually what's
gonna happen next but at the end of the
day usually it's something completely on
it like there's something I couldn't
have ever even conceived of right
she made you know but at the end of the
day that's actually kind of like you'd
say the growth aspect they think of
intimacy in worth for us individually
where it does really deep in our hearts
and it becomes it can become a very
deeply spiritual Pratt
right now for me I realized when I got
that I was like ah I realized I had been
spending most of my life right like
trying to get over being anxious or
scared so that I can then be close or
intimate right and so I really yeah I
just realized that that was like sitting
on the dock of the bay looking down at
the water staring at the water trying to
figure out how I can jump in the water
without getting wet right and so there's
something really relieving to me it's
like if you'd imagine the mind Olney
moves towards what it thinks is possible
so if I think that like I can jump in
the water without getting wet right I'm
gonna sit there for ever trying
to work that out but the moment I get oh
right you can't separate wetness from
water like if I jump in I will get wet
I'm gonna get I just get up and I I go
out into the world and I move I move
forward and and that's been the key for
me with things up with with intimacy and
relationships and it keeps you know I
think it's the thing that encircling is
the discomfort that we invite to sit
inside of and increase our capacity like
for aliveness versus submitting
controlling right right dominating or
dissociating I'd rather stay and grow in
those moments I saw is I saw I saw
there's a couple hums there and oh my
word yeah I mean there's just so many
things coming together so you know one
of the I think like a thread through all
of the conversations on this podcast has
been transitioning your relationship
from one that that I think is why a lot
of us get into relationship which is
actually ironically avoiding intimacy in
terms of how you just defined it
you know I think we get into
relationship in order to provide
ourselves with certainty and the like
the medicate 'iv is that a word Medicaid
of aspects of of having sex with someone
and it's like you forget about all that
stuff like all that anxiety you know all
of that all the the uncertainty about
what it would be like to put yourself
out there with your in arguable truth to
your partner but and and I think what
you just pointed to was a huge reason
why relationships die because it becomes
this stacking of times when I didn't
when I chose to not be alive when I
chose to protect myself or protect you
or to not say the thing that I thought
would frighten you away
whether it was speaking to a desire that
I have or or the way that your desire
frightens me or you know I can think of
an any number of reasons why people turn
away from the moment so so I think this
really identifying intimacy or at least
I think a really important aspect of
intimacy as like jumping into the
uncertainty with your partner yeah and
and of course hopefully that comes with
a lot of attention to the safety of your
relationship so that your container can
really hold all that uncertainty yes it
is a really a paradox it is it is a
paradox because the more basically what
I'm telling I'm if you if you don't
trying to think about it what I'm
telling you maybe we make you crazy
because I'm saying that like in order
for basically to have more and more more
depth and confidence in my relationships
right just jump in and introduce more
and more ambiguity there's a more we go
in and ambiguity together right and like
really share what's there right without
trying to control things
right like risking things over time that
like those moments over time right
actually create a very very deep genuine
sense of security in the relationship
yeah because what ends up happening is
that we both start to realize what is
like what what our connection actually
is right it when I'm not like managing
myself right so that I keep you or so
that you kind of go away in a certain
level or something like that if I if I'm
controlling things so that that doesn't
happen I'll never find out what the real
bond of our relationship is right if I'm
constantly if I'm continually willing to
be myself and in inviting you to be
yourself where our personal comfort and
preferences isn't isn't the top priority
but knowing each other deeply is then we
may actually find that like oh that
which is really true for us right all
the way down right becomes the real the
genuine lived shared shared reality you
could say bond that comes through
risking that bond right so it's like
it's a it's a yeah this is the paradox
this is so interesting because I'm
thinking about how encircling and and
maybe you can talk a little bit more
about the process of what that looks
like so people really get what we're
talking about yeah but there's some
aspect to it where strangely when I
because my experience of it I'll just
say what would I experience which was
there was me and there was a group of
people in a semi-circle around me and
they asked me questions about my
experience and there was also someone
there to guide the questions a little
bit too and maybe you can speak a little
bit more about what that is and and so
and these questions were meant to help
other people understand me and where
where I was
coming from without judgment and what
was interesting was that in that
experience I felt very free to just
answer their questions and to show up
and I felt like I was being asked to be
fully me and and the art there is I
think for the people who are asking the
questions in the circle is to not impose
their experience on me but to truly get
into my shoes like we were talking about
before um but and then I'm flashing to
like relationship where when you're with
a partner or even if you're just out on
a date with someone who's not your
partner yet it can feel like there's so
much at stake with how you answer their
question or how they answer your
question and it's just ironic because
these are the people that at least in
the case of being in partnership we care
about the most
mmm you know but there's more at stake
somehow and this is a theme on the show
is like this question of well how do you
be more fully you and how do you embrace
your partner being more fully who they
are and how do you do that in a way
where it's not threatening you where
you're actually able to contain that and
thrive and then so there's a couple of
things like a couple of things I think
the thing that there's so many things
that that question points to and I'll
come at it from this angle because I
think it's one of the things the
circling really highlights and and I
think is the unique thing that that
makes circling distinct from other
things that kind of look like circling
and why circling has since 1996 has gone
like all over the world right it's in
like billions of countries now and I
think it has to do with that there's a
simplicity understanding that Who I am
right is not a sole proprietorship that
the nature of how I even become is a
function of relationship
right that like you could say that you
could say that it's not so much that
there's a me if it comes into
relationship and then expresses itself
and then you get to know me over here
it's more like we come into a
relationship and in my expression right
I think your response to that in my
response to that I find out who I am
correct yeah right there's like there's
like and actually it's in the
relationship where something can be
revealed about me that's so true that I
didn't know about and couldn't have
known about until that relational event
happened right so there's this kind of
like yeah I just like looks like all
kinds of neurons kind of shut shut up
through your head here's about like your
I would have find out who I am over
there guy or rock in my world
yeah well and I went to how there's a
state of mind that's implicit there that
allows me to be known rather than
seeking out relational experiences that
simply reinforce who I think I am bingo
bingo bingo and I think that because we
think that there's me that then relates
that I would say that most relationships
people go into relationships they think
they back to what relationships are
there are places where I can get
mirrored back accurately what I think I
need to be in order for you to like me
yeah to like myself right but there's a
real different come from and it's a real
it's a it's a paradigm shift but I
really do think that it is implicit and
it I think it's implicit in nature
I think it's implicit in like biology
and like digestion and wherever life
unfolds right there's a constant
becoming right and this is the
is uh you could say like this you look
at in terms of evolution right just to
give this even even more deep context
okay right so if it was if if the moment
that life happened right it all went
perfectly
there'd still only be one single cell
organism right it's it's actually it's
like life it's it's where where life is
introduced to irritation right in
dissonance that like that it likes
relates to that dissonance in such a way
that it in order to deal with the
irritation it creates itself in in a
higher order of complexity right so then
we have like in order to deal with like
this kind of weird I don't know
rock or something or weather pattern
right we life forms into a hot like a
more organized multi-celled right
species and which introduces new rear
tech irritations and if you if you rise
that all the way up for a billion years
you end up with these beings talking to
each other that can like somehow figure
out how to like like relate to each
other here on skype it all of it all of
it right is a function of life reaching
out to become what it is which is an
amazing thing when you just think about
like I'm going to Who I am is I have an
urge to be what I am right like I reach
out towards the environment and I relate
in that feedback loop right you could
say tells me right Who I am in that in
that relational event right but all that
has to do with dissonance irritation
just look at the earth and ask yourself
is it irritated heck yeah like there's
all kinds of stuff going on it he asked
yourself is it alive hell yeah right so
it's like I I so when we go in and see
relationships and we have the attitude
of like
I guess I'm gonna find out who I am here
right I'm gonna find out who I am here
right and so so a lot of times like in
this in to bring it on a more practical
level I think um you could say that like
one of there's so many subtleties here
but like you'd say like so right now
when I'm when I look at you one of the
things that is like is really prevalent
to me that I often don't notice is that
I have a conception of Who I am in your
head right there's a me being formed in
your head right now right but there's
but there's also the me I think is over
there and so much of that is informing
how I relate to you so for example if I
thought you were growing you were hating
me as this conversation were unfolding
my heart rate would change right how I
would respond to that right to like all
those kinds of things that I on some
level a part of me is tracking that
right now when we just realized that
that's part of the structure of I thou
relating right we can be we can begin to
bring it and make that conscious right
and I can say to you it's like Oh like I
I'm imagining that that you're you're
not liking me right now or that you're
loving me right now right is that is
that true
now just now I was just using an example
and just doing that I noticed Mike like
again why my solar plexus kind of got
more alive or something and I was I
wasn't even using like a real example
yeah yeah and I'm imagining that that's
because there's there's actually a
physiology and an energetic component to
being fully alive and being engaged so
just like like asking a question like
that even though it's hypothetical it's
like the same thing as going to the gym
and doing you know a squat or whatever
it's like you just worked out that part
of your mechanism that's all about
I've relational ISM so as you're saying
that somebody's as you're saying that I
just I tuned into like who it is that
you are right now to me in this
conversation and I I was just like who
like who would have been noticing it our
connection and you is like it's like
almost like I get the sense of like
where you're so excited - so excited by
what relationship is and the structures
of what makes it tick right like all
those places like all those places when
I started talking about those those
different things I just I watched you
move around and get excited and it's
like how how that lives for me inside is
I just feel an affinity for you and a
love for you and like as I'm talking
right now I just feel I just feel kind
of I it feels like tears coming to my
eyes and I feel proud of you and
admiring the view that you're doing
right now with me right what you what
you really really love and and also I
also am at the same time I think part of
who you are for me - who carries with it
the backdrop of the history of knowing
you and knowing that you weren't always
doing that and so now that that comes
through in the in the pride and I I just
so I'm just really enjoying you and I'm
enjoying having you in my you could say
having you in me and in my awareness and
how it's shaping me in this moment mmm
how is that hearing that what do you
notice what's happening are you well it
feels
I feel really seen which in this moment
having said those words it sounds a
little cliche but so I guess what that
feels like for me is yeah I feel the
absence of contraction so I feel very II
at ease right now and
and I feel some pride as well that maybe
that's your pride that I'm just kind of
reflecting back at you but I'm feeling
like yeah there there have been a lot of
shifts and as you were describing what
you were seeing I was thinking back to
the coaching work that we did and and
I'm remembering specifically how you
know the listeners regular listeners on
the podcast have heard the story or
aspects of the story - when Khloe and I
broke up and that was all happening when
you and I were working together or kind
of interwove there for a little while
and and and I remember and I wrote this
to you and I spoke these words to you
like how frustrated I was that these
questions about relationship were so
forefront for me so and I was like I
just want to like I just want to put it
all aside and it feels like so ironic
now because and this is how in many ways
this podcast was born it was because you
spoke the words like you know Neil so it
was something like this maybe that's
really an important part of what you're
about is like that you're alive with
probably almost the same words you just
spoke to me you're really alive with the
curiosity of like how this all works and
it's important for you and you know the
next part of the story for people
listening is that a guy told me to just
imagine like what if instead of being
all pissed off at relationship if I just
imagined every morning what it would be
like if I embraced it and if my entire
life revolved around questions of
relationship without making any plans or
anything just imagining what that would
be like and over the course of maybe two
weeks I would do that every morning I'd
wake up and I just imagine what that
would look like and all these different
ideas were popping into my head and I
would say oh I'm not going to do that
but I'm just gonna get in that feeling
and it just like took on so much life
for me that
by the end of two weeks I was like guy
there's no stopping this like this this
ball is rolling like that you know and
here we are here we are you know two
years later I remember actually
interesting I remember that that
conversation I remember where we were
sitting
and I remember sistrum ember that hole I
remember saying that to you and and your
eyes going opening up like oh it's like
but like all the neurons seem to like
line up and in that that place where
it's like the thing that you're most
complaining about like that the essence
of like there's something that you
really cared about opened up and maybe
what would happen if you just actually
aligned your life in accordance to what
you actually found yourself always like
caring about and like that light bulb
went off I now that really like that
just hearing that it's interesting yeah
I since I just kind of sense the sense
of spaciousness like around me and like
I want to kind of stop and like like
kind of look at you for a moment and
just kind of just be you know just be
present to the clarity that's here yeah
which makes for a very challenging radio
time you know we're just gonna sit here
for two minutes in silence and gaze at
each other but I imagine that everyone's
feeling it like how can I'm right you're
you're listening to this and you're
feeling what guy is describing it's like
palpable you know yeah and it's what's
all so what's palpable for me is there's
like the insight that we're speaking
about the distinction that we're talking
about right and but there's also what
that's inside of which is this this we
you could say that we have right and why
we would stop and like you could say
gaze at each other right or be in
silence right
would be that what we would be inside we
would be an implicitly honoring or
acknowledging this third entity that
that called we write some your greater
than the sum of the two of us and we'd
be implicitly acknowledging how it's how
it's creating us and in some way
changing us right yes yeah it's um feels
really good you know in that moment
really shows how relationship win-win
deep enough right can open up those
kinds of those kinds of changes right
those kinds of ways that relationship
actually create us and for me actually
circling is a five studies like what I
think about the circling and and leading
circles and developing circles and
training people look like what my life
is Beit essentially about all that the
whole world was invisible to me I didn't
even know about it I didn't even know to
to not know about it until I met a
friend of mine Jerry who I cook we
co-founded circling years ago while I
was in art school being an artist in it
was thinking as Kim that was my life
path and then he starts inviting me see
see see it clearly sees something that I
do that he can't describe that he's
excited about right and he once he
brings me anything he's excited to
introduce me to his friends and and so I
start hanging out and I still I don't
know what the hell I don't like you know
what the hell gee that's good dude like
he's interesting but he's clearly
interesting in something and something I
don't even know what he's talking about
right uh-huh
and so we're hanging out with his with
his friends and we're having like
conversations and the conversations are
start to go deeper and things started to
happen where I would say something to
somebody or respond to somebody in these
conversations with this group of his
friends in a way that where somebody
like Jerry or Tom
or somebody it would would would pause
they pause everything they go like I
remember one time they paused everything
they said he'd stop hang on that thing
that you just said I had to pay ten
thousand dollars to not understand that
distinction that you just shared right
and I and it was in that moment that
like you remember and that precise
moment really spoke to me because that
was a moment where I stuffed and I went
I was like I was just talking but
apparently I naturally had a gift right
that was no one like like was invisible
indistinct was it wasn't anything to me
until somebody spoke it they shared it
and it became distinct like I can only
relate to things that I have
distinctions for I couldn't relate to
this gift that then became it became my
life but if they hadn't have said it I
don't know what would be happening for
me right now right and in different ways
people says things like that and as that
became distinct hey this is before we
add the word circling right and all the
the whole vocabulary and the depth of
distinction that continues to deepen
around what circling is none of those
were there including the guy who created
it right until the likud say the
listening of the people I was at I was
in relationship with the listening
actually distinguished me right I
started to so once I saw that oh I have
this gift then I could start to relate
to it and I could start to notice that
right and as I noticed it it opened up
the world of like noticing more things
about that and then noticing like how
that somehow created me in a different
way and you can say that whole process
where you could say that guy to whatever
degree the guy kind of created circling
and and help found all those things
there was really a function of the
people who kind of listened me into
existence if you will yeah as you were
describing that
I I got this sense and we we did touch
on this a little bit earlier but of like
what is it like what would it be like to
go through the world looking for the
clues like rather than thinking this is
Who I am and I'm looking for people to
reflect that back at me what would
happen if you went through life looking
for the clues about who you really are
and what your gifts really are in how
people listen and reflect that back to
you yes and I you know I when I
immediately I love that I love that what
would if I were to like go through my
life and look for the clues well
wouldn't be a good method of
Investigation right what would be a good
way to look and I would I think it would
probably be is like I would start to
actually listen for and track and notice
and share what other people's gifts were
right it would be like I think I would
start to like I would start to just
notice other people's gifts and see them
which implicitly would invite a
conversation right yeah that would track
that right which is us that circling
that's that's circling circles back guy
I'm I would love to ensure that everyone
listening when they have when they're
done listening to this conversation that
they have a sense of like okay next time
I go out on a date I'm gonna try this
thing or I'm gonna go home to my partner
tonight and after the kids are asleep or
if you don't have kids right away and
I'm gonna try this thing but before we
talk about that so I'll give you a
second to think about it I'm wondering
if you could just let our listeners know
like if they want to find out more about
you about circling read some of your
writings get in touch with you to find
out more about your coaching work how
can they do that
okay sit so
if you're interested in coaching with me
just simply email me a guy sing stock at
gmail.com and I'll get back to you and
and we'll get together and talk about
working together what I want if you're
interested in in some of my writings
it made my blah blah blah dark holes you
could just you could you could look at
guy singing calm and those are those are
some some articles and posts that I've
done and if you're interested in being
trained to circle which is what I'm
doing professionally now is really you
could say circling is the practice of
circling but then there's the the
underlying methodology that actually has
been formed organically over the years
that that is turned out to be an actual
method of transformation and so that's
what I'm really fostering is is the
deeper more professional side of
circling which is training people
coaches and therapists and other leaders
to be able to not only facilitate
circling but to take the essence of
circling and bring it into their
professional life into their into their
companies into their work with their
clients therapists and coaches and its
really is really becoming to known as is
perhaps one of the deepest like you'd
say in terms of TV profound coaching the
depth aspect of coaching that I think
they were really the best of the world
at the word in the world at that at this
point the feedback and I'm just all
right yeah so if you're interested in
being trained it trained to be to do
still do circle and go to the circling
Institute calm great yeah thank you
so circling Institute calm or guys sang
stay calm and if you're listening the
guys actually you are listening so
that's kind of silly but uh his last
name is spelled se ng s
T Ock yes okay so thank you guy and
again thanks so much for your generous
offer of a free to our coaching session
to one lucky listener if you want to
qualify for that again just download the
show guide at Neal satin dot-com slash
circle or you can text the word passion
to the number three three four four four
and follow the instructions which will
also qualify you such a generous offer
also really I just I'm just so you know
I just have brought more of my attention
onto my one-on-one coaching just
recently now that we have our courses
going so I actually have two slots open
for four people want to work with me
one-on-one in coaching so if it they're
probably gonna fill up pretty quick so
if you're interested email me right away
and then we'll get on the phone and see
if this bit great yeah thanks for
encouraging that yeah and you must you
must also have a waiting list for when
when spots open yeah totally so if
you're listening to this and it's a
couple weeks after airtime still reach
out for for guy as well yeah great so
then before we bring it to a close guy
I'm wondering if you have a like what's
something that like a takeaway for
people if they as if they haven't gotten
enough already
yeah here's something that you should
try at home yeah I would say like I
would say and of course adjust this
based on the context but what if you go
home or or if you in work or somewhere
somewhere that in a relationship that
you care about is simply see what
happens when you introduce your
experience of what's happening right now
in the relationship even if it's just
something in fact it can be something
like and I would encourage you to
actually something that you really
really appreciate it's like you know
right now I'm noticing you know like
like you have both fingers
up and there's this smile on your face
and I'm just imagining that you're just
appreciating and reveling in a moment
and like here like seeing that I'm just
noticing I have it like a warm sense of
gratitude and affinity and grateful
gratefulness to you and then just pause
and like find out what happens but
what's cool is notice that by the time
you end up I end to end that sentence I
have no idea what's gonna happen next
right which is really different because
usually we a lot of the times we we
speak to each other in order to know
actually what's gonna happen after we
talk mmm yeah these are so much planning
involved totally so just bring in like
we talked about before is not a
triangular conversation but like an
in-the-moment just sharing what's
happening right now in a generous way
great yeah we've talked before about
having a practice of gratitude for your
partner and and it didn't occur to me
until this moment that it could just it
could also be a practice that's in the
moment so not like I'm grateful for
about this thing of yours but this is
what I'm grateful for right now in this
moment with you yes totally totally and
you used to meet you met it's like it's
just it's just so cool because it's like
I it's the possibility of growth and
aliveness of the relationships in every
single one and every single moment like
there's a whole dimension of the present
that is accessible through language in
that way that is the stuff that is what
it is aliveness itself yeah and what do
you think that would do if someone were
on a date with someone that's see that's
the other thing is like a lot of people
say you know that that if you're single
like learning circling learnings how to
circle I I hear this all the time is
that it does amazing things for your
dating life yeah yeah
like you can have these conversations
where people get really really seen they
feel really seen you've found the first
date you can start to like you can see
somebody and have the experience of
feeling somebody and being felt and
being seen that in in the first time
that like a lot of times it takes years
to have happened so I think in dating
life since dating life is such an
essential you know it is it is so
intentionally designed let's get to know
each other right to see if there's some
kind of future right well where do we
where do we where do we feel the future
in terms of that it's like how will the
conversations going right so if we can
start to become masterful about
elucidating the space and the
possibility of that conversation I mean
that like dissolve automatically
translates into kick-ass dating right
absolutely yeah and because it's gonna
take you out or at least help you
embrace the anxiety in the moment yet in
a way that's that's fun and where you're
asking yourself what am i what am I
going to learn about myself from this
person and and here's one other thing
about the anxiety when I like how a lot
times we hide our anxiety right or try
to get over it but when I display my
anxiety right it input it implicitly
implies that I care I care about how
this is going otherwise I wouldn't be
anxious right maybe I share my anxiety
but but I think the thing I can share
for sure is like that I care right I
care enough to be anxious hahaha which
introduces a whole new dynamic into the
relationship you know yeah and me and
I'm imagining too like when you're out
on a date or with your partner and
you're noticing that they are anxious or
nervous
rather than having that be some some you
know black mark against them you could
see it as an expression of how much they
really care totally totally and you can
even say
it could even be an entry point of like
oh wow like it's like I'm imagining that
you feel anxious something something's
important to you I'm imagining right
yeah and then you get to find out what
it is yeah totally and maybe that
they're thinking about the stock market
or something but yeah the dive it just
took or whatever
totally guy is so great to have you on
the show thank you so much for coming on
and sharing your wisdom about relating
and and also just on a personal note
again I'm it's I'm so grateful for your
part in my own growth and it's that's
what's allowed me to help people in
relationship and my coaching career with
with people in relationship and around
relationship and and we've spoken about
this on the show the importance of
coaching and and it's not like just
because it's great it's because there's
this capacity in a good coach to help
you see what you just couldn't you you
wouldn't see it on your own and I think
you explained it well that it's not just
necessarily the perceptiveness of the
coach although that helps a lot and
their training and their ability to
listen rather than imposing an agenda
upon their client but also it's it's the
relatedness that elicits whatever the
insight or the gift or that reveals the
blind spot yes yes absolutely absolutely
yes so thank you so much for being on
our show today and I look forward to
hearing from our listeners with feedback
about about our time together fantastic
this is awesome thank you so much my
friend
thank you for listening to another
episode of relationship alive if you
like what you've heard and want to make
it easier for other people to find out
about us please take a moment to
subscribe to our podcast and to rate and
review us on iTunes if you have
questions or comments or want to
continue the conversation you can always
join our relationship a live community
Facebook group and for more information
about today's episode visit us online at
Neal satin dot-com slash podcast or you
can always text the word passion PA SS
IO n to the number three three four four
four for more information finally do you
have a burning question that you're
hoping we can have answered here on
relationship alive either for a future
or past guests let me know and I'll see
what I can do take care and see you next
time
[Music]
you
[Music]