hello hello can I have everybody's
attention please we're gonna be starting
soon all right so first of all thank
everybody for coming I really appreciate
seeing all of your faces here makes me
happy and it's kind of a sign that we're
in the process of reclaiming sanity on
our campus that you guys all showed up
to this so thank you thank you I'm just
gonna lay some quick ground rules for
the event so first of all I want to
thank Center first out study a liberal
democracy Leadership Institute and
undergrad political theory Association
for all their support after this I'm
going to give the mic over to Professor
over menko and he's gonna announce dr.
Peterson Photography is allowed but no
flash photography please no signs are
allowed besides a regular sheet of paper
Petersen is going to speak until 8 p.m.
after which we will have a short Q&A
until 8:30 and everybody's going to line
up on this side I will be holding the
microphone actually we might not be able
to use microphone since we only have one
okay we should have a microphone for
questions starting at 8:00 I'll have you
all line up down here and we will be
over at about 8:30 and after the Q&A
event you guys are all free to leave so
thank you very much here's professor
Albert Mako
[Music]
[Applause]
well good evening and welcome to our
talk today which is called political
indoctrination on campus I am Richard
Avram Iancu associate professor of
political science and co-director with
John Sharples the English mental
gentleman right here from the history
department we are the co-directors of
the Center for the study of liberal
democracy the center along with the
young Americans for Liberty and the
undergraduate political theory
Association organized this lecture today
if you'd like to be in the loop
regarding other events you can look us
up on the intertubes and like I said our
talk today is called political
indoctrination on campus and I'm
grateful to welcome John a dr. Jordan
Peterson as our speaker this evening dr.
Peterson is professor of psychology and
clinical psychologist from Toronto
Canada he cut his teeth as a professor
of psychology at Harvard University and
now is a professor at the University of
Toronto where hopefully he enjoys the
full protection of a robust tenure
tenure policy he's the author of two
books maps of meaning which is on my
nightstand right now and 12 rules for
life an antidote to chaos dr. Peterson
is also the author or co-author of over
a hundred scientific articles on issues
such as alcoholism aggression and the
neurology of political consciousness as
I understand the titles because I didn't
read 100 articles in 2013 dr. Peterson
began recording his lectures personality
and its transformations maps meaning the
architecture a belief and uploading them
to YouTube which have been very popular
I will admit publicly that I listened to
many of his podcast this past summer
while on long training runs they don't
do much for pace but they keep you going
for a long time dr. Peterson made
something of a public splash in 2016
when he made a couple of YouTube videos
criticizing Canada's bill c16 which adds
gender expression and identity as a
protected class under the Canadian Human
Rights Act dr. Peterson argued that a
person could be prosecuted for refusing
to use preferred pronouns a similar law
has recently been passed in California
which of course raises the issue of
forced speech and the First Amendment
after these videos dr. Peterson acquired
some notoriety his YouTube channel has
gathered more
four hundred and fifty thousand
subscribers and his videos have received
more than twenty five million views as
of October 2017 his classroom lectures
on mythology were turned into a wildly
popular thirteen part TV series on TV
Ontario dr. Peterson also has a biblical
lecture series on Tuesday evenings which
are almost always sold out and if any
reason to move back to Toronto for me
that would be one of them finally I
learned that like me dr. Peterson hails
from Alberta I assume he's a right
thinking man and Dustin Edmonton Oilers
fan ladies and gentlemen dr. Peterson
[Applause]
thank you very much for inviting me can
you hear me at the back yeah it's good
all right well we might as well get
right into this so I want to go as
deeply underneath the problem as I can
possibly manage tonight so I'm going to
marry some of my ideas about what you
might describe is the grammatical
structure of belief with some more
overtly political analysis concentrating
on what actually what constitutes
ideology because one of the things that
I've been trying to figure out and I
guess this is part of my attempt to
wrestle with some of the actual problems
that the post modernists opposed because
I don't mean as people or as thinkers I
mean conceptually because you always
have to give the devil his due so to
speak and there are elements of
postmodern thought like the idea that
there's an infinite number of
interpretations for any finite set of
facts that actually happened to be true
and there aren't they're quite
problematic and it's it's for good
reasons as well as bad reasons that
post-modernism has become such a
dominant strain of thought and so it's
necessary to take it seriously and I've
been trying to one of the things I've
been trying to figure out is is there a
reasonable way of distinguishing
philosophy from an ideologies and the
Pope the post modernist answer to that
is basically know that it's ideology all
the way down like the turtles all the
way down you never escaped from the from
the grip of your of your viewpoint in
some sense and and there's some truth in
that but there's not enough truth that's
the thing and one of the hallmarks I
would say of both post-postmodern an
ideological thinking is the proclivity
to reduce very complex phenomena to
single causes but anyways so we're going
to we're going to go underneath things
as far as we possibly can so the first
thing that I'd like to point out is
or like to discuss is the actual problem
that were that we're all trying to solve
in some sense including the ideologues
who claim to have the let's say
interests of either the working class or
there were or the oppressed uppermost in
their in their imagination in their
heart or in their intellectual concerns
and there's absolutely no doubt that
there is oppression and and that there's
no shortage of suffering in the world
and I do think that's not only the
fundamental the fundamental reality of
the world and and this is an existential
theme and it was developed at least to
some degree by Martin Heidegger and
Heidegger had a concept that he called
throne Ness which is an interesting an
interesting idea and throne Ness is is a
brief description of the arbitrary
nature of human being or even of being
itself and the arbitrary nature it can
be his the word he used for that which
is a German word can be translated in
other ways it can be translated as
abandon or dereliction or dejection
which obviously are much harsher words
than mere throne this throne this is
more of a detached term but what it
means is that it's a characteristic of
human conscious experience to be
underpinned by arbitrary realities that
have nothing to do in some sense with
your choice as a being and so some of
the elements of being thrown are that
you're born at a certain time rather
than a different time that seems like
it's an irrational fact that's how young
would describe it Carl Jung as it's an
irrational fact because there's no real
way of accounting for it from from a
causal perspective not not subjectively
speaking and you're born a certain race
and you're born with a certain level of
intelligence let's say although that can
be impaired certainly with enough effort
and you're born in a certain culture
with a certain language and at a certain
socio-economic in a certain
socio-economic class and with a certain
degree of attractiveness and those are
things that are all handed to you in
some sense they they make up the
in some sense they make up the axiomatic
structure of your being and some of the
more advantageous and others are
disadvantageous and you're stuck with
them and that really is a problem
partly because life in and of itself is
a problem and a problem of suffering but
also because it seems quite evident that
well or at least that you could make a
strong case that the the talents and
catastrophes of life are by no means
equally distributed and so in some sense
there seems to be an intrinsic we might
regard it from the perspective of the
standards of human justice and perhaps
human mercy as well as something
intrinsically unfair unjust about the
structure of existence itself now I like
the exact existentialist take on that
because what the existentialists do is
attribute that inequality and injustice
and say unfairness to the structure of
being itself and pose that as the
central problem of life and I find that
very realistic I like this painting by
Van Gogh I think it does a very good job
of expressing that you know he's an old
man and he's obviously sorrowful and and
you know he's not rich as you can tell
by his shoes and like it's rough and and
he's a nexus of oppression and perhaps
Oh a nexus of oppression in that he may
have served as an oppressor but also
someone who's suffering and oppressed as
a consequence of the conditions of his
life and so then the question might be
well why is life like that and that's
where and what might be done about it
and that's where the differences really
start to arise so we can start from the
perspective of the fact that life
presents a universal problem to those of
us who are alive and conscious now there
are various what would you call the
Metta theories that account for the
existence of this suffering my
interpretation of the story of Genesis
essentially which in some sense
describes the introduction of suffering
into the world is that what what seems
to happen in the story of Genesis is
that human beings originally emerge is a
mythological rep
so it's a deep fictional representation
that's one way of thinking about it
keeping in mind as you might that
fiction can be more true than truth
which is partly why we're so attracted
to it because fiction distills truth and
presents it in a much more concentrated
form than than a mere description of
everyday reality and in the Genesis
story there's a there seems to be an
association between the development of
vision and self-consciousness and the
awareness of death and the awareness of
good and evil those things happen pretty
much at exactly the same time and the
consequence of that awareness of or that
self-consciousness is a dawning
awareness of vulnerability you remember
in the story of Genesis when Adam and
Eve opened their eyes or have their eyes
opened as a consequence of falling prey
to temptation the scales fall from their
eyes and they realize that they're naked
and then they immediately cover
themselves up and of course the question
is what does it mean to realize that
you're naked and there's a variety of
complex quest answers to that one is
that well if you're naked a common
nightmare is to be naked in front of a
crowd and the reason that that's a
nightmare is because well people don't
like to have their full vulnerability
exposed to the judgmental eye of the
crowd and for good reason like everybody
has what would you say it may be an
inbuilt sense of shame about their
fundamental inadequacy in relationship
to the difficulties of life and so the
story of Genesis which i think is a
foundational story well I don't think
it's a foundational story it's obviously
a foundational story foundation story of
Western culture suggest that it's
mankind's knowledge of its own nature
that leads to not only to suffering but
to work you know because once you
realize that you're vulnerable and that
that vulnerability never really goes
away
you always have to prepare for the
future because even if you solve the
problems that are right in front of you
this moment that doesn't mean that
you've solved the plethora of problems
that are likely to pop up for you
tomorrow and next week and next month
and next year and and that in some sense
are beyond your ability to finally solve
so but there's a different viewpoint I
think that comes
of the Marxist perspective and I'm going
to talk to you about Marxism and
post-modernism both of which I regard as
variant strands of the same ideology and
as I said I'll define why I think
they're ideological and the the the
thing that strikes me so clearly about
the Marxist perspective is that the
finger is always pointed at inadequate
social order as the root cause of
suffering and that just seems to me to
be I don't know it's it's so naive that
it's difficult to understand why people
can possibly fall for it maybe it's
partly because there's some hope
embedded in it right
there's an idea that well suffering
might be transcended if we could just
organize our societies properly but it
seems to be number one that that's
highly unlikely and number two as
Dostoevsky pointed out even if we did
organize our societies so that no one
had anything to worry about from a
material perspective so everyone let's
say had enough bread and shelter that
were the kind of insane creatures that
would blow that apart and fragment that
sort of static utopian perfection just
so something strange and interesting
might happen and I think that's a really
that's a really devastating critique and
you know no Dostoevsky formulated that
back in the late 1800s he had thought
through the consequences of communist
utopia before it even manifested itself
as a political force and I think put his
finger on exactly at least one of its
primary weaknesses so you know if we
were delivered from suffering it's not
necessarily clear that we would be happy
about that because one of the things
that does characterize human beings is
this intense desire for experience that
transcends the normative you know and
people will go out and look for
difficult things to do just for the sake
of doing difficult things they climb
mountains and they engage in extreme
sports and they put their lives in
danger and there's no technical reason
for that and it doesn't seem like a very
intelligent thing to do from the pure
perspective of self-preservation but
we're certainly capable of it and the
problem the Marxists seem to lay the
reason for suffering at the foot of
inadequate social structure and but they
go farther than that they also describe
the social structure as it exists and
this is where the idea
the patriarchy is derived as far as I'm
concerned as something that is
necessarily an upper class or an
oppressive class against the oppressed
class and what the people who fit in
those different categories can vary with
classic Marxism it was the rich against
the poor or the poor against the rich
right the burrs was C against the
proletariat and that's been transformed
I would say by the post modernists using
a fairly self-evident sleight of hand
into identity politics where the
oppressed oppressor narrative just takes
different forms according to the
identity that happens to be plugged into
the same mediational structure and what
seems to happen as a consequence of that
and I mean there's pretty good data
about this with regards to the genesis
of intense intergroup conflict one of
the things that predicts intense
intergroup conflict like the conflict in
Rwanda and certainly also happened in
Nazi Germany is that genocide all
activities are often marketed as
pre-emptive strikes against an oppressor
class right and so that would have been
the Jews in Germany and in in Rwanda the
same narrative emerged it's very common
to to dichotomize this society as
oppressor and oppressed and then for the
oppressed to rise up and take out the so
called oppressors even before anything
of any of any particular violence occurs
because of this enhanced sense of
victimization and the moral high ground
that it seems to provide the logic being
something like if we're being oppressed
and we have every right to to defend
ourselves so to speak even against
threats that are only in some way
imaginary now I don't want to get to
cut-and-dried about that because you
know it certainly is the case that there
isn't a political or economic system in
the entire world that lacks corruption
and so the idea that this the social
structure is in part corrupt enough so
that everyone who is embodied in that
social structure doesn't necessarily
have an equal chance to manifest their
gifts say and rise to the top is
certainly true because human beings are
completely incapable of producing
perfect social structures for a variety
of reasons our own blindness the fact
that we inherit structures that we don't
really understand that are all demented
and bent in one way or another and so
there's always an element of truth to
critical claims that if we just got our
act together better from a social
perspective that everything would be
more fair and just but to say that is
not to simultaneously justify the claim
that all the reasons that human beings
are suffering and that life is unfair
and unjust is because the social
structure is corrupt and oppressive
right you got to think in multivariate
terms if you have any degree of
intelligence at all and for any complex
phenomena there's generally a multitude
of causes and they are not easy to
differentiate I mean that's partly what
social scientists is do is to take a
look at a complex outcome suffering
certainly being one of those and to look
at the potential contributors of
multitude of factors now it's very
difficult because those factors are not
easy to categorize and they overlap and
so on and so forth but you have to be
pretty what would you say
motivated and stupid I would say both at
the same time to use a univariate
hypothesis to to talk to to account for
a complex phenomena I don't care what
the phenomena is and so that's another
hallmark of ideological thinking is that
the causal story collapses into a single
dimension you see that often in
psychopathology 2 where you know people
who get obsessive about something can't
shake like a particular idea that
possesses them paranoid people are like
that and people who have eating
disorders especially anorexia are like
that is their entire value structure
collapses into the dimension of thin
equals beautiful and good and it's very
rigid and black and white and it does
them absolutely no good so now some of
the problems with with the Marxist
perspective seems to be that victimhood
the sense of enhanced victimhood tends
to produce an intense sense of
resentment and that's a very bad idea
because resentment is a very toxic and
violent emotion it's also very
grateful which is one of the things I
would really say about especially the
radical left student types especially at
Ivy League universities I mean it's
really quite a spectacle to see people
at places like Yale come out and agitate
as a consequence of the realization of
their own oppression when by any
reasonable standard current or
historical they're probably in the top
1/100 of a percent perhaps better than
that of all the people who have ever
lived
anywhere ever and so it really it's
really it's really quite staggering to
me that the top point zero zero one
percent can express their resentment
about the top point zero zero zero one
percent in such strident terms without
noticing that exactly the same claims of
privilege apply to them by as long as
all you have to do is transform the the
bin in which you're doing the the
privilege comparisons and that becomes
immediately self-evident and you know
the fact that as Americans let's say us
North Americans since I'm a Canadian
that we're staggeringly privileged
compared to the rest of the world is
certainly a consequence of the of what
you might describe is the arbitrariness
of our political borders and so but to
forget that when you're claiming a
particular brand of oppression for
yourself seems to me to be very
ungrateful at the least and certainly
motivated let's say politically because
I think it justifies your expression of
hatred for those that tiny fraction of
people who are still better off than you
and also a degree of historical
ignorance that's absolutely staggering
in its magnitude and a complete
indictment of our education system which
should be indicted in every possible way
so now the Marxists might claim to their
benefit let's say with this worldview of
class struggle as being the primary
driver of human history and the well-off
socioeconomically because that's pretty
much the only way they defined well-off
which is also something I take great
objection to because there's lots of
hierarchies in the world and there are
many important hierarchies and not all
of
can be reduced to socioeconomic status
by any stretch of the imagination
imagine if you were 80 years old and you
had 20 million dollars you know you
might be perfectly happy to get rid of
all that money if you could be 18 again
so it's and you know one of the best
predictors of wealth in North America is
actually age because you know young
people haven't actually had much time to
make money whereas old people have had
quite a bit of time but the problem with
being old and rich is that you're still
old and that actually turns out to be
quite a serious problem because no
matter how rich you are you eventually
die and so the money is the money has
very delimited if delimited effect with
regards to addressing the fundamental
problems of the suffering of life and we
know perfectly well from the empirical
perspective that once you have enough
money so that the bill collectors aren't
chasing you around essentially something
like the beginnings of a middle-class
existence or maybe the upper end of the
working class then additional money has
absolutely no bearing whatsoever on your
psychological well-being and that's
actually an indication of the
limitations of material comfort let's
say as a medication for the for the
suffering that's attendant on life it's
another thing that's very weak about the
Marxists and I think very interestingly
contradictory because they're very anti
capital in their structure but they're
so damn materialistic that it's
absolutely mind-boggling because the
Marxists are actually more convinced
that money is useful than most
capitalists as far as I can tell because
they believe that that money is in fact
the solution to all life's problems the
problem is is that just the right people
don't have the money and I think that's
a staggeringly naive perspective because
there's many there's many problems in
life that money just cannot solve and
there's a fair number of them in that it
actually makes worse
so anyways having said all that you
could also still make the case I used to
work for a socialist party in Canada
when I was a kid about six about time I
was 14 till the time I was about 17
before I figured out what was wrong not
so much with socialism per se but with
ideology per se and I actually admired
that the socialist leaders that I had
the fortune to be introduced to because
at that point they were very much voice
for the working class a lot of union
leaders and people like that you know so
they're classic democratic socialists on
the labor end of the distribution it's
absolutely necessary for labor and the
working class to have a political voice
something the Democrats might keep in
mind so and maybe they wouldn't lose
their elections quite so frequently no I
really think it's appalling you know
because it's necessary for the working
class to have a political voice so and
to have that transformed into identity
politics is a real catastrophe anyways I
think that the people that I met many of
them were genuinely concerned with the
problems of the working-class and you
know more power to them and so I think
there are people on the Left who who
genuinely are trying to make a
difference for people who could use a
fair shot at opportunity in life but at
the same time I noticed that a
tremendous number of the people
especially the lower end worker party
worker protestor types were more peevish
and resentful than good-hearted and kind
and it was about that time that I came
across George Orwell's famous critique
of left-wing thinking and in the UK when
in a book called road to Wigan pier
where he basically made the claim that
the Socialists that he knew especially
the middle class ones didn't give a damn
about the poor they just hated the rich
and that's I mean that is something
we're thinking about for a very long
period of time because hatred actually
turns out to be a very powerful
motivation you know and and if you think
about the sorts of things that happened
in the Soviet Union and all these places
that were supposed to be workers
paradises
if you look at the outcome and you had
to infer whether it was goodness of
heart and kindheartedness and care for
the working man that produced the
genocides or outright bitter resentful
resentment and hatred it's a lot easier
to draw a causal path from the negative
emotion to the outcome than from the
positive kind-hearted benevolence to
thou you just don't get goo lags out of
benevolence that's just not how it works
so I think the bloody historical
evidence is clear although I have read
the most convoluted pathological
pathetic
twisted rationalizations of what
happen stay installing this Russia that
you could possibly manufacture it's as
if a stack of corpses that would reach
halfway to the moon isn't enough
evidence for the pathology of a certain
form of belief so well some people can't
be convinced by anyone's death but their
own I suppose so so you know now I want
to talk about post-modernism a little
bit what seems to me that's much
Michelle Foucault in the middle and a
more reprehensible individual you could
hardly ever discover or even dream up no
matter how twisted your imagination and
Foucault and Derrida I would say there's
more but I would say they're the two
architects of the of the of the post
modernist movement and in brief I think
what they did was in the late 60s and
early 70s they were avowed Marxist some
way way after anyone with any shred of
ethical decency had stopped being a
Marxist by that time even jean-paul
Sartre had woken up enough to figure out
that the Soviets hadn't assured in the
kingdom of heaven
you know he had evidence stretching back
45 years that he could have attended to
if he would have been willing to open
his eyes talk about bad faith which was
his critical critique essentially is
something quite staggering the post
modernists knew that they were pretty
much done with regards to pushing their
classic Marxism by the late 60s in the
early 70s because the evidence that
stellen is Russia not only Stellina
certainly Lenin was no no saint by any
stretch of the imagination that the
killing certainly got underway while he
was still alive and and continued after
Stalin was dead as well although perhaps
with not the same degree of brutality
and efficiency and then there is of
course Maoist China where the estimates
you know nobody knows how many people
died under Mao but the estimates are run
as high as a hundred million people
which actually turns out to be quite a
few people and the fact that we can't
keep count accurately you know without
an error margin of something in the tens
of millions just tells you exactly how
horrible the situation was they
transformed the Marxist
dialogue of rich versus poor into
oppressed versus oppressor and Foucault
in particular who never fit in anywhere
and who was an outcast in many ways and
a bitter one in a suicidal one his
entire life did everything he possibly
could with his staggering IQ to figure
out every treacherous way possible to
undermine the structure that wouldn't
accept him in all his peculiarities and
it's no wonder because there would be no
way of making a structure that could
possibly function if it was composed of
people who were is peculiar bitter and
resentful as Michele Foucault so you
couldn't imagine this functioning
society that would be composed of
individuals with his particular makeup
in any case he did put his brain to work
trying to figure out a how to resurrect
Marxism under a new guys let's say and B
how to justify the fact that it wasn't
his problem that he was an outsider it
was actually everyone else's problem and
he did a pretty damn good job of that
and laid the groundwork for this for the
what would you call it the rise of the
marginalized against the center and
Derrida's thinking is very much the same
you know Derek even though Foucault and
Derrida hated each other and and
regarded each other as intellectual
charlatans which was about the only
thing either of them was ever really
correct about so Derrida was also and
Derrida in some ways is even a more
treacherous thinker because he makes the
claim in some sense that like a
political system has a center around
which the majority congregate let's say
it's it's it's quite similar to two
fuko's analysis and that there are there
are people who are outside the category
system and then which is obviously true
because no matter how you categorize
people there are certain people inside
the category and certain people outside
that's actually why you categorize
things right because of every category
holds every entity then every every
cognitive operation is infinitely
complex you can't manage that way to
categorize you have to include and
exclude in the very nature of
categorization and you can't just scrap
categorization because without
simplification and categorization you
actually can't function in the world you
just died right you die of excess stress
it's something like something like that
happens to schizophrenic people because
their category systems break down
they're completely incapable of
functioning in the world as a
consequence of that anyways then fluke
you know Derrida went and Foucault as
well went a step farther and this is one
of the incredibly crooked elements of
their thinking I think another sleight
of hand which was well category systems
exclude political systems exclude
economic systems exclude any hierarchy
of value excludes obviously because if
there was a hierarchy of value some
things are more valuable than others and
the less valuable things are excluded
because otherwise it wouldn't be a
hierarchy of value but the the next
claim they essentially make is that the
reason that those hierarchies of value
are constructed isn't to produce
whatever it is that's of value but to
exclude and to maintain the structure of
power that's intrinsic to the hierarchy
of value and that's a that's an
unbelievably crooked claim because there
are multiple reasons why a hierarchy
value might be put into place their
hierarchies of beauty and there's
hierarchies of competence hierarchies of
intelligence and and attractiveness and
and athletic ability and musical talent
there's multiple hierarchies and in
order for those things to exist at a
high order in order for us to to to do
laud what would you say musical genius
we have to excuse all the people we have
to exclude all the people who can only
squawk their clarinet from the hierarchy
because otherwise you don't have any
music and there's no up and there's no
direction and so to claim that the
purpose of the hierarchy is to exclude
is unbelievably crooked and it's a
central claim for both for both Foucault
and and Derrida it's one of those
slights of hands that people don't quite
notice but that have absolutely
catastrophic effects now for Foucault
and Derrida they you could here's how
you could imagine their world
essentially you know for the for the
philosopher hobbes life was nasty
brutish and short and people were at
each other's throats in the state of
nature right but hobbes really thought
about that
as a has the chaos of individuals and he
believed that a central authority had to
exert force in order to organize that
intrinsic chaos so that some degree of
peace could reign it's kind of the
opposite of jean-jacques Rousseau's
theory which was that human beings were
intrinsically good and and the state the
the government was intrinsically bad and
that all of what made people evil
derived from the state I would say if
you put Hobbes and Rousseau together you
actually get the truth even though they
do seem to be coming at it from opposite
perspectives because people are actually
good and evil and social structures are
also good and evil and you know it's
paradoxical and we don't like
paradoxical categories but that's still
how it is what what Foucault and Derrida
and the post modernists did was that
they kind of added a collective element
to that so they're Hobbesian world isn't
a world of individuals struggling
against one another in the initial state
of warlike nature it's it's groups of
individuals bound by whatever their
identity happens to be struggling
against each each other for power
because in the postmodern neo-marxist
universe there's nothing but power and
there's a variety of reasons for that
partly it's because the post modernists
don't admit that there are any standards
outside of arbitrary opinion essentially
they don't really believe in the real
world which is why they can generate
critiques of science for example which
is increasingly characterized as nothing
but part of the Eurocentric patriarchy's
what would you call desire to impose
their power structure on the rest of the
world despite the fact that it also
makes planes fly and computers operate
and well you know yeah exactly so and
it's a rare bloody
social justice warrior that doesn't have
a an iPhone or a Android that wouldn't
work if quantum mechanics wasn't
actually correct because the fact that
quantum mechanics is correct is one of
the reasons why these unbelievably
highly developed pieces of technology
actually functions so they and
whine about the patriarchal patriarchal
underpinnings of Eurocentric science and
use the gadgets all the time to Agra
to complain about it so it's really
pretty appalling so anyways anyways the
worldview of the of the postmodern
neo-marxists is that everybody is
basically not an individual because
that's really a fiction and it's a
Eurocentric patriarchal fiction at that
but a member of whatever their identity
group happens to be and there's no real
possibility of communication between
identity groups hence phenomenon like
cultural appropriation and so it's a war
of all groups against all groups and
it's all it's nothing but a struggle for
power and there's no higher order ethic
to be referred to because for the post
modernists there is no such thing as a
higher order ethic there's no such thing
as a uniting narrative that's that's a
hallmark of their thinking now of course
that doesn't work out in practice
because without an ethic or a
higher-order value there isn't anything
you can do with your life because you
keep undermining yourself if
everything's just a whim and subjective
there's and there's no hierarchy of
values then what the hell do you do when
you get up in the morning if one thing
isn't better than the other you might as
well just lay there and smother yourself
with a pillow would be a lot easier than
opening your eyes and struggling in the
world so so it's completely it's a
self-defeating philosophy and I think
that's part of the reason why it's more
or less self-evident that it's a mask
for the continuation of Marxism because
at least Marxism has as one of its
advantages a direction it's an ethic
right you have something to struggle
against even though what you're
struggling against is certainly one of
the things that you actually rely on and
second something that you have to
oversimplify in a very ungrateful and
resentful way to justify fighting
against it to begin with and that's
especially true in Western cultures
because as pathological as they
certainly are which is approximately as
pathological as all of you are there are
a lot less pathological than almost
everything that's ever happened and
pretty much everything that's currently
happening elsewhere in the world and you
can kind of tell that by the fact that
people tend to cut to emigrate to the
West rather than the reverse now you
know the postmodern neo-marxists would
have an answer to that which would be
the only reason the West functions is
because it's raped the rest of the
humanity and the planet but you know the
less said about that the better and Marx
was wrong about this too the
proletarians have nothing to lose but
their chains that actually wasn't true
they lost their food they yeah yeah you
might see that happening again in
Venezuela where they where they're
having a hard time the middle class are
having a hard time getting toilet paper
which is a lot less funny than it sounds
they lost their families that's good
they lost their land they lost their
freedom they lost they lost their right
to exist without pain they lost the
right to honestly suffer and talk about
it which is a terrible thing to learn
lose and then they lost their lives so
that was wrong and he can smile all he
want about it but it wasn't very cute
this is nice I saw this on Twitter today
when Karl Marx died in 1883 the average
Englishman was three times richer that
he was when what Marx was born in 1818
that's world GDP per person in 1919 90
international dollars and you see that
there's an unbelievable spike that
happened at about 1895 which was let's
let's put it this way it was precisely
and exactly the opposite of what the
Marxists predicted but you know when
your predictions fail and you're an
ideologue you just gerrymander the
axioms of your theory because otherwise
you'd have to drop the damn thing and
then you're plunged into a state of
existential chaos which is no joke and
you have to reformulate yourself so you
know you don't want to underestimate the
difficulty of doing that but but it's
still relatively amusing especially when
you consider that that unbelievable
increase in gross domestic product per
person actually happened despite the
best efforts of the Marxists to prevent
it from happening and so god only knows
we where we would be if 120 million
people weren't sacrificed painfully and
pointlessly in the 20th century to this
idiot god of socialist utopia
was turned out to be murderous beyond
comprehension post-modernism an attitude
of skepticism irony toward a skepticism
towards everything but post-modernism I
might add
irony toward rejection of grand
narratives that's a lot bigger a problem
than you think because actually the
things that unite people are grand
narratives you know a narrative is a--
as a cognitive structure that Orient's
you towards an ideal that's what a
narrative is you know if you go see a
movie which is a narrative the hero is
up to something first of all there's a
hero because why the hell go to the
movie otherwise you don't want to watch
a bunch of people bumble around randomly
there's no you're not interested in that
at all you want to see someone who has a
problem to solve and who who's applying
an ethic to the solution of that problem
can be a bad ethic that would be an
antihero right could be a pathological
ethic that's a good object lesson
anyways but it's certainly an ethic and
so it's grand narratives that unite
people and when the post modernists
becomes skeptical about the grand
narratives what that essentially means
is that they're demolishing the the
hyper truths I would say the fictions
the the the true fictions that unite us
as people and stop us from being at each
other's throats enable us to compete and
to cooperate in a peaceful and
productive manner at least some of the
time which is a miracle in and of itself
and should be regarded as such right I
mean we're so blind in the West to the
miraculous nature of our culture that
it's well it's a consequence of being
privileged let's say although I hate
that word we could call it fortunate
know when I and Hirsi Ali came to
Holland one of the things that's really
struck me when I read her book infidel
she was very taken aback by the fact
that you could stop by a bus a bus stop
and there'd be a little digital display
there that said when the bus was coming
and when it but the digital display said
the bus was coming then the bus would
show up and she just couldn't accustom
herself to that it was like an
existential produced existential terror
and it's no wonder because you just
think about how bloody impossible that
is
that's impossible I mean the Dutch could
manage it because they managed you know
a dozen impossible things before
breakfast they live underwater for God's
sake
so but you know she was also absolutely
amazed that you could go ask policeman
for help and they wouldn't just hurt you
and take all your money and that is also
another form of miracle the kind of
thing that we just take for granted
skepticism towards ideologies and
universalism well we can scrap the
ideology part including objective
notions of Reason human nature social
progress absolute truth and objective
reality and it's an unbelievably
corrosive it's an unbelievably corrosive
system of thought because first of all
it defines hierarchy as power and that's
actually technically wrong even Friends
de Waal who's been studying chimpanzee
hierarchies has established quite
clearly that the most brutal and
powerful alpha chimp is not the one who
establishes the most stable dominance
harkey's let's call them social
hierarchies because the brutal tyrant
chimp gets torn apart by to subordinate
chimps 3/4 as strong as him as soon as
he turns a blind eye the more stable
hierarchies even among chimps are ones
that are that are governed by someone
you know when a chimp that's got some
physical power and some capacity for
intimidation but who's perfectly capable
of establishing reciprocal relationships
with other male and female chimps so
that he's got friends and allies around
him it stabilizes as a rule so to speak
so the idea that hierarchies in
functioning societies are primarily a
consequence of power is cynical beyond
belief apart from being wrong so and it
also destroys the idea of a hierarchy of
competence which I really think is one
of the reasons for the theory to begin
with because we know even from the
empirical data that in Western societies
the best two predictors of long term
life success our intelligence and
conscientiousness and they do a pretty
good job of predicting long term life
success accounting for about 25 to 30
percent of the variance which is a lot
by social science standards and it's
kind of a testament to the integrity of
our societies that complex jobs tend to
be filled by intelligent hard-working
people and thank God for that because
who the hell do you want
running them you don't want to be doing
that randomly most of those things are
incredibly complex and difficult and so
you better have disciplined people who
were willing to work 60 hours a week and
who were super smart governing those
things or or the lights go off and they
should be off right now because it's
impossible to keep a power grid
functioning it's not like it it's not
like entropy isn't trying to tear it to
bits at every second right there are
thousands of people out there working
madly to stop this thing from doing what
it should be doing which is to fail and
so competence is everywhere and it's
absolute mean you think about how many
competent people have to be working
behind the scenes so that you can all
come here you know in your leisure
fundamentally and sit for two hours
peacefully in lecture it's absolutely
beyond belief so I think that they were
after the destruction of the idea of
competence itself and we're getting
we're walking down that road very very
rapidly as well as trying to destroy the
idea of the world and that's part of the
what would you call it the attempt to to
insist that there's no such thing
outside the text which was one of
Derrida's great statements there's no
such thing outside the text and what he
meant by that in some sense was
everything his interpretation and there
is a manner in which that's true but
it's not the kind of final truth that
the post modernists likes like to think
it is they're a little too tangled up in
language so and that's not a good thing
so here's where we're at with regards to
the to the spread of postmodern
neo-marxist ideas and these are CI being
true you know how you you can identify
the right wingers you don't want to hang
around with because they talk about
white supremacy and maybe they have a
swastika it's like that's a little
science and if your conservative move
away from those people and most
conservatives do that you know I in the
aftermath of Charlottesville for example
shapiro immediately distanced himself
from the radical right and William
Buckley did the same thing in the 1960s
1970s when he divorced himself from the
John Birch Society
conservatives are pretty good at putting
borders around things in fact that's a
good definition of a conservative I'm
serious I'm serious
like conservatives like to have borders
around things whereas liberals think
well if you have too many borders
information can't flow and that's true
and the conservatives say no borders
chaos and the and the Liberals say too
many borders stagnation and those are
both right so you have to argue about
how thick the border should be but
anyways liberals have a hell of a time
drawing borders and that means they
can't separate themselves from the
radical leftists who have absolutely no
interest whatsoever in sustaining the
genuine liberals they just use them as
useful idiots to take a phrase from the
Soviet Union and here are the hallmarks
I think of the pathological left I think
that if but someone is pushing this
quarter nity on you then you should you
should be very suspicious of them in
every possible way and you should resist
it as much as you possibly can diversity
inclusivity
well you don't those are those are the
minor demons of the radical left let's
say equity it's like no we're not going
there that's equality of outcome not
equality of opportunity and equality of
outcome I'll tell you why in a bit is an
absolutely pathological idea there's
nothing about it that's good it's
impossible to implement it's
fundamentally motivated by resentment
and it's a lie so I like the fact that
those three make the acronym die though
because that seems to be approximately
appropriate so and then the worst of the
bunch is white privilege because as far
as I'm concerned there's absolutely no
difference between that statement and
then outright racist slur they're the
same thing so and it's quite
straightforward why it's not doesn't
take a bloody genius to figure this out
I mean what constitutes racism it's the
ascription of the hypothetical qualities
of a group to all the individuals who
compose that group so white privilege
it's like even the interest people who
are interested in intersectionality
you'd think would have some problem with
that it's like what about all the poor
white people well they're more
privileged than the poor people who
aren't white I suppose but but you know
that's a pretty bloody weak argument in
my estimation and to call it privileges
so something and to associate it with
race per se is also something
extraordinarily interesting and we'll
get into that a little bit so let's talk
about diversity okay
well first of all we have to define it
you know when Jonathan Hyde has been
trying to define it as diversity of
opinion I think it might be useful to
define it as diversity of personality
because there's actually more
variability and personality within
groups of people regardless of the
group's than there is between groups of
people so that should be said again
there's more variability within groups
of people then between groups of people
and to state otherwise is to state
something that is in fact categorically
racist because if I said well there's
more difference between groups of people
than within groups then I'm saying that
each racial group is an entity unto
itself which could be true but happens
to actually not be so the diversity
definition is really quite interesting
and right now that's being defined by
race sex or gender sexual orientation
and disability although there's a very
large number of other potential
dimensions of of difference that could
be included in the list of oppressed
versus oppressor that's actually why
intersectionality has emerged you know
because people figured out well you know
you're having a harder time if you're
black let's say and you're having a
harder time if you're a woman
depending on how you define harder time
but you're even having a harder time if
you're a black woman there's an
intersection there it's like okay fine
well where are we gonna stop with the
intersections I figured out the other
day if you if each of those categories
could be differentiated into a hundred
subunits you know who knows how many
there are with gender sex there's an
infinite number of them apparently then
you need six dimensions before you're
down to one in the billion so six
dimensions of intersectionality brings
you down to the level of the individual
which is the flaw in what would you call
it identity politics theory manifesting
itself as an internal contradiction so I
think that's very funny if you push if
you push intersectionality to its final
frontier you break down everyone to the
level of the individual which is
actually what I think Western culture
figured out about 4,000
years ago is that the ultimate minority
is the individual and the only and the
fairest Society is one where individuals
are allowed to rise to the level of
their ability because how what are you
gonna do you're gonna covary out all
their differences it's impossible it's
technically impossible there's a given
postmodern logic itself there's an
infinite number of ways to categorize a
finite number of facts so how are you
going to determine which dimensions of
difference are the ones that should be
adjusted for the individual since
there's an unlimited number of
dimensions of variability intelligence
height attractiveness age personality
there's five dimensions of personality
socioeconomic class right degree of
historical oppression you know that can
be seriously multiplied endlessly so
what are you gonna do control for all
those it's like good luck that's never
going to happen and then diversity in
the service of what exactly you know the
idea that a group of people that's
racially diverse is better at problem
solving than a group of people who isn't
there isn't a shred of evidence to
support that idea
it's a presupposition a supposition and
it also brings you back to something
like racial essentialism right I mean so
so in every possible way logically and
practically it's a non-starter and I
think the diversity issue is irrelevant
anyways because I think the fundamental
reason that the postmodern neo-marxist
push diversity is because it's another
way that they can attack the power
structure that they regard as
patriarchal and oppressive say well it's
in the service of the working class and
the oppressed it's like we already
covered that a little bit with regards
to the Marxist claims to be working on
the side of the working class when in
fact what really happened was that many
of them perhaps most were killed and the
ones that weren't killed were certainly
at least made extraordinarily miserable
which maybe is even better than killing
them if you're particularly malevolent
today and see one of the things that's
happening that's quite pathological is
and very interesting is that mmm-hmm the
post modernists and this is I think a
direct consequence of training of
activists in universities and the
universities have more
be ashamed of than you could list in a
two-hour lecture
I think someone estimated today that
about 4,000 colleges and universities
will go bankrupt in the u.s. in the next
ten years and as far as I'm concerned
the faster the better so so the Toronto
District School Board announced recently
that it will now give priority to the
hiring of diverse staff especially in
racialized backgrounds why in I don't
know I suspect it's because the people
who wrote the damn policy are
functionally illiterate but you'd
certainly think that if you looked at
the intelligence of their policies and
so what's that priority to the hiring of
diverse staff especially in racialized
backgrounds what the hell did that mean
I tweeted that if you weren't gonna hire
straight white sisters it's I guess this
gender does the same thing but we use it
just because it's such a hateful phrase
if you're not going to hire straight
cisgendered men as teachers why the hell
do you let them into the faculties of
Education to begin with you might as
well just exclude them before they waste
four years on your what would you call
them ideologically rigid pseudo
education a little nonsense equity this
is something I really like
there's the little happy thing equality
of opportunity on the Left versus equity
on the right you see the little kid gets
to lift up and eat the Apple isn't that
lovely but what happens really in equity
is that everyone gets to have exactly
the same depth of grave and they're
perfectly equal when there's six feet
under and if you not if you don't
believe that then you can look at what
happened in the Ukraine in the 1930s
during the whole of Madore when the the
Russians decided that with the Soviets
decided that it was perfectly reasonable
to ascribe class guilt to the successful
farmers and wiped them out and then
starved six million Ukrainians to death
thus establishing a certain equality
this woman she's I remind this is the
Shakespeare quote one I think it's from
Richard the third but I'm not exactly
sure
one can smile and smile and smile and
still be a villain and you know she's a
lovely looking old grandmotherly type of
creature but that doesn't mean that
everything that she did wasn't
pathological beyond
leaf and it was her her what would you
call them
second-rate pseudo-intellectual
opinionated meanderings that produced
the the the concept of white privilege
and what she did was make a list of all
the ways that she felt that she was
particularly privileged in society that
was her bloody methodology and that's
the sort of methodology that these
pseudo disciplines that have invaded the
universities get away with because the
rest of the faculty you're too damn
timid to stand up and say the emperor
has no clothes better stand up and say
something about it pretty soon because
you can bloody well be sure that they're
coming for the physicians and the
evolutionary biologists and
psychologists next and they're not weak
and they're well organized and so it's a
very terrible thing so anyways these
papers rely on personal examples because
we know how methodical a rigorous that
is of unearned advantage as maket but
that whole methodology thing that
rigorous methodology that's just another
manifestation of the Eurocentric
patriarchy so you don't have to be
concerned about your damn methodology
when you have your personal experience
to rely on and so here's the privileges
I can if I wish to arrange arrange to be
in the company of people of my race most
of the time if I should need to move I
can be pretty sure of renting or
purchasing housing in an area which I
can afford in which I would want to live
I can be pretty sure that my neighbors
in such a location will be neutral or
pleasant to me unless they know that I'm
the author of the fundamental paper on
white privilege I can go shopping alone
most of the time pretty well assured
that I will not be followed or harassed
it's like well the first thing is as lot
of those so-called privileges are just
the consequence of living in a
reasonably civilized society and apply
to pretty much everyone and the second
thing is is that there's no reason to
associate this with race that's another
one of these absolutely pathological
slights of hand how about we call it
majority privilege you think that's not
the case for for the majority members of
every society that's ever functioned
that's actually being functional
obviously there's a majority advantage
if there wasn't a bloody majority
advantage people wouldn't make societies
the whole point of making a society is
so that the people within this society
have the advantage
so now you might say well when people
are being integrated into this society
they should be given those advantages
are provided with those advantages when
they join the club so to speak as
rapidly as possible and obviously that's
the case but to attribute this level of
civility and safety to some hypothetical
construct like white privileges well
it's exactly what you'd expect from
people who who whose response to the
idea of methodology is that that's just
a social construct like everything else
is theirs the class enemies from the
Ukraine the kulaks right they were the
farmers who were productive in the 1920s
and before had me recently emerged from
the peasant class they were all rounded
up and shot raped and robbed and then
sent to Siberia to freeze to death or to
die of some infectious disease because
to them guilt was attributed as a
consequence of their membership of a
class and I can tell you if there are
people around you that are attributing
guilt to you because of your membership
in a class they are not your friends in
fact they're the Friends of no one and
they're contributing to this intense
state of political polarization and
racial disharmony that seems to be me to
be expanding at an exponential rate it's
not good I really like this
juxtaposition of pictures so when the
Soviets collectivized the farms in the
Ukraine they take took all the grain
that the Ukrainians had had had produced
which wasn't very much because they had
collectivized the farms and they shipped
it all to the cities and then the rule
was that if you were a starving
Ukrainian woman who had children and you
went out in the field and you picked up
individual half rotten bits of grain to
feed your kids that that was a that was
an offense punishable by death you were
supposed to turn that into the local
authority so they could ship that to the
city too so on the one hand you have
nice picture here of the bags of grain
that were heroically going into the
cities and on the other hand you have a
picture of the bodies that were the cost
of doing precisely that so let's look at
the failures of this system well UK you
could list them forever the death of the
kulaks that was right off the bat which
is why I use it it was very very early
in in the collectivization process
then the Ukrainian famine which I mean I
don't know how often that's taught in
high schools in the United States and
Canada but I would suspect never is the
answer to that the rise of the gulag
state because it turned out that the
bloody Soviet Union couldn't function
unless they enslaved everybody and made
them work the death of tens of millions
it's uncountable the 56 crackdown on
Hungary the 68 invasion of
Czechoslovakia not to mention the whole
cold war that put the whole goddamn
world at risk from 1962 to 1989 and that
still rear is rearing its ugly head with
our current dispute with North Korea
which is a the last remaining let's call
it GU leg-like Soviet state so there's
the death counts perhaps that's a
relatively conservative estimate 8 to 61
million in the Soviet Union it's quite a
margin of error wouldn't you say that's
the red tear the Great Purge the
national operations of the NKVD later
the KGB the great purge in mongolia
soviet killings during world war ii the
People's Republic of China
land reform land reform that's how
that's how you that's what you call it
when you take land that grows food and
turn it into land that's just full of
corpses
that's land reform and the suppression
of counter revolutionaries the Great
Leap Forward that was a good one the
great proletarian Cultural Revolution
Cambodia and the killing fields and then
a list of other countries every single
place where these pathological ideas
were put into practice became what you
might describe as the literal equivalent
of Hell on earth so rapidly that it was
a kind of miracle in and of itself and
yet we still you know what is it 1 out
of 5 social scientists in American
universities regard themselves as
Marxists it's like what the hell really
really what is going on with that I
don't understand that in the least you
know I don't understand why that
pathological ideology that's so
murderous so intensely murders and so
closely tied to the genocides from a
causal perspective can can cannot have
accreted to it the same what would you
call unalterable
an honorable state that Nazism has
accrued to itself what's going on why
why don't we see it that way I don't
understand that I mean maybe it's
because of the hypothetical universal
utopia that the damn Soviets were aiming
at maybe you could get away with that in
1895 you know or maybe after World War
one when things were brutal and and the
monarchies of Europe were collapsing and
everything was chaotic you didn't know
that your utopian ideas were gonna
result in an absolute catastrophe but
it's a hundred years after that now
almost to the day and when the evidence
is clearly in I'm a Marxist it's no
you're just jealous because you don't
make as much as a bloody investment
banker so that's why you're a bloody
Marxist if you are paid four times as
much you'd be a capitalist so fast it
would make your head spin I'm gonna talk
for 15 more minutes because we started a
little late and I do want to get through
this so what's the problem well we
already discussed it and I want to show
you a different way of conceptualizing
it this is based on some of the work
that I've done on archetypes and I think
of I think of archetypes as imagistic
representations of the axioms of thought
that's a reasonable way of or maybe of
the axioms of being itself there are
categories of being pain is a category
of being for example suffering
limitation finitude those are all
categories of being and they're very
realistic they're the fundamental
elements of existence essentially it's a
different different in some sense than a
materialist viewpoint you know because
the materialists make the claim and
perfectly reasonable in some sense that
the fundamental realities are material
but they're only the fundamental
realities in some sense if you define
them that way not that that isn't useful
and not that you can't derive objective
truth
that's pragmatically useful from that
but the fundamental realities of life
have a lot more to do with motivation
and emotion especially with regards to
suffering and so that is the unsolved
problem of human existence and we talked
about the different ways of
conceptualizing that and I want to walk
you quickly through some of my thinking
about
the root the true roots of suffering and
human vulnerability and I think of this
as an antidote to ideological possession
I think that this is the fundamental map
of religious belief and I'll walk you
through it very quickly and that what
happens what happens in the case of an
ideology as an ideology takes a fragment
of a religious belief system and expands
it up into a totality and has its mode
of power because it draws on these
underlying religious / archetypal
narratives for its power so for example
you know that the idea of the future
socialist utopia is very very similar to
the idea of the kingdom of heaven on
earth it was always you know that's a
cardinal element of may of of the three
Western major religions so here's a way
of conceptualizing existence and each of
these levels of conceptualization have
their own symbolic representations and
you can see these what portrayed
consistently throughout the narratives
that we use to guide our existence even
the ones that we don't understand
explicitly they come up in in in movies
and in and in books and in myths and and
the stories we tell each other in our
dreams in our imagination constantly so
they're really the categories of the
imagination and so the first category
and the one that's most difficult to
understand I called the dragon of chaos
it's sort of the outermost circle that's
a good illustration of it there the
dragon is a very large very common
symbol worldwide and an anthropologist /
biologist who I recently read called it
a snake cat bird which I really liked
and he thought about it as an amalgam of
the of the idea of predator you know
because our tree-dwelling ancestors and
after that were basically preyed on burb
by birds of prey by predatory cats and
by snakes and so well and god only knows
how much how many times fire did them in
as well so a fire-breathing tree cat
tree snake bird is a is a very good
representation of the category of
everything that's out there in the
unknown that can do you in and that
become elaborated over the course of
time into the idea of the dragon that
hoards gold or the
virgins for that matter the idea being
that human beings are half prey and half
predator and so that we have to make a
representation of that which exists
beyond our comprehension that can do us
in and so that's the the dragon of chaos
let's say but also come to understand
that confronting that voluntarily is the
appropriate way to gather new
information and to survive and that's
really the fundamental human story the
fundamental human story is to go boldly
where no one has gone before and what
you encounter are the terrible dragons
that exist beyond your field of
comprehension and if you can manage that
forthrightly then you gather the kind of
information and riches that enables you
to develop yourself character logically
and to benefit your community that's the
fundamental story of mankind the
fundamental positive story and that's
the underpinning of the hero mythology
so which is a lovely antidote to
ideological presupposition so that's the
outermost the other outermost reality
you would say that's the unknown
unknowns that donald rumsfeld referred
to and nested inside that are the
terrible things about life that you
actually encounter that you they're not
the hypothetical things that might get
you there the actual things that you
encounter that you don't know and some
of those are positive and some of those
are negative you know and that can even
flip because sometimes your life is
turned upside down by let's say by a
rejection from someone you love should
be a good example of the terrible mother
that's the great mother on the outer
ring but that can mature you and make
you wake up as well and so the the
encounter with with these with the
things that transcend your what would
you call it your competence are also
things that can make you grow and mature
so you could think of the great mother
as nature and the great father as
culture and the individual as the person
who's enveloped by culture and by nature
when you move to the fringes of your
culture you encounter nature itself and
that's the case let's say geographically
but it's also the case conceptually
right because if you're the master of a
field of endeavor which is a
geographical metaphor you move towards
the fringes so that you can stand on the
unknown
encounter something that's new transform
what's new into inhabitable territory
and extend the dimension of human
capacity and so it works on a practical
geographical level of representation but
also on a on a on an abstract level and
so you can also think about it as a
person on an island in an ocean that's a
good way of thinking about the human
condition except the person has two
elements and the island has two elements
and so does the ocean and the person's
two elements are classically speaking
the good and evil that wars in their
heart because it isn't so self-evident
exactly where your enemy is and it might
be the class structure that's so
pressing you but it might be the snake
in your own heart and it's certainly the
case that if you read people like Viktor
Frankl and Alexander Solzhenitsyn just
to take a start who were very
perspicacious interpreters of the
catastrophes of Nazism and and and the
Soviet Union both of their conclusions
was the fundamental problem with both of
both of those systems is that the
individuals within the systems allowed
themselves to be corrupted by what was
in their own hearts and so one of the
things that's absolutely horrible I
think about the Marxist and
postmodernist viewpoint is that it
doesn't attribute any of the pathology
that's all
all projected onto the social world to
the individual him or herself and you
might say well that's where the
fundamental battle takes place and I
would also say that the idea that
existence is a battle between good and
evil and it's the battle of the soul is
a consequence of the symbolic
realization of Western civilization that
the evil that has to be confronted most
forthrightly is actually the individual
that obtains that the evil that obtains
to the individual and that it's
primarily an ethical issue at the
individual level and that's what you
take responsibility for it if you forget
that you project it onto other people
you take no responsibility for it and
you end up thinking that you're the good
guy and you probably shouldn't think
that because if you thought for about 15
minutes about all the stupid things that
you've done in your life you could and
malevolent things as well you could
figure out for yourself quite quickly
that the probability that you're the
saint and that everyone else is the
villain is is is
only an indication of precisely how
villainous you are so and then with
regards to the social structure well
obviously it's pathological and
tyrannical and corrupt and deceitful you
know it's it's partly a structure of the
Dead and people are corrupt to some
degree and willfully blind and so that's
an archetypal truth that's part of the
thoroughness that we discussed earlier
you have this infrastructure that
surrounds you both physical and
conceptual and you're its beneficiary
and its victim it's partly pathological
and corrupt it's always been that way
and you're damn lucky that it isn't just
purely corrupt because that's frequently
the case and so what your job is not to
whine about the fact that it's corrupt
that's self-evident your job is to
straighten yourself up enough so that
you can straighten up the culture and
that's the old motif of rescuing your
father from the belly of the whale let's
say which is part of the necessary
process by which people become fully
developed individuals what you're
supposed to be doing in university and
the humanities you don't just study the
great ideas of Western culture you just
you you study the pathology of history
and know that it's about you and then
maybe you try to culture yourself and
discipline yourself to the point where
you have enough of an internal ethic so
that when you take your place in the
patriarchy for lack of a better word
you're going to be a force for good
rather than a force for evil and then
maybe the damn thing tilts a bit towards
the good instead of the catastrophe and
then maybe you've done something that's
worthwhile and then nature well you know
if you it's very easy to romanticize
nature especially if you're a city
dweller who's never had to you know
wander out in the northern woods in the
middle of the summer and get eaten by
black flies and mosquitoes starving to
death while trying to track down an
animal it's very easy to romanticize
nature of course cancer and other
diseases tend to disabuse you of the
pure beauty of nature and nature is a
very very destructive force it's it's
against us all the time as well as for
us and another thing that's really not
well balanced in our society is the
anteye humanism that's become part and
parcel of radical discussions everywhere
human beings are regarded as a cancer on
the planet to to quote the what was that
the Club of Rome worrying about the
population explosion and we're all
guilty because we're destroying things
as fast as we can possibly manage it's
like Jesus everything around us is
always trying to kill us most of the
time we're just trying to stay alive I
mean we're not perfect we're corrupt and
so our social structures and people get
greedy and careless but it's not like
nature's all shining wonderful young
lady waiting in the wilderness to
embrace us positively it's the old hag
that's going to kill you every possible
way and you need to defend yourself
against that and you know human beings
have only been in a position since 1960
since we ever had any conceptualization
of our potential to change the planet on
a planetary scale it's been like four
generations you know back in the 1890s
Thomas Huxley was commissioned by the
English Parliament to to investigate the
carrying capacity of the oceans and his
he was a great biologist his report was
that there are so damn many fish in the
ocean that every human being could fish
every day for the rest of his life and
catch everything he possibly could and
we wouldn't put a dent in it and that's
how you know that's only a hundred and
twenty years ago we only woke up to the
fact that we became a planetary force
and in 1960 it's like what the hell do
you expect from people you know we're
trying to get our ourselves together as
fast as we can and might be decent of us
to stop with the anti human rhetoric
which is only going to lead to a bad end
you know if human beings are nothing but
a cancer on the planet then it's the
bloody hero who obliterates them isn't
it because it's the hero who gets rid of
cancer and then people watch the school
shooters and the mass shooters and they
think well what is it that motivates
people like that witch so they could
figure out about half an hour if they
did the proper reading just read what
they wrote human beings are a cancer on
the planet being is evil intrinsically
I'm going to take out everything I can
to show my displeasure with the
structure of reality and then I'm going
to shoot myself just to show
you how little I care and if you can't
understand that then you haven't looked
very deeply into your own heart because
there could be a time in your life
believe me where something terrible
enough happens to you so that you'll be
able to understand that perfectly
there's a Christian representation of
the same thing right so the great
mothers on the outside that's nature and
then the father's in the middle and in
that representation which I really like
that's from the 13th century you see God
the Father who's a representation of
culture holding the suffering individual
who simultaneously transcends his
suffering that's the goal to be the
suffering individual who simultaneously
transcends his suffering that's why all
those people on the inside of the open
version which is what that sculpture is
called are gazing at that image because
they're trying to figure out what the
hell it means well people have been
gazing at it for 2,000 years trying to
figure out what it means and one of the
things that you can be sure of is that
that story and what that image
represents is absolutely central to the
integrity of Western civilization five
more minutes
this is an image of I would call it the
patriarchy and it's a lovely image it's
God the Father and he's assimilated to
the Sun because well because
consciousness which is associated with
light is the Builder of culture and he
rules over the walled city and and so
he's the centering idea you might say
that that unites a culture that's
another way of looking at it and he's
got two hands I described them as
security and tyranny all together order
and you know if you're in a university
the U of T students complain about this
all the time there's 60,000 U of T's
students right they feel like numbers
they feel ignored and no wonder cuz
they're numbers and they are ignored
it's no wonder they didn't feel that way
you know and there's huge classes of
1,200 people and they get lost and they
think god that's a pretty evil structure
and and uncaring it's like yeah that's
exactly right but by the same token you
know you get to purchase four years of
intellectual freedom and you have all
these people who could at least in
principle teach you something and you
get an identity out of the deal and if
you have half half a bit of sense you're
in the library trying to read great
things and maybe you're not quite as
dopey and useless when you come out as
you were when you went in and so it
takes with one hand and gives with the
other and you got to understand that
about your position in relationship to
society it crushes you and molds you at
the same time it limits you and furthers
your compute capability at the same time
and it's up to you to determine how to
establish a harmonious and productive
relationship with that because that's
one of the fundamental demands of life
that sort of splits into these two
things but that's the king who devours
his son I love that picture and that's
well that's a society that's become
tyrannical right and the son of the king
is the thing that regenerates the king
the king's old and he's blind and he's
stupid and he's corrupt and he has a son
and the son is lively and awake and
alert and can see and if the father's
not pathological then he tries to make
the Sun strong so that the Sun can grow
up and revitalize the culture and if
he's a tyrant well then he devours him
and then he gets old and corrupt and
everything goes into chaos and then
there's the benevolent
King who's got that properly balanced
and you see in this picture he's got a
globe in his hand with the cross on top
of it and that's means the same thing
that of that other symbolic image did
which is that the proper society
supports the suffering individual in his
or her attempts to transcend their
suffering and attain a proper ethical
perspective and then the son of the
Father is the hero that's Hercules I
really like that picture so Hercules
goes out into the darkness and he's got
this container and maybe you could think
of that container as a cultural artifact
you know because the culture protects
you from chaos and then the question is
what are you supposed to do with that
protection and the answer is you're
supposed to wear the garb of the lion
right that's the king of the beasts so
that's supposed to be you and you're
supposed to go out there into the
darkness with your bloody eyes open so
you can discover what's in the darkness
and share it with everyone else and he's
got a club there in his hands and the
club is covered with eyes those are eyes
NOT barbs and what that means is that
you should bloody well pay attention and
that well the other element of that
that's not expressed in that image is
that you should also speak carefully pay
attention and speak carefully and then
you're the proper son of the proper
father and you can keep things
functioning and that makes you into this
right so the city is always threatened
it's always corrupt and threatened and
there's always something outside that's
going to take it down always and that's
what's represented by the dragon that
little twist in its tail is something
that represents infinity and the
courageous individual goes out of the
damaged city to confront the dragon of
chaos and to gain something valuable as
a consequence and that's what human
beings are supposed to do that's our
destiny that's our soul that's a better
way of thinking about it and some of
that terrible dragon is just the
catastrophe and suffering of life and
our continual attempts to transcend it
but a tremendous amount of it is also
the malevolence and the evil that exists
in our own hearts and in society and
perhaps to some degree even in the world
itself you're supposed to wake up and
strengthen yourself and stand up
properly and fortify yourself so that
you're a light that can shine in the
darkness and that's something that can
withstand malevolence and tragedy
and what did what's your alternative
you're gonna let life crush you and make
you weak and make you resentful and
bitter and then murderous you'll take
out your rage on everyone you can and
it'll only be limited by your capacity
to obtain power that's not a good thing
and so it's this way or it's this way or
a way that leads directly to hell and
we've certainly seen that plenty of
times in the last hundred years and
you'd think we might have learned our
lesson but it takes a lot for people to
learn and we're in danger of repeating
exactly the same mistakes again so you
know it's one thing to complain about
the political polarization and it's
another thing to point fingers at the
post modernists and the neo-marxist even
though they they roundly deserve it in
my estimation it's another thing to try
to figure out what the proper
alternative is and the proper
alternative is not in my estimation to
contribute to political polarization
it's not good and it's not that the
radical right is the solution to the
radical left it's just another
catastrophe and the only solution that
I've been able to figure out and this is
as a consequence of much reading and
much thinking is that it's up to the
individuals in our society sort
themselves out and to strengthen
themselves and to become wise and alert
and to shoulder the responsibility of
being and the demand the ethical demand
to push back malevolence in their own
hearts and in their society and I also
believe that you know it's very
difficult for people to respect
themselves because they're weak and
vulnerable and pathetic and malevolent
and so it's know when they're not what
they could be and they know it and so
it's no wonder that people don't respect
themselves and some of that's nature and
some of that's culture and some of its
individual weakness but one of the
things that I've learned and it's about
the only optimistic thought I've ever
come across is that if you have enough
courage to forthrightly accept the fact
that you're vulnerable and malevolent
and you're willing to do something about
it to overcome it you can develop enough
respect for yourself so that the
terrible weight of being will not make
you malevolent and corrupt and I don't
think that you have anything better to
aim for unless you want blood in the
streets and a pathetic life and so you
might as well straighten up and get your
act together and
maybe we've got some chance of getting
through this intermediary period of
chaos that we all face and make
something better out of it instead of
something worse so that's what I have to
say about that
so thank you
[Applause]
[Applause]
I've dr. Pederson has agreed to do with
30 minutes of question answer still so
so I should just unplug it or shut off
the recording okay
oh yes yes right
[Music]
yeah you might say that reluctant would
be one way of putting it yeah so the
question is I had thought about making a
website well the website was actually
made because you know if I'm trying to
decide whether to do something usually
what I do because it's really hard to
figure out if you should do something
just hypothetically right so one of the
ways to figure out if you should do
something is to do it almost completely
and then it's there and then you're
actually thinking about something real
and I talked to a bunch of people about
it after it was built and thought that I
wasn't sure it would cause more that
would do more good than harm
so I put it on hiatus now you know one
of the unfortunate things that happened
was that the University of Toronto
Faculty Association accused me of making
this website you know on the basis of
things I had said about three or four
months ago without talking to me about
it because why would they talk to one of
their faculty members being the Faculty
Association and you know so I would I
would I was wavering back and forth
about whether to not to do this and then
they came out and attacked me and the
problem with that is that now if I say
I'm not going to do it it looks like
they won and that's and first of all I
don't see this as a win-loss situation I
don't like it to be construed that way
but
the truth of the matter is is that when
the Faculty Association came out and
said that you know it would be wrong for
me to do it my first response was see
how well you bastards I'll be doing it
now you can be sure of that but that's
not a good
that's not how to think right that's how
to react and so you don't do that you
have your little emotional meltdown and
then you you think for like a month and
you get people to talk to and you try to
come at it from a level-headed
perspective so I I don't know I probably
have most luck with YouTube videos and I
have a book coming out I'm supposed to
bring a flyer for all of you but you
know I forgot so like I always do so and
hopefully that'll be helpful because
it's about individual responsibility
fundamentally and and truth in
particular which i think is what would
you say well if you want to adapt to
reality which is kind of what you have
to do then falsifying it is probably not
the most effective strategy as far as I
can tell and it's certainly the case
that if you allow yourself to speak bent
words that you'll end up with a bent
character and then God help you so you
know I talked tonight about what I think
are the words that are most dangerous
diversity equity inclusivity white
privilege so maybe you know the people
who are watching the videos can think
about how they might want to orient
themselves in relationship to the
mid-level bureaucrats in particular who
are pushing this sort of thing forward
with as much force as they can possibly
manage so we'll see that's that's the
plan at the moment yep
ha you never know hello
students like they have today I'm
talking about people like we could loop
on the board though they are some of
them steeped in Marxism they in the
sense that though there are power
hierarchies and structures though
admittedly not all powerful that do we
define human interactions that do
dominate people and that do in a sense
or at least in their words alienate
people from themselves probably the most
prominent papers the medium is the
message production of new technologies
the technology itself and the content it
reduces we can think of newspaper
articles in a newspaper the distribution
of newspapers is itself content as well
and how that defines well the first
thing is is that it's not particularly
useful necessarily to conceptualize them
as power structures because there are
structures with multiple purposes and
there are multiple structures and so
collapsing it to power is a very bad
idea the second is that we're in a human
beings are in a constant state of
alienation from the world and from what
they produce it's that's what human if
you had to define human beings that
would be the definition those creatures
that are in a constant state of
alienation from themselves culture and
the world now why that is exactly I
don't know I think it has something to
do with the fact that we're self
conscious but it's an existential
reality rather than an indication of the
pathology of a given cultural
construction you know that that's one of
the reasons I really like well Heidegger
in part but the existentialist in
general they just throw that out in
front of you and say look yes of course
you have those problems like that's it's
always been that way the ancient
Egyptians had a God that represented the
corrupting they're corrupt the
corruption of the state and the
corrupting influence that produced that
corruption that was set and set is the
is set the word set eventually becomes
the word Satan I mean we've known this
the Mesopotamians knew this they had a
god Kingu who was the king of the
monsters out of whose blood human beings
were made it's like the idea that we're
a lien ated from what we create it's
like yeah right
absolutely that's true so get up and do
something about it you know it's it's
not like you're unique in your
subjugation to the pathology of culture
and it's also not the case that culture
is only pathological that's the other
thing that's so that's so disturbing I
mean you have glasses on that's a good
thing you don't bump into walls you know
and so and that's a cultural artifact
you know and I'd be dead six times over
if it wasn't for various medical
interventions and so you know leavening
the fact that you're oppressed with a
little bit of gratitude is a really
wonderful thing and one of the things
that just staggers me about the the
radical fringe that's that's that's
characterized by these ideas that we
discussed tonight they have absolutely
no gratitude for anything and that's
really something remarkable you know
what Ignatius a human being is
intolerable unless he has two things
cleanliness and gratitude well maybe
they manage the first count although not
always but they certainly sorry about
that
but they certainly don't manage this
second so yeah
published this morning a letter to the
editor by a student government the
legislative affairs committee in which
they make several claims which
what struck me as an attempt to slander
things that happen with the c16 billing
things like this but they make the
assertion that you
essentially abused or hide behind the
banner of free speech in order to be
safe or to allow yourself to
all types of speech I wouldn't say I'm
hiding behind the banner of free speech
precisely so that would be the first
error in that I don't think that you can
characterize what I'm doing is hiding it
isn't it isn't exactly it isn't exactly
self-evident that the right to free
speech has protected me I would say a
certain amount of good fortune a certain
amount of caution with my words and a
tremendous amount of public support is
what's protected me I also think that
the ideological types who pen those
pieces of nonsense have have a common
what a constant theme is anyone who
disagrees with with them is pathological
in some manner and uses the right of
free speech to exercise that pathology
well you know no that's just that's
sorry that's not the case it's not the
case and you know most of what's being
leveled at me in terms of slurs are
they're low resolution and ill-informed
you know I'm a transfer by the bigot
what else I'm a racist I'm a Nazi that's
a good one I've been teaching about
Nazism for thirty years you know trying
to tell people that they probably would
have been Nazis had they been in Germany
during the 1930s which is at actually
trying to convince them of that which is
something that you might need a trigger
warning for before you enter the class
you know so it's it's it's palpably
absurd but it doesn't matter because if
the war of ideas is about power it
doesn't matter whether you represent
either side with any degree of accuracy
it's just part of the Hobbesian
nightmare and you know whoever spins the
best story wins so yeah anyways I've
been weirdly fortunate because every
time the radicals have come after me and
they really came after me last October
it's reversed every single time so and
I'm not counting on that to continue but
it's been rather blackly comical as it's
been occurring so these articles it's
like as far as I'm concerned
they're a dime a dozen I don't even have
to read them anymore that's the thing
about reading something in ideologue
rights you just have to look at the
first sentence and infer the rest you
know it's true man it's actually this is
one of the things that Solzhenitsyn did
a brilliant job of analyzing in the
Gulag Archipelago he said that's the
consequence of turning your god-given
soul over the human dogma you're just a
puppet for these ideas that are
operating behind the scenes you think
you have the ideas it's like think again
they have you and they're doing with you
what the ideas want to have done with
you and when they're done with you
they'll discard you you can be sure and
you'll be lucky if there's anything left
of you when that happens so and the
universities are absolutely complicit in
this they take young people whose minds
are are who are looking for an identity
and no wonder and they teach them this
algorithmic idiocy that anyone with any
brain could learn in a week that the the
dictums and dogma of the oppression
versus oppressed narrative god it's
unbelievable you know a decent chatbot
could write most of the postmodern
papers that's why that's why they that's
why the typical humanities 80% of
humanities papers now Garner's zero
citations which means the only person
who ever reads them is the person who
wrote them and even they don't do a very
good job of reading them so yeah
[Applause]
are you are you actually serious oh well
I'm sorry I was a little hard on you
actually it I would say I'm more hard on
your professors so it's very brave of
you to be standing there by arbitrary
and it's not the arbitrariness of nature
but rather the arbitrariness structures
of society like
maybe nature lends its fair that's why
you get educated it's to separate the
wheat from the chaff you know because
you're a historical creature right I
mean it's outside of you and inside of
you and some of its dead and corrupt as
you just said and estranges for no
reason no no functional reason
counterproductive Lee but until you can
until you understand the structures for
better or for worse you're in no
position to to do anything but make them
worse fundamentally the purpose of a
liberal education is not to turn you
into an avatar of capitalism or of or of
democracy for that matter the purpose of
a liberal education is to enable you to
comprehend the history in which you're
embedded and then to act as an agent to
to reconstruct and revitalize that
hierarchy but that's a serious matter
like at 18 say and right out of high
school with no experience whatsoever in
life and no real education you're in
absolutely no position whatsoever to be
protesting about the structure of the
Western world it's like no sorry you
know your your observations about the
fact that people are alienated by
structures like absolutely of course and
it does sort and it sorts harshly and of
course because you're young you tend to
be sort of near the bottom except that I
would point out that you're young and
there's really something to that you
know and you might think that you have
no power because of that but I could say
well you have all the power that youth
gives you and that's not trivial so
where power doesn't lie where it's
obvious you know it really doesn't and
people have more power than
they think but they squander it and he
often squandered on ideology when
they're not just wasting their time so
anyway so it was very brave of you to
stand up and ask me a question and to
take all that criticism
[Applause]
composition agnostic atheism there is no
or at least no God human computers today
is intellectually hard to assail still
there is good evidence
religious behavior was an advantage
produced by natural selection do you
think that self critically acting in a
way
if God exists is sufficient to
deliberate evolutionary wisdom or faith
that's a good question
one of the things that that I read when
I was reading Carl Jung he made this
claim which I really liked was that
whatever sits atop your pinnacle of
value is functionally equivalent to God
that's good that's really smart and I
like it's smarter than it sounds which
is the case with most of the things that
you wrote because it actually does turn
out that our category systems are not so
much about subdividing the material
world into its appropriate entities but
about carving up our experience in two
categories of tools and obstacles so
that we can attain certain valued goals
and so we're always directing our action
towards the attainment of a goal and so
that means we're immersed in the value
structure and so Jung's point was
whatever sits at the pinnacle of your
value structure serves the function of
God now you might have a fragmented
value structure which means in some
sense that you're psychologically
polytheistic and the problem with that
is that then you're a house divided
amongst itself you're pulling in
multiple directions simultaneously
impulsive people are like that right and
they don't understand themselves because
one day they go left and the other day
they go right and you know they they
have no control over themselves at all
now you said well there's no objective
God and that seems to be a reasonable
hypothesis the question then I suppose
becomes to what degree our subjective
experience is real and that's a matter
of definition
I think the religious impulse is an
inevitable consequence of the fact that
it's necessary for people to live inside
hierarchies of value and that we feel a
sense of awe the sense of all we feel
with regards to the highest values is no
not distinguishable from the existence
of the value itself now and there's real
advantages to the idea of a detached God
in some sense and one of the things I've
learned about archaic concepts of
sovereignty is that detaching the idea
of ethical of ethics itself and ethical
power from the holder of power is an
extraordinarily useful thing to do
because otherwise the king becomes the
embodiment of the God and then the King
can do no wrong then you have a tyrant
if the idea of power and sovereignty is
detached from the individual and set up
as a higher virtue that even the
sovereign is is responsible to then the
sovereign at least in principle can
never put put himself forward as
absolute and you can think about that
just as a development of humans capacity
to abstract right we can abstract the
idea of sovereignty we can abstract the
idea of ethics in virtue we can we can
hypothesize that as an ideal we can
embody it as a personality it's actually
quite useful because it's something we
have to act out now you might say well
what relationship does that have to you
know to the existence of something
transcendent in the religious sense
outside of that abstract
conceptualization and the answer to that
is we don't know if you if you
familiarize yourself with the writings
of people who've had profound religious
experiences its chronically the case
that they describe encountering
something that transcends them and that
they describe it as more real than
anything they've ever encountered
now whether or not that constitutes
proof depends on how you define proof so
I'm not making a case for it one way or
another but I mean Jung himself I mean
when he talked about god when he was
being careful he didn't talk about god
he talked about the god image in man and
he was careful never to formally state
that the fact that there's an image of
the ideal in the soul let's say an
archetype that that provided concrete
proof that such an ideal existed you
know in some transcendent manner but the
world is a weird place and it's not
something I would rule out so it's not
like we understand the world very well
and the materialists you know they try
to they try to encapsulate the entire
world within the materialist philosophy
and like more power to them it's been an
unbelievably successful tool but we
haven't cracked consciousness in the
lead
and there is something about
consciousness that's world creating and
there's something transcendent about
consciousness and it also seems capable
of a kind of infinite expansion and it
isn't obvious why any of that is the
case not obvious at all so yep
hello okay
before they were writing this stuff
criticizing Marxism itself and
those ideas to get right
post-modernism is serving objective
realities so I mean what do you make
well
well okay so two things I mean there's
been a number of attempts to revise
Marxist theory right and so you pointed
to one that's the cultural theorists and
that was after World War two when it
became painfully obvious at least to the
first round of people who were oriented
towards the radical left but opened
their eyes that there was something
rotten in the state of the Soviet Union
and so they did they did their best to
revamp the central doctrines of Marxism
using Freudian theory and so forth and
as you said they were very influential
among the student radicals of the 60s
and it was them that gave birth to the
modern crop of say postmodern
neo-marxists i think that you know i
couldn't cover all of that obviously in
one lecture but your your point is
well-taken
now you yet you ended that with a
different question so but I don't
remember exactly what that question was
oh yes well look I mean look the
ultimate minority is the individual and
the individual always stands in
opposition with his or her truth to that
of the mob so that's true is that it's
very frequently the case that truth is
held by something outside the general
consensus now falsehood is - right so I
mean if you if you have a structure
that's reasonably functional you like a
little walled city and you have a
hundred people outside yelling about how
pathological it is 99 of them would make
it worse and one of them has something
useful to say and so you can't just
dispense with the minority so to speak
because the majority of the minority is
going to be wrong in their opposition
because the one person in the minority
who isn't wrong is absolutely vital and
that's the tension that's always the
tension between the group that's partly
the mythological hero really has two
roles one is to go out and conquer the
dragon of darkness and to gather
information and to disseminate it but
the second role which is equally
important is to stand up against the
corrupt culture which is what Horace
does for example in the ancient Egyptian
stories demolish what's what's corrupt
and then rebuild something in it's in
it's in it's in the aftermath you do
that psychologically - you know because
you have an interpretive structure
through which you view the world and now
and then you run into something that's
like a minority a fact that doesn't fit
and but it's but it's actually a fact it
indicates that part of you needs to die
and come encounter chaos and
reconstitute yourself and that's why
there is this dynamism between the group
and the individual and also why the
individual is held in the West to be a
power let's say that's super ordinate to
the state the state has to recognize the
validity of the individual because the
individual does in the final analysis
hold the redemptive truth but to put
that in minority groups that's a whole
different issue that's a sleight of hand
as far as I'm concerned so
all right all right well thank you very
much
[Applause]