welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
okay I'm starting to recognize some
faces unfortunately I will never
remember your names if I ever run into
you so I'm gonna apologize beforehand
I remember this will date me but I
remember when Facebook first started and
I'd go to these conferences and people
had to run down the hall and go Benito
and I thought I was like losing my
memory because I had no idea who they
were
and I didn't this woman Piper you have a
beautiful beautiful screen saver shot
here I have a little duck named Piper
okay so we can I know some of you have
been here for you know for a couple
weeks in a row we can build on what
we've been doing but I just also wanted
to get some idea of maybe you have
questions or where you want to go or
what is a conundrum or something that
you might be holding about what we've
been doing I just want to open it up for
ten minutes or so
into that kind of exploration so I can
kind of pinpoint where we should be
headed for next last week we worked with
inner talk and try to demystify it
[Music]
was your experience of that did your
experience of that give you an insight
or something that you hadn't thought of
before or did it confirm what you knew
what what was your experience of that
was it obvious to you beforehand you're
skeptical about yeah you can just under
yourself in I've never really thought
about it before there's something I've
always been aware it's not not so much
the speech but the the earworms right I
don't know if I'm particularly
susceptible but I pretty much all the
time every day have some kind of tune
playing in my head repeatedly the same
sort of simple tune over and over again
I don't know how common an experience
they're when I know everyone has it to
some degree but for me is I mean I live
alone and I work a lot you know just
just quietly in the garden whatever and
I'd pretty much all he says to say have
some sort of little team going through
my head or something the last time that
resonated you said that curiosity
doesn't have to turn into inner talk
because you know talk was to
coarse-grain I don't know exactly I
don't have been thinking about that a
little bit but I don't know exactly with
me actually
all right cool but not completely and so
yeah yeah so what is inner talk good for
inner talk is good for simulating and
experimenting with what you're going to
say if if you need to run it by you know
if you need to if you're gonna go on an
interview and you know they're gonna ask
you about your last job you might want
to use inner talk to simulate to
experiment with what
you're going to say so all this inner
inner visualization is the same way
they're their ways to simulate if you're
looking at a carpentry problem you could
do something trial and error or you
could have I put back there
oh then that'll go there or rearranging
your room where you can start to solve
80% of the problem by simulating it in
your mind this is also how for example
retraining athletes you simulate your
dancers you simulate the choreography in
your mind you're retraining pathways but
to think of to solve complex problems
they where you solve the complex problem
is not in the length the language is a
pretty coarse instrument to solve a
problem so Eugene gentlemen for example
he talks about gives the example of an
of a poem of someone writing a poem and
let's say about someone they love or
someone they knew or someone they lost
or guarded that they were in and they
think beside the tree there she was it
was and as the sense of something
they're trying to say and they'll use a
word it was marvelous and they're like
that words not right and then they'll
use another word so they're actually
measuring the word against a deeper
knowing right so the the deeper knowing
generally would say is more precise than
the language so what does that mean then
what it means is that how do we work
with the deeper energy and that is all
about intention so you set an intention
to figure something out or you set an
intention to solve a problem or you set
an intention to change your life
and you stay with the intention stay
with the intentional motivational state
and that keeps priming the system to
solve it at these deeper levels and then
every once in a while you check in you
know and do you have the language do you
have the inspiration or the insight to
move move the needle to the next step
and then once you have enough of that
you might have to fiddle around with
again in explicit space but it's this
back and forth we all know that this is
part of why taking a walk all of a
sudden you'll remember something you
forgot or you'll solve a problem because
you're making you're letting the process
go back into the implicit processing so
but the question then is why do we have
constant and inner talk like what for
some people like let's just raise our
hands who has in a talk probably 90% of
their conscious day all right who has it
more like 70% and how about under 40
yeah see some of you are 660 ish 5060
some of you at 90 so that's that's
that's something interesting to notice
and interesting to ask yourself the
question whether it serves you or not
right
now if you let if you're at 90 percent
and it's carrying all your ideas forward
that's awesome but if you're at 90
percent it's the same thing over and
over and over and over and over or some
version of the same pattern that maybe
you'll want to work toward releasing
that habit and instead working with
intention so if I say what do I really
want to do with my life I have let
Stephen hook it up with coronavirus we
have an opportunity to do something
different with our lives what do I
really want to do with my life you want
to just get a very very very strong kind
of a determination that you want the
answer to be given to you but you don't
want to think about it you know you
don't want to be going well you know you
want to set this deep kind of energy
signature and then as thoughts come up
you'd be like I always wanted to do like
you know these thoughts come up I always
wanted to do that
and then you feel into imagining what
it's like to be that and you'll feel
whether it's too much of an idea you
know sometimes you think oh I'd like to
be a movie star
you know it's just a fantasy because
it's too much thought and it doesn't
really sit with that intention doesn't
match that intention so then you release
that and you wait for you wait could it
could you might be wait for years right
you might wait for years but that's
better than stringing yourself along
with these this would uh I guess Jordan
Hall calls was he called simulated
thinking right it's all simulated
thinking it's a kind of energy it's an
energy that we need to displace we do it
by talking so the question is you know
can we relax into the intention that's
kind of an interesting phrase because
the intention of a motivational state
has got a lot of energy to it but can we
just relax
meaning relax this mind into this bodily
sense of intention and determination can
we sit with that
you might have to go so far as far that
you don't even you don't even have an
intention or determination so you have
to get underneath that and sit with the
fact that you don't have an intention or
determination so you can if that doesn't
arise you can you constantly want to go
underneath as far as you need to go
until you really feel like you're
touching where the energy is sourcing
itself for some people it could be lower
chakra and feel very sexual there no
that's interesting here's where the
energy is coming from you don't want to
get it too fast into a story like you
know a lot of times when you're
meditating that energy you it'll start
to manifest in the in the lower chakra
and then people say oh you know the
story you'll play a TV story in your
head I gotta go get a girlfriend or I
gotta get a boyfriend you know that
that's how we displace that energy that
energy is like a nuclear reactor and if
we can't they don't have the capacity to
hold or be with it then it goes into
these stories and these these these kind
of simulated thinking thought patterns
then we get into the stories and the
stories make us and stuff like that so
it's just the energy has to go the
energy is like a nuclear reactor it
wants to be you know talked about as a
car you know you have the energy as the
engine and it wants to be attached or
transmissions that can go somewhere and
that will happen automatically in these
kind of habits individual ways if you if
you don't if you can't contact the
source and then with intention and
determination attach it to the
transmission that you want to you want
the energy to be in service toward
but what if we if we if we rush too fast
to make meaning out of it it'll be this
mental talk that's another thing you
know you'll notice at one time one year
at the farm here we have a lot of
animals and we had a lot of older
animals it you know like two chickens
died and then a horse died and then a
dog died like like five animals died in
like four years and even though we know
they were all older and stuff you've
hear you feel your mind like there's
something in the water there's literally
all these stories come up because you
want to make sense or meaning out of
something that it doesn't really have
that meaning and you could notice how
when things are emotional or when you're
starting to tap into the deep the depths
of your feeling tone you if you can't
really be with that you'll start to make
surface meaning that's that's one of the
ways in which the energy discharges no
it's a good thing because you want to
wonder it's my well poisoned I mean it's
you know it's like I'm yes thank you for
serving up these things mind but it's
none of those things
it's just grief it's just the energy of
grief wants to go into this kind of
surface meaning-making and so these are
the ways that energies are coupled in in
ourselves
um I'm really feeling the connection to
working with myself and other people
using tools like duct Akron's bio motive
framework and internal family systems
and where there's yeah seeing myself and
others struggle to to go into that under
level layer and just want to stay in the
sort of the words and the stories yeah
just resonating a lot of that yeah so
what we're gonna talk about today is
what's underneath their words and the
stories I mean not necessarily like
inner talk or earworm stuff you know
that stuff's just kind of like I don't
know but well today I want to talk about
mental models in what they're called
internal working models when you're
internal working models are highly
conceptual they use the term mental
models when you're internal working
models are based on stories and
relationships they call them internal
family systems they both operate the
same way the way they operate is by
organizing reality into a familiar model
so conceptual people will usually use a
lot of conceptual terminology in
imagistic people like I use the car the
transmission that's more of an image I
could have used concepts you could also
use family systems and the family system
so they're all what I call internal
working models
now what's interesting so what the
reason why they're deeper and lower is
because once you get rid of the inner
talk and you're accessing some of the
deeper motivational or determination or
felt sense you start to see that they
have a structure that's built up on a
mental model of reality right so and you
can get at these mental structures
through certain methodologies like
internal family systems etc but one of
the problems with them is they're a
horrible reduction of reality mental
model is a construct or a container
which doesn't let all of reality in and
so they limit your freedom and therefore
they limit the create that your ability
be creative in your intentional and
motivational sensing
you
you
so yummy when you're talking about
trying to tell yourself a story about
the farm animals I was thinking about
how both two things one the idea that we
make sense of our lives looking backward
that we have to live them going forward
and then also John very key talks about
how narrative is a psycho technology and
I'd never thought about that before that
we that we are taught to tell stories
and I wonder to what extent like in that
situation you're talking about that we
have this tool of narrative that's so
powerful but then we want to over apply
it to everything is that is that yeah
yeah so I'm gonna like your question
steering steer around a little bit yeah
so language is funny for us because if
instead of telling a story I was making
artwork right like abstract artwork not
artwork that basically tells a story
like some artwork is so literal right
let's say all that was processing in me
became the artwork
I wouldn't relate to that artwork the
same as a theory of everything if I had
a theory of everything
I would relate to it as this wonderful
expression of my part of my a part of me
and this is the problem that we have
with narratives we tend to not see them
or allow them to be these fantastic
creations we want them to be the final
word or we want them to you know
transcendent include everything else we
thought you know it would be like an
artist and I guess it could be movies
about this who wants that doesn't like
any of their paintings because there's
one really big painting that's gonna
include all the other paintings right
this is the structure of
mine's in in Western culture it's not
this structure everybody's mind but
pretty much everybody is cosmopolitan
these days so the Buddhists talk about
the mind as an organ of perception so
they say for example there's not all the
Buddha's Buddhists it's just so time T
cos school but it's a really beautiful
way to think about the mind and that is
they'll say like there's I consciousness
so that's a perception right and then
there's ear consciousness and then
there's smell consciousness they have
these the senses are a type of
consciousness but then they say there's
mind consciousness also and for them the
mind is part of the team for us the mind
Trump's the team like for us we're
taking all this perceptual information
and then the mind is supposed to say
what that all means
right so the santur antica say what the
mind's consciousness is it generalizes
like the the ears hear the sound the
mind says bird
that's all the mine does bird it doesn't
matter if it's a red-winged blackbird or
a bluebird or whatever it's a generalist
and so they the idea is it's good to
have a general perspective but it's only
one perspective amongst the others
whereas the way we relate to the
generalist is that it transcends and
includes all the others when the larger
ideas should just be another perspective
in Earth's constellation of perspectives
so when we create mental models and
theories
it's as if they stand in for everything
else but they should just be another
tool in our toolkit some of you been
watching me on Facebook and then getting
into trouble so a larger understanding
of coronavirus needs to be in your
information ecology but also the
anecdotal evidence that contradicts with
it we use our mind as if a more
sophisticated perspective includes all
of them and it doesn't it's a it's a
different type of perspective than all
the other perspectives that we need to
include this is the problem with
systemic thinking what I call synthetics
and stomach thinking right so to have
like a kind of ecological management
systems orientation to the environment
does not include all the local knowledge
that the indigenous people have it
doesn't but we relate to those types of
systemic models as if they sum up
everything it's a valuable perspective
to have but it's just another
perspective it's another organ of
consciousness and this is what we need
to understand about narrative a
narrative is a powerful exploration of
reality but it's just it needs to be on
the same team as all the others and most
of our narratives
come in the form as if they get there
the trump card now this is true for what
people go through you might have heard
of Keegan and a self authoring self
authoring person this is a late late
stage identity ego identity of the
authoring self the self authoring self
identity is very reliant on what I call
autobiographical coherence the narrative
so if I ask you if we're really going at
it
we're on the different page with
coronavirus you will be arguing from
this sense of autobiographical coherence
I lived my whole life this way and I'm a
researcher and I've done all my due
diligence and all this stuff you will be
in the perspective dictated shape by
your need for autobiographical coherence
so you will resist my perspective
because I am in arguing for my need to
be an autobiographical coherence and
this is the last identity before what we
would like call some kind of
individuation or liberation so this need
for autobiographical coherence is
symptomatic of a late-stage identity and
I think this is what's great you know
this is what's being challenged in our
modern in in our recent times when your
story of self can't address doesn't give
you the answer that what you should do
next you start to see the story of self
itself is a narrative or a mental model
that's partial if when people ask you
tell me something about you
you have this this like you have to
pause because it should it be this
thread or it should it be that thread or
it should it be this thread and you
realize over time when you're answering
the question you kind of morph it and
you make it up you start to realize
there is no autobiographical coherence
it's just like the same question why do
all these animals dying why am I here
now your mind is just serving up things
that are like make you feel that things
make sense or that you can make sense
out of them so this is part of the
narrative structure this is this is
somebody is writing I think to everyone
okay so this is part of the the
narrative structure are one of the
mental models that shape us at a deeper
level so we can't so or even when we're
trying to figure out from this deeper
knowing we have to be careful or
vigilant that we're not subject to the
constraints of this mental model so
here's one from internal family systems
who's who believes they have an inner
child okay so that's a that's a limiting
belief it's a mental model it's a
thought to construct who's paid people
to talk to the inner child it's kind of
kind of ridiculous really these many of
the many of the bio spiritual trades
they're in the process of creating the
structures that then they help you
resolve
could ask you a follow-up question about
that yeah that was a what would you say
like okay so for example and you know a
depth psychology perspective there's
these inner structures that are that
have been shaped by whatever right
whatever the narrative is like evolution
or some spiritual boundaries that that
shape the way that we perceive or even
like like a phenomenological just a
purely philosophical endeavour to
uncover what the structures are that
that we use to perceive things how do
you feel about how our ability to
articulate those is a narrative that
then becomes a mental model that's
limiting this yeah so this is a very
good question thank you for asking it's
helping me move along in the right
direction you know I don't know a lot
about all of you okay there are
psychological structures and it has to
do something with how we were talking
last time about burning and downward
causation versus upward causation so the
earliest site the primitive brain of a
child and what I mean by brain again is
the whole shebang works but God the
vagus nerve effect systems and if I use
the word brain it means that whole thing
right so the core self is a sensory
motor self with human potential so it
basically has an animal's perception and
body plan but it's more sensitive to
relational dynamics with its parents
let's say right so if you know anything
about chickens
the chickens are born they have horrible
mothers but they can eat right away and
they just take care of themselves called
pro precocious but ducks they have
really beautiful parents and the parents
protect them right they're more
precarious existentially ducks are more
precarious existentially turns out
there's a relationship between ultimate
pro-social behaviors and sophisticated
consciousness and
the precariousness of the sensorimotor
system with respect to how its cared for
early okay so that's how we're born but
basically an animal with this potential
that makes our socialization much more
sensitive and precarious so the first
thing this animal has to do it's a tries
to structure reality because
unstructured reality as James said is
like you know an LSD trip or worse an
LSD trip you can couldn't get any handle
on anything and the way the first thing
that the core self has to do is create a
structure called self other and world
that's the primary structure the primary
organization their primary internal
working model of the child now I'll tell
you how that happens but this core
structure changes as we develop you know
once when you get into high school
you're starting to ask questions about
is that the world in my mind or is that
in another person you know these morph
and get get the this organization this
fundamental organization can change over
time but for the child this is how the
structures are created it's about has to
do what's called variance this is very
well researched now it's a new field but
it's called variance so what call varies
with me what constantly comes with me is
me self
what responds to me but but varies like
my mom she's always responsive or my dog
there's like something responding but it
varies is other and things that are
invariant like no matter how many times
I hit that wall it does not move or
respond that becomes world and this sets
up the primary psychological structures
the psychological structures are the way
the primitive minds
it's the primitive minds internal
working model
so this enables us to figure out a lot
and to be socialized as an aside what's
interesting is one of the hypotheses out
there in this research is that kids that
use simple interfaces like iPads and
screens yeah
so let me say this and then I get back
to the questions because the because the
interface is called very then you get
this you get this fusion of self in
technology this is actually what they do
when they do these virtual reality
out-of-body experiences because the
thing you're looking at is Co varying
with you so you think you're ahead of
yourself so this the hypothesis is this
is creating psychotic
it's like cycloid type pathologies and
young people because there's too much of
a fusion between technology and their
self now this person yes so Bell Horan
yeah so I did remember I said that the
construction changes so it can change a
magical experience with nature nature
mysticism but it also can change as you
grow spiritually and you see the
construction itself is up to has some
choice in it right you see that those
boundaries are not that clearly
delineated but if you grow up in our
society then you tend to not see the
tree is Kovarian because our language
takes that experience away from you but
later on these categories change again
and there's always there's a point in
young people where there's a lot of
reality testing this is you know these
boundaries are themselves they're
conditioned and they can be
decommissioned but the normal Western
child has this certainly a certain basic
plan I think we're all you know and and
which construction of self or other
world is our fundamental one depends
upon what gets affirmed in our culture
and what gets kind of like oh that's
silly you know it's just a tree kind of
thing yeah but those constructions are
still made in all human being south of
their world so that's the we're gonna
get to the inner child there Carrie I
guess that's world going today so yes
Nate there are psychological structures
we call those psychological structures
because they're not conceptual but it's
the same the sophisticated mind creates
more mental models and the primitive
mind creates these feeling tone kind of
expectation perceptual sensory motor
models which we call psychological
structures because they're not
sophisticated mental models now the
thing about it is they're very hard
wired because anything earlier
everything else gets built on it right
so our language and our abstractions and
our science gets built on some
fundamental things and then when if
you're taking psychedelics or in
tation or if you're having mystical
experiences you start to see that those
those are somewhat optional that they
can be rearranged and still make sense
they just make a different kind of sense
yeah so and just to drive it home for
some of you psychologists out there if
you know affect regulation theory or
attachment theory when the mother is too
blended with the child and when the
child scared the mother gets scared
there's not enough variance and say you
then you get certain psychological
structures built that are not are
considered not normative if the mother
doesn't vary at all of the child's like
if you just put them on a strict
schedule and if they cry they cry and
then when it's time you know the mother
and other people seem like world and you
become a sociopath so the relationship
to the primary caregivers can create
these pathologies of self-other in
worlds your to blended with the other or
if you think other people are like world
you become a sociopath they become
object like for you this is also why
people who children who live you know
this is also why well I won't get into
that but okay so you studied to see how
this works right now so self other world
the other thing the child that's that's
and the other thing is saying this
indifference it's almost like the same
way of languaging Kovarian and varying
so once the second thing the child
understands is what it feels like you
know we were talking yesterday last time
about when
mouth moves ear always hears the same
thing so there's these these packages of
experience that are structures in psycho
psychology
and one of the packages is if you live
in a highly gendered family this person
this other always feels like this and
this other always feels like that and
these get hardwired as internal working
models this is the formulation of male
and female or masculine or feminine
gender gender identities in the internal
family system now what's fascinating is
as the gender roles become more fluid in
society you start to see more fluid
gender structures as internal working
models and children it's the same it's
it's it's how we say the same thing so
that's the second that's another and
some of this is fluid some of it is
roles in society if you have a highly
gendered family society and some of it
is kind of biologically innate if you
want to believe if you ascribe to that
yeah so then we start to have the
triangle we no self other in world and
when we make a distinction between if
they're gendered roles the two cells now
genders are funny
so I would say it's that a gendered role
isomorphic roles because for example I
have gay friends who have children and
one just takes on such a traditional
mother's role they stay home they cluck
they're the ones they go to when they
cry the other one goes to work and makes
money so this is not a gender cat
but it's an isomorphic role right does
that have to really understand that it
doesn't really have to do with your sex
has to do with highly isomorphic roles
in the nuclear family okay so that so
that's the next structure the child
makes there's there's this thing
happening over here isomorphic there's a
different thing happening over here and
I'm it's like a triangle it I'm the
child at the base this is the first
family system right that I am part of
this triad and this down here is called
the child because all the attention and
protection this one's protecting me this
one's nurturing me or the protection and
nurturing is what happens in a highly
gendered family the male becomes the
protector and the provider and the woman
becomes the nurturer and the safety but
this is all kind of changing and that
structure then is what your inner child
is it's you sitting at the base of these
two categories now what we tend to do
when we are looking for partners when we
look for partners and we're thinking of
it in terms of family men tend to look
for nurturers and women look tend to
look for protectors because we think
that's the you know Pythagorean shape of
family and so you start to have people
dating and putting kind of expectations
on people to be part of this the real
problem with that is that
you're basically playing the role of the
child when you look for your partner
you're never you have it so when you're
a child and you have this structure this
three-part structure that's a beautiful
thing it organizes reality but if you're
20 years old you don't want to be
organizing your reality on the basis of
a mental model that's appropriate to a
two-year-old this is the problem now as
we create as children create more and
more organization they understand when
they get to be like four years old their
psychological structure that's important
to them is the role they set to
understand mommy has a role daddy has a
role they start to play doctor they
start to play fireman trucks they really
understand that you can step into roles
it's also where they start to step back
into the role of the chip excellent
child because they understand it is a
strategy they really start to understand
that these roles come as packages and
you can start to see them these are also
internal structures that can be that are
part of the way the child organizes
their reality
but the problem is is that if they're
not constantly upgraded or updated
you'll always think the doctor is this
the way you thought a doctor was when
you were five years old and you always
think the policeman is this and you
always think the president is this and
you always think a man is this and you
always think a woman is this and these
categories have been created when your
mind was very primitive when you
couldn't reason when you couldn't be
creative about the nuance of the human
condition and that's what the
psychological structures are they're
deep internal working models of the way
life is and if you're really honest with
yourself we have no freaking clue of the
way life is all we can do is try to
organize some sense out of it that's
relevant and useful in our situation
so would you say that a psychologist the
spiritual she's often is a different
region mom comes with a different sort
of feeling tone can you ask that
question like in conversations a big
question sure I was just wondering
basically whether you're saying
something like like I think young for
example might say that the the father
mother archetype you know becomes this
like sky king sky queen in terms of the
whole the whole civilization and that's
why we create religions something like
that but you're sort of suggesting that
actually it's just a working
relationship that the child has created
with reality because that's the way it
is for a lot of children so are you how
would you think about wanting to
deconstruct that for example and and
build something that might be more
appropriate in this place yeah so the
process of individuation is the process
of dissolving these structures that
stand between you and reality so I
remember the first time I actually saw
my father it was ft and a heart attack
and he was he was in the hospital bed
and I was like a little Frenchman I
never knew he was little like literally
I could not see that he was a little man
say you know so until then you see
through the archetype you actually never
see the individual in front of you I
work with women who will say first
things out of their mouth does it I
never intended to marry my
father and I'll just cut them off right
there you didn't marry your father the
only thing that's the same between your
husband and your father's are a man and
everything he does you put in that
little tool box call my father you
literally cannot see the individual who
you're married to literally you have you
know nothing about him and then of
course that puts him in a box where he
becomes what your father is so this is
the problem with the archetypes and
these primitive structures that are you
know people pander to in the spiritual
community they're they're their
constraints they're necessary for the
precarious existential condition of an
animal born as with a human propensity
but they are they live in the past they
live in the past now in terms of
archetypes archetypes I'm gonna give
archetypes a really bad rap here I'm in
a bad rap mood today
what's that Peter Lindbergh said trash
talking he's he answer you were trash
talking so I'm gonna trash talk the
archetypes it's a partial perspective
but it's one that no one really sees I
mean you know young is very
controversial everything someone says
they somebody else could say he didn't
say or vice-versa but before there were
archetypes there were allegories does
anybody know what an allegory is so the
there before civilization before what
what young call mythopoetic
when the archetypes started becoming
conceptualized more as internal models
like the king and the queen
there were allegories and if you read
indigenous peoples stories for example
they're all allegorical so like the wolf
like or the coyote the Coyotes are
really bad he eats everyone's
babies he lies doesn't show up on time
he shapes
but when coyotes in trouble what do they
do they go help them out
and you think what you see the
difference between an archetype is that
in an architect the coyote would be the
epitome of evil and then there would be
good on the other side the archetypes
emerge and culture with the dualistic
consciousness in platonic consciousness
before they were allegories and in these
cultures and the early mythologies you
know the early mythologies like Zeus
wasn't the all-powerful person like he
would do things and they would his
daughter and turn into an animal and the
animals get all this like weird stuff
would go on much much richer
appreciation of life as it is the
archetypes are reduction symbolic
reductions but in indigenous in these
other kind of foraging tribes these
early cultures that have remained today
I mean there's a more sophisticated not
that's not how their stories go their
stories go more like social media in the
coronavirus really truly that is
actually more how their stories go
and part of our I think what's being
asked of us is how can we become more
real in this information ecology it's
actually perhaps more real than the
bubble we've been in I mean some people
are saying coronavirus is a good thing
that's like saying coyote is good like
maybe it's a good thing so this is kind
of like trying to what's being at these
internal working models are no longer
adequate to the transparency of the
world and so these deeper structures
are things to really be mindful of and
see if they're helpful and see when
they're limiting and you you know you
can do this like for example if you've
ever told a story about your childhood I
mean there's certain stories you tell
and you like it kind of like presents
your parents you know I was born Italian
family every night my father
buh-buh-buh-buh
you tell this story over and over again
and then at a certain point you like you
realize it's not a real story like you
realize that's not really how it
happened so this is this the point about
your always retrospectively generating
the paths so it fits with your idea of
who you are now and then there's a
question of whether the past can ever be
recaptured
we can't ever know who our parents were
really when we were young because we
were too young to know they were we can
only try to know who they are as
individuals today all the rest is just
internal churning it's a deeper level of
internal talk it's a habit that goes
around and around and around at this
more subtle structure or structure of
psychological structure
yeah so conspiracy theories are part of
this need for us to make sense of the
world one of the things that's
interesting about conspiracy theories
you know I hate the term a lot of a lot
of when the mainstream explanation
doesn't make sense this need to make
sense this is what arises spontaneously
and the way I would like to see I would
like to see all these ideas and
questions enter the information ecology
and constantly how can all of this be
happening at the same time how can be
one Hospital be overwhelmed and 65% of
the hospitals
be under you know be laying off people
how can we state that those two things
simultaneously and then what is the
relevant or the adequate response to
that and yeah so in the sense that
there's some kernel of truth in every
conspiracy theory is because someone is
speaking of their experience first of
all whether it's correctly or not
correctly interpreted but also there's a
sense in which it's a ritual response
like you feel some threat you feel some
confinement and you're gonna respond in
a ritual or archetypal way and what
comes out of your mouth is like some
kind of you know construct that may be
over the top the aliens brought
coronavirus down or something like that
but I think we need to be able to live
we learn how to let go of needing one
narrative to connect all the dots in the
sociology of information and let all of
it in to play different degrees and then
move from a place of response it's kind
of an unknowing really the biggest thing
is to let go when you can't have a
predictive narrative when it is
uncertain is to let go of the need to
settle for you know a story that trumps
everything
so Prati says so once we have dissolved
these psychological structures will you
proceed non conceptually replace them
with better distilled models yes so is
that a question or a statement ready no
that's a question so obviously this is
super super interesting and I also love
like the the cutting through of the
inner child structure right there but
but at the end of the day what is the
the next step we dissolved them but I'm
sure they're quite useful to construct
reality with so my question is do I
eventually become completely non
conceptual and receive everything but my
intuition says that that might make it
really time-consuming to be able to
respond to reality so I would need to
create some shortcuts some new
conceptual scaffoldings yeah so um
there's always an ability to touch with
those structures I can get into a minor
child but I don't think I have an inner
child
I think I'm downwardly cause II just
like you know we said we could do that
yeah I'm I'm Reed animating the pathways
that are the inner child and I also know
I can tell when I'm putting too much
story in it I'll tell you how I can tell
I'm putting too much Dorian I feel the
violin strings it's too sentimental
children are not sentimental about
themselves you see the difference so I
can get touched in touch with me in a
child but I know when I'm storing it
because I feel the little violin strings
happening children are not sentimental
about themselves
so you start to relate you start to make
these distinctions in what's being
constructed
I went through a point in my life when I
was what first was my partner that I
have now we went to visit his his family
on Nantucket and it was one of these
beautiful and he went way out on the
beach there was one of these beaches
with no one there and the sunset was
amazing and they had a carnival there
and his two girls like when I was a kid
I loved the merry-go-round because there
was too too too much of uh I couldn't I
didn't like the the scary rides and his
two daughters my my husband's brother's
daughters went on the merry-go-round
they're really young and they're on the
ground and it was the sunset and the
beach knew my partner was my new
boyfriend and the whole thing and I had
a meltdown I had a meltdown watching
them on the merry-go-round because I
thought they're so happy now and between
now and when they grow up all the pain
they have to go through in the
distractive it was just overwhelmed
whelming right
that's the little there's a story I put
a story on top of what it is to be a
child like the little backwards had too
much of that and that little violin
plays that's that's and strengthing so
that's part of it is you you you start
to utilize these and call
subpersonalities or transitional
structures just like when you get pulled
over by the cop right I know what to do
with my body I can just step into that
little role but I feel the creativeness
of it
I feel the optionality in it so you have
you you do have those but what you lose
is this need for biographical coherence
those all those options are no longer
threaded by something you really believe
in and you start to I know we have to go
soon and you start to hear people stop
when they're in autobiographical
coherence
for those of you that are working like
this the person coming out of
autobiographical here incoherence will
start to use the term what's the
authentic self you see they're still
looking for a structure underneath the
autobiographical coherence now they know
the story's not real
what's the authentic self that's the
last-ditch attempt for someone to find a
thing that is their self so in like the
people I teach that's a lot of where
people always so we have this
transpersonal module called authenticity
in the generative self we move from the
sense of authentic self to the latent
generative self the process itself is
authentic not any one of those stages so
you start to see when that question
arises it's an unsolvable question
because you're still looking for a
psychological structure that's the
authentic self the authentic self is not
a psychological structure is the things
that capable of generating structures
and organizing reality and then on the
other side of it people start talking
about
they use it language like they think
that you know it's not up to me I'm a
vehicle of evolution I'm just I'm being
used by a bigger process I'm an
instrument so the notion of trying to
find something in the psychological
structure gives way to you're just part
of this larger movement so that's kind
of where me ask that that's kind of
weird that kind of spiritual technology
happens right in those those stages
there and that's that's how it typically
arises yep thank you for that a super
super helpful I'm sorry Ryan
Browns up to your initial comment right
because you spoke about intention is a
way to channel the energy and at that
point the question that came for me was
if I'm looking at an unfolding system
how can I enforce a preconceived
intention because that was creating a
friction between how my energy wants to
flow versus what I think it should flow
like exactly
yeah you know so this is why I really
appreciate the questions because there's
many Forks into into into the into the
conversation but yes that's one of the
traps that's why I said you have to get
deeper and you could start to taste the
energy of the thought or the I you know
it'll be different for different people
for me it's always the violin it's
always got to have something scent too
sentimental that's a little habit
although there's you know there's
there's authentic grief and stuff too
but you you start to realize that where
that when the trap is being set for you
by your ego you get snookered okay well
this was a big dive lots of very
sophisticated ideas in this conversation
so just let it live in your imagination
and don't try to jump down to too much
of a thing and I'm the host now and I
want my duty is to remind you that the
stoah is a place of dialogue around what
matters most at the knife edge of
history or something consciousness and
we operate on the kid society this is
being given to you as a gift
your presence here is already a gift but
if you choose to support this door
there's some way to do that and I
haven't learned about it yet there's a
link so thank you very much love you all
[Music]