welcome to meditating Mutombo Vicki we
do this every weekday morning at 9:30
Eastern Time with Monday's alternating
between a new lesson which we call a
dharma day and following Monday would be
and what we call deep ayah day which we
review the entire ecology practices if
you're doing this for this first time
welcome please continue to meet with us
but I recommend you check out the links
in the description to this video where
you'll find links to previous lessons
and sits go immediately again lesson one
and then once a week perhaps twice a
week do a new lesson and you'll very
quickly integrate and catch up with us
now I have an announcement regarding
next week due to scheduling difficulties
and this is going to start perhaps
happening a little bit more frequently
as as things open up we won't be able to
meet Tuesday and Wednesday we won't be
able to meet Tuesday and Wednesday of
next week
I'm hoping that you guys will make
arrangements to meet together at the
same time on the discord server I think
that would be a very good idea I think
into so it's very good that we have this
more extended community and it would
also be an opportunity for many of you
to meet and get involved with that
extended community so please take
advantage of this and turn it into an
opportunity for connection and further
sign a building rather than just as a
missed missed classes please help me by
liking this video and this entire video
stream because it will raise its a
profile on the youtube search algorithm
and that will help me to help as many
people as possible at the end of every
lesson at the end of every city should
say we have QA please limit the
questions
to this course you can ask questions
from any part of this course but please
limit those questions to this course for
more general encompassing questions
please come to my livestream a general
Q&A on YouTube every third Friday of the
month at 3:00 p.m. Eastern Time
that will be July 17th of this month I
think that's everything so once again
once I say begin we'll begin with
chanting and then we'll go into the
silence it give yourself a position
please set your phone's on do not
disturb
and we will now begin
[Laughter]
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
you get a solid set
so they come out of your practice trying
as best you can to integrate what you
cultivated in your practice with your
everyday consciousness cognition
character and communitas perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
so let's begin with a an observation
from Brett pleasure of doubt observation
one thing I've started doing is when I
feel the urge to look at the time I
saved myself there was only now and the
urge seems to go away
thank you for shining that bright will
especially we get into with my patients
will see the deep truth and the
interconnection between our sense of
time and our sense of being and our
sense of self and all those although
those are not categorically identical
they have a non categorical identity
interpenetration with each other for
those of you who more philosophical that
this was the core you know heidegger's
working being int and time and there's
been some recent work by the by the
korean philosopher johann cox the scent
of time so time is one of the things
that we it's it's that like it's part of
the the fundamental framing lens of our
being and but it's a dot lights a
bi-directional lens if you'll allow me
to play with the metaphor and that it's
a framing up simultaneously of ourselves
and our being and of our world and of
our being in the world and so one of the
things that will start to change on is
your relationship to the mystery of time
because time is so integral to our
fundamental framing it's transparent to
us it's hard to see it Augustine or
Agustin there's two different uncie
Asians of his name famously said I know
what time is instant until somebody asks
me so time is a mystery you every
attempt to grasp it conceptually realize
it you realize that you're presupposing
time in the very conceptualization
that's how profound time is but yet
also what is more familiar to what is
more in every moment than time and so
this practice will take the pasta into
meta and that will start reorienting you
towards some of these fundamental
mysteries and the reorientation will
come out in the way Brett was sharing
they will come out in very practical
thing as you do but because the way our
culture has sort of separated
practicality from profundity I want to
emphasize the fact that although these
are very practical transformations they
are nevertheless profound and so it's
very important to share them with us so
thank you very much for Brett for that
we don't have to be philosophers but we
can learn from them hopefully we all do
need to practice finally Oh Sophia the
Philae Oh which means the community love
for Sophia the wisdom that Ford's
self-transcendence mark the fehb is
their value enchanting by itself how
important is really maybe through the
standing movement to the chanting
effectiveness so yeah you can do there
are many traditions and I have done this
where even where the entire city is to
chant if you're going to chant for an
extended period I would recommend you
emphasize the routing perhaps what you
can do
Marc is to the stand the standing
exercises emphasize the reading and then
when you sit maybe very quickly do that
with that version of routing that goes
with the city the seated cheek um just
you know inhale exhale shift
inhale exhale shift all the way down
that will only take you probably a
minute or so and then go into the
chanting that would that would be very
helpful I think
zim it's good to see you again the
process of investigating phenomena with
mindfulness in the past now and opening
to their being in Metta seems to be
blending into each other in my practice
am I losing an important distinction
no no they mutually afford each other in
to penetrate each other you are
beginning to realize or maybe better to
say proj net is beginning to realize
itself through you that
what's taking shape and taking on a life
in you in your awareness and in your
fundamental framing that's Praja
celebrate that
don't don't clutch at it celebrate it
cultivate it
befriend it let it grow let it grow then
and go welcome been always a pleasure to
have you here
observation having conflict with friend
feeling intense in meditating distracted
by repeated imagery of frightening
monsters realize this is how I see the
conflict excellent now using CBT to
change thinking yes excellent so van
probably knows that there is a lot of
there there there's quite a bit and it's
accumulating I want to be more precise
empirical evidence for the effectiveness
of integrating mindfulness and CBT
together and we're going to talk about
this later because CBT cognitive
behavioral therapy is a direct and
explicit descendant from stoicism which
we're going to be studying in the wisdom
of Hypatia and notice what Ben is doing
and what the research is showing he's
taking mindfulness from the Eastern
tradition and he's integrating it with a
direct and powerful and active and
empirically empirically based version a
descendant of stoicism he's taking
mindfulness and this practice from
stoicism and he's integrating them
together into a complementary practice
which is excellent that's it that's
exactly the kind of thing I'm talking
about and that combination right that
combination of
Vikas Khanna and aspects of Metta and
then using CBT to reorient and leave a
fundamentally reframe that's very
powerful combination and it's it's a
great it's it's great exemplification of
the way I'm talking about of how you can
find the connections that establish a
powerful self-correcting and self
deepening the ecology of practices so
thank you for sharing that and thank you
very much so this has been very good
good before we see if there's any more
questions I'm going to take this
opportunity to remind everybody once
again next week Tuesday and Wednesday I
will not be here I strongly encourage
you guys to organize something on the
discord server it's a wonderful
opportunity for you to continue to meet
for the life of the Sangha to flow on
its own independently from me which is a
good thing and for the Sangha and the
discourse community to build more
connections together I think this is a
very good thing so I want to thank you
all for joining it's always really I
it's just great to be here
and I really appreciate this so much oh
looks like we have one more question
that snuck in Mick glance has got a
question
welcome Mick sharing actually Sharon I
found being present in the moment during
the sit much easier by refusing to aside
words to any distracting thoughts sounds
etc that's right if you can and if you
can if you can label or if you can
notice it without having to use a
linguistic label you can just note the
distraction not get involved with its
content and return that's good as I
mentioned all of this inner speech is
your easier coach and at some point if
you get a sense you can let it go and
you let it go and you find not on
you can do it without the inner coach
but there's that improvement that make
is relating that's that is the sign
right that you should move forward into
the silent version of I mean inner
silent version of the practice so thank
you sharing that back that's that's
excellent so once again thank you all
for joining I want to thank my dear
friend and technomage Lamar my beloved
Simon Jason who's always behind the
scenes pinch-hitting and helping me to
set up please subscribe to this channel
to be notified in the next video there
you'll find links to the lecture series
awakening from the meeting crisis and
links to the dialogo series voices with
verve a key where these themes and
related themes are explored in depth and
situated within a more encompassing
framework please invite others who might
benefit by sharing this series I'm
trying to help as many people as I can
as I've already noted you have a more
encompassing community that is already
integrating in a very living manner with
the singer the discord server community
and I strongly suggest that you get
involved with that community
it's a powerful home we're doing this
every weekday morning at 9:30 Eastern
Time except next Tuesday and Wednesday
and I'll ask you to please remember that
continuity of practice and that's why
meeting of the discord server on that
Tuesday and Wednesday zone is so
important continuity of practice is more
important than sheer quantity of
practice there is no enemy worse than
your own mind and body
there is no friend no a-line no true
companion on the path better than your
own mind and body be lanced unto
yourself and to each other take the care
everyone and I'll see you tomorrow