on YouTube scholar but I can also put it
as unlisted which Janelle pointed out so
that there's no like it's like it's
public you can just covered it myself
recently it's perfect for this kind of
thing it's absolutely perfect for this
yet to Sheraton game be and do those
things yeah we've been having the rebel
wisdom discord there's a few of us get
together periodically and try and have a
role Omega spy discussions and we record
those and exactly that they go up
unlisted on my channel and the links go
out and then if they and if they want to
send the links on to other people it's
fine it's just you know it's two or
three hours of people sitting around
talking about it's not I don't really
want to clutter up my channel with that
kind of stuff you know it's just not not
of interests
anyone that isn't that isn't directly
involved in some way yeah which is fair
enough
I mean covering up my channel that's
what I'm here for like really let's
figure out right now I have a our live
board meeting on Fridays and then I have
like a goal-setting meeting on Saturdays
both of which are live for people to
watch on my terminal then whenever I
want to post something and I have the
odd conversation some of which are
private and some of which are public and
some of which are unlisted and I've had
I've had a thought I was thinking of
doing it on my channel but actually I
think it's better if it's a thing on its
own like I'm not necessarily suggesting
this as a title but thoughts on game be
that kind of thing right where people
make maybe put a limit of five minutes
on it I mean I'm I'm like in the 98th
percentile of openness so rules of any
kind or abhorrent to me right but maybe
put like a five minute limit on it
something like that so that people don't
waffle on too much and just I mean I
would be quite happy to curate this and
so somebody put something up and then
somebody else comments on there and you
put it in a playlist so that they follow
on sequentially from each other and then
this sort of thing built up into a
library of ideas and themes of ideas
which various people have contributed to
a thread of discussion you know and so
somebody's
so a little bit like the Facebook page
you know if somebody puts up
post and then about commencing Reds as a
consequence of that but but you know
video contributions where where people
actually sit in front of a camera and
you know they can I all means use some
graphics as well some music whatever put
together you know a little bit more
artistry sometimes I think and really
you know can really bring the point home
so yeah the genes-- need to express
beyond just sitting and typing out
little posts although it would be in
many ways kind of similar structurally
mmhmm yeah I like I enjoy video more
than type you know which is why I'm not
super active in the Facebook group
because I find the written word isn't as
great at expressing role Omega for me
anyway like it it's reading into what
people say and not I feel I can't
express my it's not that I can't express
myself in the written word it's that I
prefer to do it on video or there's more
nuance and I can understand the person
and hopefully get my point across and
kind of read the other person and see if
it's landing in it and you can clarify
in the moment and you get tone and body
language and all of that kind of stuff
no and I I agree with you the the
advantage that the written word has over
that kind of communication is you have a
chance to really consider exactly how
you want to say something right whereas
in the moment you're very much on the
fly right and and and although you're in
good faith you may be not expressing
yourself as clearly as you would do with
a bit of chance to really think about
how he wants to say that so the written
word is good for that but but in terms
of generative discussion I agree with
you face to face
you're also I although I have my moments
I feel that even sitting with it I don't
get more articulate because I either
just second-guess it and I'm like wait
no that doesn't quite make sense or I
put so much background and like caveats
that it kind of makes it almost
unreadable like this piece and at least
in language like spoken language went on
doing that when I can stop it sentence
and just go back
it's also like realize it's happening
because of body language would be like
okay maybe I don't need to answer every
question because I can see that it's
landing right I don't need to think of
the six questions I'm sure you have
based on the thing I just said and
answer them all at the same time mmm
yeah I see you mean I see so
anticipating what the reader might be
responding to what you said and they're
trying to answer that rather than just
saying what you want to say yeah yeah
yeah yes that must be a real tangle yeah
for sure I love what you wrote I read
half of it and then you posted it in the
I was like great I have to go back and
read it yeah the version I posted is
considerably more polished than the one
I sent you I kind of got a little bit
stuck I've been working on it for a few
days and I kind of got a little bit
stuck where I wasn't entirely happy with
it and I knew it wasn't quite how I
wanted to say but I couldn't quite put
my finger on what it was and I didn't
because I was so immersed in it was
really really hard for me to step back
and see it anymore you know what I mean
so I sent it out to a few people to just
try and get some feedback you know what
what did they think of it and yeah a
couple of bits of feedback that I got
were actually really helpful and and
pointed me in the direction of the
things that had been bugging me and I I
think I was able to polish it off a
little bit so yeah the version that I
posted I'm pretty I'm pretty happy I
mean you never 100% NamUs or you say
probably not very much from what you
just said but I've done a little bit of
writing and I find that you know you
polish it and you polish it and you get
to a point where every time you really
all you're actually doing is maybe
inserting a comma but it doesn't have to
be there you know what I mean it could
be with or without a comma and at some
point you're just for the sake of
tinkering you got to let it go even
though you feel you know maybe it's not
perfect so yeah anyway yeah it's become
as you can probably tell actually it's
become a little bit become quite ended
up becoming quite a personal personal
yeah that makes sense yeah yeah how much
of it is held in each individual person
and how much of it is a group thing and
how much of it is like you said source
like something we go back to and and
that's what
I was looking for when I first got to
gain B I'm like what are the what's the
checklist right like what makes
something gain B or not game B that it's
on and that it's and that might never be
the case there might never be a
checklist because let's say there's 10
things on the checklist well if you meet
9 out of the 10 is it not game B is it
yeah but that whole modality of thinking
of checking off things on that's game a
though right I mean that that whole
that's that's structural definitional
algorithmic you know what I mean testing
whether or not is we're testing whether
or not is something is game B by using
game a methodology that seems to me to
be and it is it is hard not to because
we all hold our whole lives right almost
impossible not to yeah yeah yeah
absolutely and so whereas I I come to
game B in a different way where I
everyone's like nobody knows what game B
is I'm like I do I do know what game B
is I've been sitting with it for three
years playing it by myself because no
one else wants to play it with me which
of course isn't game be it can't be in
someone's head it has to be real most
interactions and relationships but I'm
like I kind of know how we get a way I
don't anyway we can get to date me and
all the things that can go wrong with it
or about playing it and fixing it as you
go
that wasn't so popular in the space okay
it's becoming as you go because but
because the one thing that you hold on
to is that directionality right I mean
in order in order to do that you have to
have a clear sense it doesn't mean you
can say it doesn't mean you can write it
down but it but you've got within you a
clear sense of the directionality you
know what I mean and that's what sauce
is for me that's exactly what sauce is
is is is that thing which you can't say
but which you know you know what I mean
you you know it and you feel when you're
going in that direction and you also
feel when you're not going in that
direction and you maybe can't explain
why but you just it just doesn't feel
right ya know and that because that
piece that little piece of it not
feeling right can be different for
different people right like it feels
right for you does it mean it feels
right for me
but the more we work together the more
probably it's cohesive right probably if
it's all new and for me it's Omni one
for you and part of being on me when
it's listening to you and hearing is it
Omni when right like does this work for
you
and not demanding that it does right or
it's Mandy that it does it like meeting
the individual where they're at and
asking what works what doesn't work how
can we improve it for you even if I
don't owe you that right actually want
here what do you actually want here
right that's that I think that's a
really key thing to drill down to and
that can sometimes not be easy to find
right people what people come into a
thing thinking that they want is not
actually what they want but they
actually want is something deeper than
that you know some meet need that's not
being met that this thing is related to
but not actually the thing itself you
know and that that need to be met more
effectively in some way that they simply
hadn't thought of right and so drilling
down into what people actually want from
a thing I think is really really really
important I can't remember where I heard
that but it really struck home with me
was it someone talking about
negotiations right that you know if
you're starting ponta negotiations is a
what foundational principles can we all
agree on here and be what do we all
actually want out of this yeah if you
can get to that if you can get to the
truth of that then it's almost really
it's almost always really easy to come
up with something that everybody's
really happy with yeah in my community
which is like most people get most of
what they want most of the time and I
think that's a good goal to obtain right
no one's gonna get everything they want
all of the time they don't get stuff you
may want all of the time it's like yeah
most of it I don't get most of it
because a group isn't going to give you
everything and I think also with our
current global society like what one
group doesn't give you maybe another
group can write that you can you don't
need to get everything from one group of
people but how do we meet each other's
needs as individuals as small groups and
as a global efficient body that yeah I
mean I've been thinking
there's been a post on this on the page
just read there's been a thing on the
page as three Snowden if you've been
reading through it Jordan introduced the
earth the term of severe more at least
introduces me I've not heard before have
you been really through that thread no
one is though what is the word divyam
undersea ib are you a massive IAM is a
civic unit if you like so it's a it's a
coherent group of people who are
sovereign you know they they they they
have intimate deep bonds with each other
there are there a coherent community you
know what I mean exactly how you go
about defining that and to what extent
they are self-sufficient and and so on
in a physical sense is debatable but
that's but that's the idea that's the
it's the sort of I mean I've got a
really really similar idea I I see it as
triangles right but that these that
these are the repeating units
I've got scientific mathematical
training so I kind of see things in
those terms but the the repeating unit
of a game B type society is ideally a
self-sufficient in terms of power food
water
you know the mainland basic skills that
kind of thing
communities and that they exactly like
you just I really like what you just
said because it kind of expanded this
schema for me a little bit so that
you're not going to get absolutely all
of your entire hierarchy of needs met in
this relatively small group of 50 or 100
people right and and that's right and
that's kind of troubled me without me
really thinking about what it is but
this is really good and so you have to
go outside of your immediate group to
have certain of your needs and that's
going to be different for different
people but what this does also this is
not a weakness right this is a strength
this is the beginning of creation of
meaningful links and meaningful
relationships between between the
coherent groups right thereby he's
imitating the possibility of meaningful
collaboration when many of these groups
need to get together to do something big
right and then you've already you've
already got the links that are formed
between these things you have meaningful
relationship between individuals from
different groups who can then smooth the
pathway towards things going on between
these groups I really
like that I really like that a lot to me
one thing keeps coming up in the game be
spaces the Dunbar number right that like
you could only have a cohesive community
with up 250 people and I think with the
internet and with our global society
we've already expanded on that
considerably not because like if I
myself can only hold relationships with
up 250 people that's acquaintances
that's deep connections that's all of
that it's not going to be one cohesive
group it's gonna be you know like 50
people in my church or 50 people at my
school or 50 people in my community and
those people are also gonna have their
own you know spiritual community their
own their own it's like a Venn diagram
right there's some overlap between your
church community your school community
and your local community there is some
overlap there right but there is also
some which is which does not overlap
I like the Venn diagram thing I think
that represents it well right but ya
know absolutely overlays of overlays of
overlays again it's relationship right
it's it's relationships across all sorts
of different levels all scales yeah yeah
we're very much on the same page aren't
we very very much and that's like I
think we're I don't know if we all need
to concentrate on that but it's it's
finding your own individual like
everyone has a space to give from and
everyone has like even if all you're
bringing to the table is like and this
is where game a meets or it's hard to
envision game B from within game like
game is like are you success yeah are
you successful what is your degree what
do you have to offer what do you have to
market where as in I how I see game B is
like every single individual is kind of
perfectly them and so they have their
nodes they have their connection they
have their data they have like there is
no such thing as a quality or
unpalatable I cube ring you to the table
which is huge it's you know and everyone
can bring them to the table you don't
need to be better than you are you don't
need to know more than you do you don't
need to have more connections than you
do
just be you right even if you have two
connections even if you you know
no nothing that's such an amazing space
to be in because then we all have to
explain it to you
which brings us you want to pick to you
right so like every person has has value
in what they in what they bring to the
table if they're willing to bring it to
the table and that's the piece it's that
it has to be voluntary right it has to
be if I'm forcing you to come to the
table it's not gonna work
but if I invite you to the table and
allow you to be yourself and allow you
to bring what you're able to bring then
there's so much value there already that
we don't honor in society right it's
it's well what about these people who
aren't contributing like there's
literally no way to not contribute are
you you you're contributing but you
gotta do this to two things came up
while you were saying that one is can't
force anyone but at the same time people
should I hate to use the word should I
withdraw the use of the word should
somehow or other an appreciation needs
to grow within people that they have a
responsibility to the world at large to
show up as best they can and that by
failing to do so actually in the long
run they're harming themselves right
because of the connection of everything
to everything and so it's not a
compulsion it's not an obligation in the
sense that you get punished in some way
if you don't do it right I'm not like
that but but there but there should be a
feeling of I'm letting things down by
not did this making any sense what I'm
saying don't figure that I mean yeah
fair enough fair enough yeah you um if
you're not there yet mentally
spiritually emotionally to say hey I'm
part of a bigger hole right what I give
I get back then you're not there yet and
that's a perfect place to be in like
you're not peace then right you're like
you've got to show you that like when
you have so much abundance and so much
coming coming at you and this is the
beauty to me I'm creating game B from
game a
is that game a as broken as it is is
still working it's still here and still
keeping the food in the supermarket it
still has and so we can fix it from
within that space and so we don't need
to recreate everything all at once so
let's say what I think of is the way to
path to game B is I'm creating a
technology cooperative it gets all of
our needs met it gets all of our like
every individual can come to the table
and say what they need we're not
obligated to give it to you but we can
give you the tools to co-create it with
a group of people right and so from that
space that kind of lost my train of
thought here from that space you're I
don't know what I was going to say to
people what what they need and giving it
to them and read everything so if you
have a business you don't this isn't a
cult you don't need to hand your
business over at the same time play a
little bit and can't beat it like
anything you co-create with a group
you've been given the tools to co-create
with that belongs to the comments right
like having and then when there's
conflict because oh I thought this was
gonna be mine and instead it's part of
the Commons like owning that piece and
you like right so how do we make sure in
the future this is very laid out how do
we make sure like only mistakes is or
like challenges as they happen and
figuring it out and that there's
something cool about coming out of game
a and that we have to out-compete it and
we will naturally out-compete it because
it's so broken and yet it works enough
that like we have a space to play in
yeah you're more optimistic than I am I
mean my vision my ultimate vision is
extremely optimistic right but the the
prospects of us actually morphing game a
into game being some kind of organic
peaceful not too disruptive and
destructive manner I
yeah I'm less optimistic about that than
you are let's put it that way
I've sorry heard a couple of people
recently say including that Brazilian
guy upon remember his name bonito posted
a link to his video really really cool
guy his name escapes me anyway that
people don't change until they have to
right and and III just think until
things get really bad until game a
actually breaks and is seen to break and
its failings are you know obviously and
undeniably exposed because it's falling
apart and it's in tatters now until then
I mean not unless optimistic listen I
hope you're right I hope you're right
I've continued to fight the good fight
right but III yeah don't show your I am
NOT realest person but from that space I
have created in my head a way to
actually get there working with our
within our human nature and working with
out competing gay made its own the space
and so I have that vision in that hope
because it's working within that sphere
right it's not requiring people be
selfless when there clearly can be
selfish it's not requiring everyone
Bueller cooperative when they also like
competition it's but it's creating a
space that is based on cooperation right
it's not saying you're a bad person if
you're competing well maybe I think you
are but it's saying like this space is
for cooperation right here you like if
you're working a 40-hour a week job
maybe you're working here one hour leak
right and as you see it benefit right as
you see things that are created that are
omni wind that benefit everybody that we
all own together and we all have a say
in creating then you're gonna it's gonna
prove itself to you right it's not
because i love a lot of the ideas that
are about collapse and then we created a
girl and I hate the collapse piece I
don't want yeah and that's where like I
think globally yes but personally we
will have collapse right like there it
comes with them like through meditation
through spiritual work through any
it's claps right but the world doesn't
collapse hopefully we can support each
other in that I think a lot of people
especially in the game bSpace have come
to this space through collapse through
health issues through just like personal
world shifting collapse you know she was
right like your paradigm collapses and
you need a new one you have the more we
can create the ways to support each
other where it doesn't need to go to
zero right like our system doesn't need
to collapse it is collapsing right our
current system is on trajectory to go
off the cliff and so the more we can
kind of own that but also own that it's
doing something right like I don't want
the hospitals to go under I don't want
food not to be in the supermarkets
before we figure out how to not need
food news and yes interesting to see to
what degree individual responsibility
plays a role there right so for given
the giving the example of hospitals you
know if everything is breaking down
around you and you know the money system
collapses right money's not worth
anything anymore for example do doctors
and nurses still show up to work and
cure sick people you know I mean knowing
full well that they're never getting
paid again at the world I mean I I would
like to believe I don't know only the
only only the situation would tell I
would like to believe that many many
many people would not just doctors and
nurses but you know farmers and drivers
and whatever you know who have people
that do that do actually essential stuff
I like to believe that we would figure
it out you know what I mean that people
would get together in exactly this kind
of thing into little group to say all
right listen things are up
around here how are we going to sort
this out people depend on us right how
are we going to sort this out I'd like
to believe that you know that's that's a
good road I think to gain be that it
plays that forces us into the situation
of having to create those relationships
you know in response to our broader
responsibility to the community at large
you know it could force it like that I
think and not group not global collapse
right like there has been times where
currency has been so devalued and this
hyperinflation we see how that works and
it's not great but there is ingenuity
there for sure right people have black
markets people figure out people are
still alive in Venezuela people are
still alive in Zimbabwe right they were
still alive and in Germany they've had
big huge repercussions from those things
but having the way to build the
scaffolding under society so it doesn't
collapse so that we don't because the
truth is is if it goes away tomorrow no
people driving our food to the
supermarket aren't going to show up when
you know I mean they're part of a system
so like but food isn't there to be
delivered the food isn't like the
farmers didn't necessarily the farmers
are going to sell it directly to the
consumer right it's gonna be a lot less
complex and a lot more lapses and so we
rely on complex complexity like I live
in a big city I'm not gonna I don't have
a relationship with farmers right I have
relationship with some people who garden
but not enough to feed all of Vancouver
and the more then we can look at that
honestly and be like right so let's
build that right let's build the
relationship direct with the farmers we
don't have multinational huge
corporations taking over we have the
ability for farmers to make a living or
they also have to be transparent in the
way that they're they're being stewards
of the lands right that like I'm not
gonna give you my money as a farmer and
trust you if I don't have access to like
why should I trust you over
multinational corporation right what are
you giving me over a multinational
corporation if you're giving me a
working planet and food sovereignty yeah
I want to work with you over
multinational corporation if you're
still doing all the and you're
still costing me the same amount of
money and I'm still eating the same crap
food no I don't want to support you
right like the more we can build it into
the system the transparency it can it
can be integrated even more deeply than
there and I again I'm quite open to the
criticism of naivety and hey this is
just never how it could possibly be in
the real world but I think can be
integrated even more deeply than that
rather than having farmers per se I mean
I don't see any reason why every single
member of these you know unitary
communities these cbons can't
we contribute to the production of
nutrition for the whole community I mean
the the the you know spending a couple
of hours a week on growing something is
is is a not a big sacrifice be a
pleasure and it you know it means that
you know you're growing the broccoli and
you're you've got the chickens for the
eggs and you whatever it might be you
know that it further integrates the
community with each other and and and I
think this reflects the idea of
integration of process across scale in
nature as well right the important thing
is that we produce food in order for
that to be as anti fragile and
sustainable and as generative and as in
you know as gluey and you know I mean
like gluing people do that part of the
thing of gluing relationships together
then that like everything else should be
decentralized as much as makes sense to
do so and I think with food production
it actually makes sense to decentralize
that all the way right down to the
individual every individual has a
contribution to make the food production
why not I think especially for food we
all the contribution except for the tiny
fraction of people who have something so
fundamentally important to do that food
production way way way open nothing as
far as I'm concerned is absolute in
second stone and you know and completely
immune from circumstance yeah yeah I
wasn't trying to suggest that yeah like
my neurosurgeon and stuff you know like
I'm okay taking over their their piece
of food production if they're cutting
people open and saving their lives and
doing this is exactly the kind of guy
who would do an excellent job of growing
rare herbs on his windowsill that
require very precise conditions to be
maintained in order to flourish kind of
thing you know what I mean that could be
his hobby and you know his his neat
contribution to food right I I'm just
saying for example is there's no reason
that he still couldn't be involved in
some way yeah yes like the um what's the
word like the consent piece like if they
want to be if it's absolutely
absolutely be part of growing because
that's an amazing part of the it's um
it's an amazing piece right to be able
to have your hands in the dirt and be
able to grow and yet some people really
don't want to do that and so I think
food production is a product like it's
growing it it's prepping it it's getting
it to the people whether it's five feet
away or whether it's it's nerds away its
its transporting and it's the whole
system because I think there are things
that can be decentralized and things
that can't be decentralized and so you
can grow 99 percent of your food within
your community or ninety percent of your
food within your community there's gonna
be some things that like don't make
sense to grow in every different I
understand these conditions are
difficult to create and so it only makes
sense to create them in a few places or
whatever you know I completely accept
that I mean at the other end at the
other extreme end you know nobody wants
to grow anything right is we haven't got
time for a busy doing other things none
of us want to grow anything right
and again fair enough I'm not saying
that people shouldn't be able to make
that choice on that but there are
already in existence I've been for some
reason this has been popping up a lot in
my notifications is these automated
vertical farms alright these automated
hydroponic vertical farms which take us
very very very different ground room
used up relatively for the amount of
food they produce very little water very
little nutrients all conditions be
optimized things grow really quickly you
can grow them year-round things that you
couldn't otherwise grow in that climate
blah blah blah blah blah and so you know
it would again it wouldn't require a
massive amount of investment to install
these things in urban environments where
people don't really have the facility to
grow but they can still have food being
produced locally and make a contribution
to the maintenance and production and
harvesting and distribution and cooking
of and preparing of and so on so yeah
III it's this is kind of one of the
points I was trying to get across in the
essay that the idea of sticking to
source is that the source the point is
as far as is sensible localized and make
accessible and make anti fragile so that
in the event of collapse somewhere it
doesn't mean that the whole world now
doesn't have this thing right the you
know there's
modular ground-up construction so that
whatever happens anywhere like you know
like cells in a beehive if something
doesn't matter this is all still intact
and can rip you know can repair that
yeah that sort of thing yeah like we
need all of it it's like we need the
piece that is right like you're your
autonomous community and you grow 90
percent of your food but also some
can go wrong and we don't want you to
starve so like if you're connected I
think global society to be like right we
got food for you don't worry like your
crop fail don't worry we got everything
we're good right like especially with
climate change with technology and
there's this big to be broken piece of
game a slash capitalism that is like
just because you have a brilliant idea
just because you've built a better
mousetrap just cuz you built the most
automated amazing vertical farm doesn't
mean it exists on the market because
it's not designed for that it's designed
for the competitors to keep you out it's
designed for you know what I mean that
you need the entire system to work
whereas if you break it down to the
individual contribution and ask okay if
you have a brilliant idea how do we get
it to market right like how do we get it
to the people I don't care if it gets to
a market but how do we get it to the
people if you want your idea to be part
of the people right like if you want you
create a new spray nozzle for the
automated farm that that helps everyone
and everyone wants to have access to
that how do you actually how do we
assess it to make sure it's better how
do we have diversity so maybe different
all that comes out that comes out and
that comes out and the walls really
quickly if everybody has access to it
and they can just download the design
and 3d print it right very quickly
feedback will get onto the internet that
this doesn't work you know what I
mean this guy said it was great but
actually it doesn't work so this is self
regulation I don't think anyone needs to
worry about this regulating it doesn't
exist now so we need to worry about it
but we don't need to worry about it as
far as right that's the point is to
create that system exactly like you said
so that if it's 3d printed and there's a
way to feed back into the system to say
okay well this broke in two weeks and
then you know would have made been I
made it out of titanium
instead of you know this instead of
steel and it works even better able to
get back in so we can all improve it
right that you that and then again some
things maybe especially right now many
things can't be 3d printed right we're
at the infancy of 3d printing there's
very few materials that can be done
especially with a 3d printer that you
just you don't mean can buy for viral
but the more we can so instead of having
it a for-profit manufacturing having it
be okay well how many widgets do we need
right and how how cheaply / efficiently
can you actually make them and so does
it make sense to have a widget factory
in every small town with it's a 3d
printer absolutely but not if it's it's
a factory right well tell me what you
think of this the rather than investing
in factories to make widgets that rather
the investment is listen we need widgets
in the mean time so you know a bare
minimum widget production is maintained
just to satisfy the immediate need for
widgets but but actually for the long
term the investment should be going into
the refinement of 3d printing such that
people can design and print their own
widgets on the site right and so it's
about you know redirecting brainpower
and resources and so on in so the long
term solution rather than all we need
more widgets let's open let's make more
factories to make more widgets but you
know in the generative long term and
then of course once you advance three at
once in fast 3d printing technology to
the point where you can make design and
print your own widgets you know bespoke
widgets to do exactly what you want them
to do now you've also at the same time
alongside that created the technology
for people to make things other than
widgets bespoke and share them and so
you see what I mean and so this thing so
yeah I the wisdom to intelligently
target resources for the real long term
good I think that's that's that's a
that's a big feature of staying
connected to source right I the game a
wants you to right now make more widgets
cuz there's demand for widgets I can
sell lots of widgets so let's make more
widgets whereas and that's alright I've
made my point I'm gonna repeat myself
it's already the solution to like
print-on-demand right like you don't
need to you don't need to create a
million widgets and then make sure
there's a market for a million widgets
and how do you profit off of a billion
it's like do we need a widget printer
widget but until the technology's there
we need to figure out how many widgets
we need in society and then create them
in a factory type setting so we have
them and then like and then at the same
time empower people to be working on the
engineering piece of like one we need to
be able to 3d print widgets I may need
to be able to do that in multiple and
multiple materials and allow anyone who
wants to work in that space to work in
that space right you don't need to have
an engineering degree to figure those
things so you need to have a makerspace
you need to have people to be able to be
like you know what I mean if you had ten
thousand people around the world working
on that especially if you have the tools
to be able to communicate with each
other to stay where you are then it's
not necessarily your full-time job it
because no one I'm hoping has a
full-time job they don't want one that
you're playing right like you're like
this is what you're it you're in sweet
it's a game it's funny so you're trying
to figure out a puzzle exactly right
that's the spirit
exactly exactly that and as you say ten
thousand enthusiasts for this thing
around the world all I've just had a
great idea what do you think of this and
boom it goes out to the whole network
all at once right and everyone takes a
look at it you know you're really on to
something here and and so on and so on
yeah yeah it's it's actually frightening
to think of the pace at which innovation
and technology would take place in such
circumstances I mean it's pretty
terrifying what people would start
coming up with in a very short space of
time
yeah and that's like you're an optimist
because you think of capitalism in 10
years I've been doing this for three
years
and it's such a slow pace it's a
freaking snowball rolling down the hill
yeah handful of technology like a
handful like a way to find a group of
people a way to have like a global
conversation a way that like a tiny
handful of tools this thing explodes
because when you tap into human
ingenuity and let people tap into their
flow they don't need to do it full-time
a little bit here and there is plenty
absolutely you give them the ability to
instead of going on Facebook and Twitter
and getting this like gross feeling they
instead get to connect with people they
actually like and solve problems they
actually want to work on they knew that
that's why Wikipedia exists that's why
all of these things exists and when you
tap into that in every different sector
and I'm not assigning you engineering
I'm letting you be an engineer I don't
care what you're working on basically is
a way to happen is that you're working
on the technology cooperative yes that
we challenge your own individual nature
right now what's the idea cafe that's
our first project it's a YouTube channel
which is what you'll be participating in
well later today for me probably it's
more over you know it's late you should
not but that's okay anyway so that's
fine and creating the tools and so right
now we're creating the communication
tool which is the idea cafe to be able
to have a conversation with a large
group of people that's not an
engineering conversation that's a um
what do we need right like what what is
it would you do in your life I don't
know like like being able to have a
conversation with hundreds or thousands
or millions of people so that everybody
contributed and it still ends up leaving
somewhere bio them I can't I can't get
my head around you actually engineer
that what the architecture would be that
allows that to happen we're sort of
everyone has is becomes aware of that
which has gone on everywhere else I mean
that's this yeah how does that happen I
don't see any way to make that happen
how does it happen well there's a
concept called the World Cafe that they
have for like hundreds or thousands of
people it's not generally for millions
of people but in its real space in real
time you have like a days as set aside
for it and you have people show up and
they have cons so you have a thousand
people and there's room there's no I
heard you talk to Jordan about I heard
you I heard your conversation with
Jordan you talked about this yeah yeah I
remember
again for anyone that's listening to
this go ahead oh yeah I guess okay so
just so they mean in tables of four and
then you switch tables so there's an
effective bigger conversation happening
and there's your individual conversation
happening to be able to do that on a
grand scale so instead of going on
Twitter and yelling at each other you
can come on and discuss the question of
the day right when we first have it
they'll maybe one question the day as
the threshold of people grows there's
gonna be individual niches so maybe
you're the food piece right like how do
you which which can take any number
you're creating questions that don't
create division that instead create how
do you have a conversation and you're
voting on those questions what are the
most empowering you're learning how to
how to have the most empowering
questions that don't lead to debate and
instead lead to generative ideas and
we're learning how to create the tools
to actually have those generative ideas
means something in the actual world cafe
you're writing you're like taking notes
on the coffee table like on a piece of
paper that is that what's the word
tablecloth and and then you're coming
together at the end and harvesting that
conversation as long as we own that
we're never getting it right like we're
never getting it perfect how do we keep
improving that right how do we have a
tape of virtual tablecloth how do we
harvest yesterday's conversation the
next day and I think it's by having
another like literally just a question
around like with if a thousand people
have a conversation maybe if we're lucky
a hundred people want to harvest it
right so that is but those hundred
people kind of represent the thousand
because they were happy tunes with the
thousand and if you had the better ideas
if it really generated something you're
going to get more one harvest it so by
making a system so that um there's ten
thousand people having a conversation
the next day there's a thousand people
harvesting it and some of those thousand
are also participating in that day's
conversation and some won't you let it
go right you kind of have to let go that
you can't solve everything
your a piece your OneNote right you only
focus on what you want to focus on if
you don't want to talk about food
production don't talk about food
production talk about what you want to
talk about
and find find the group of people that
that you want to have a conversation
with and creating questions that are
irrelevant to that that niche and so
just by doing that I think we focus
because then there's gonna be tools that
were like right there's tools that
already exist right how to how to find
not açaí how to find a group but how to
run a group they're all they all cost
money they all cost a ridiculous amount
of money if you have 500 people working
on a project and there it's each $10 per
month per person that's a lot of money
that's funny we can create our own tool
with write that and so as we look for
ways to be like okay what would help
with this right what can we use that
already exists that's cool that's
Facebook well we recreate those things
because we don't want Google and
Facebook to own them but there's no
point in reinventing the wheel before we
need to so let's concentrate on how do
we create I do get cafe how do we create
the things that don't exist yet and then
create the ones that do and then once
you get to that point where you have a
handful of tools including tools to be
able to say this doesn't make sense to
me this isn't working for me this isn't
right to be able to constantly improve
it like we're using to the best of our
capability and looking for ways to
improve it and then once we get to a
certain point that the tipping point
happens and like everyone wants to come
on board and everybody wants to play and
everybody or maybe not but we don't need
everyone right we need a tiny fraction
of humanity concentrating on solving
humanity's problems and I think we're
ready for it we want it we just don't
have the tools yet we don't know what
exists yeah I mean I think at a systemic
level I think that's true you don't need
everybody on board figuring out how to
have to make better systems but I was I
there was a threads a little while ago
the way that and talking about what you
actually see is the problems being and
so you know if you see problems as being
poverty inequality climate change
whatever you know those are very very
very very long list of these things
right then yeah you need new systems to
manage resource distribution and energy
production and bla bla bla bla bla in in
in more effective ways but for me
personally these are not problems these
are symptoms of a far far far deep
hard to put your finger on malaise you
know which is a sense of you know
disconnection from meaningful
relationship and a sense of purpose and
a sense of place which comes from living
in these huge aggregate society is right
which in which a person is just you said
it before and I've said it in a recent
post person is just a tiny tiny little
cog in a wheel right with millions of
cog in a machine with millions and
millions and millions of other cogs and
really you've got no idea how you fit
into the grand scheme of things with you
it's very very difficult to feel
important or significant in any way
right whereas if you're a cog in the
tiny machine which is just a single
community you can see exactly what every
other cog is up to right and you can see
very very clearly that if your card
wasn't there this thing wouldn't
function at least not as well as it does
with you there right and so that
immediate excuse me a place and purpose
that that to me all the the absence of
that I should say that immediately is
the real problem right and and that is
why people turn to crime and to
addiction and to permit ISM and you know
why this and so on and all of these
problems in the world are actually
symptoms of that that's the problem
which is you know blacks where we
started this conversation I think the
idea of small groups forming
relationships with each other but that
you know thatthat small group thing is
there's like the inviolable unit if you
like again I don't like the word
inviolable but you know what I mean yeah
that that to me actually is where the
solution to the problems come from but
this in turn requires a complete value
system adjustment right internally in in
in in many many many people to ratchet
down to hang on what's actually
important is building developing
maintaining meaningful relationships
with the people in my life and the
things in my life that I could
and when you're spending eight hours of
your life going to a job that you know
is not fulfilling you in any way and
spending two hours each day going to and
from that job that you hate in
cars filled with you know lots and lots
and lots of you know this this it
doesn't it's a miracle to me actually
that we don't have suicide rates in the
twenty thirty percent kind of thing you
know I mean it's a testament to the
human spirit that sits there suicide
rates are not on that kind of scale
connected and addicted including what I
was saying sorry interrupted you of the
Indonesian right that the game a
addiction of like I got to make more
money I gotta like do this I got it you
know like we don't have time to sit back
and think about what's not working for
us whether you're the CEO or whether
you're the cog in the machine there's no
like you just aren't given space to be
and have it like look at your internal
relationships look at your connections
and I don't think a lot of people are
ready to do the harm collapse work right
like that personal life so to allow them
the space and freedom and to do that
that's basically my full-time job for
the last three years is collapsing and
creating personal resiliency because and
then figuring out how to write yeah yeah
she's still sleeping but yeah and that's
a piece of it I'm like I don't know if
I'm doing a good job of parenting
because I'm my world like I'm unlearning
all of my world for you well try to
simultaneously teach it to the next
generation and like I don't know what's
going like I don't know this is what's
broken and this is why we're fixing it
and owning it as we go and just like it
hasn't been a total play was a total
collapse I mean health-wise it's been a
total collapse and then a slow digging
out of like okay what can I do from this
face personally in my own life what can
I do
globally how can I make a contribution
from where I am how do I not feel like a
cog in the machine how do I feel like
I'm giving my own individual
contribution from where I'm at and from
that space be able to see that by
tapping into that right we don't need
everyone to do their spiritual awakening
collapse without the infrastructure to
support them if we give them the
infrastructure to support them with just
some simple tools which is like how to
find a group right what group may be not
a world-changing group may be a I want
to start a running group maybe a book
club right like just little groups that
are like here's how you connect with
people that isn't yelling across the
internet at one another and trolling
each other having that peace in your
life is huge it gives you so much and
then you have more capacity to get to
create giving people access to their
needs right that right now we're all
getting our needs man our food clothing
shelter water energy in a certain way
understanding that way and slowly
improving it meaning that like I buy my
food from the supermarket I'm probably
not gonna go and live off the land 100%
anytime soon but to be able to look at
how can we bring down the cost and the
energy and the amount of time I have to
spend preparing food and I'm part of
those communities I'm part of a
cohousing community young I'm cleaning
tomorrow night and I got to show up
every other day and cooking you know and
eat the food that someone else cooked
and not have to clean up after
understand the cost of food the more we
can create the platform the techie the
techie part all that form it gives
people access to those things more time
they have like it's it's a constant
feedback loop of the individual the more
we give you people to be with the
happier you are the more you have to
give the more we get your needs met the
more you are at happier you are the more
you have to give and part of that giving
right a percentage of that giving goes
to increasing that loop some of those
people's job their passion their genius
is to help people's needs be that some
of they're not genius is to help people
create the technology to create it and
they see that it's partied we're not
demanding it right we're not demand can
you become selfless it's like look we're
creating the technology you get to use
the technology as it's created but
there's a tipping point like people
aren't gonna see the beauty of that as I
know because I've been talking about it
for three years are gonna see the big
that until it exists right like talking
about what Facebook could give you in
your life isn't the same as having
Facebook in your life good or bad right
like go back 20 years and explain to
someone Facebook well right
when you have this dashboard that helps
you figure out all of your needs and all
of your wants and all of your you know
coordinates your schedule and how do you
want to contribute and it's as simple
it's like maybe it's an hour a week
maybe it's five minutes a week maybe
it's being part of a book club that
doesn't feel like contribution but it is
right you're you're doing your own
personal collapse even if you're not
ready for it like you're doing your own
your own work which is huge yeah it's
gonna be hard to drag people off their
reliance on things like Facebook for
this kind of thing you know for the
creation of groups and for the patient
of getting involved in stuff which they
you know as it is a common interest to
though I mean they're the what's the
what's the phrase I love this phrase the
I can't quite remember it anyway so the
social validation feedback loop that's
it yeah that you get on these thing I
mean God it's funny I was just thinking
about this yesterday or the day before
maybe anyway whatever that how much were
victim by night and I honestly think
it's true to say that I'm Way less you
know hooked into an addicted to this
stuff than many many people and yeah I
find myself if I've got a minute
excuse me once less and my phone's
ringing see it's sort of we want to pay
suppose this alright go say goodbye and
stock or live conversation it's also a
possibility if he's not back in 30
seconds or so
yeah I will end it here then it's the
best having conversations with people
this is playing game be and to allow
that that piece of it that doesn't
matter what you're having a conversation
about this is our come like this is our
genius so we like having a conversation
about I don't want to have a
conversation about sports or weather but
I imagine there's pieces that come from
that that also can can create this for
people and I'm gonna stop recording
think about it YouTube ask Eric when he
gets back if he wants to post it if it
wants to let me stop it's doing it's
having trouble but do not want you to
stop must keep recording
I love how would I gave him the feedback
they were like yes you have technology
that it doesn't connect to internal
servers yeah you might want to fix that
stream yard it's broadcasting I do this
last time so I'll open back in and do it
might have weird it's not letting me
reach the server well that's interesting
I muted you so that we didn't hear your
conversation I've got a generator being
delivered this afternoon that was the
delivery man but if I also tried to end
our broadcast and then figure out if we
want to record it but this stream yard
does this weird thing when their servers
down or I won't let you stop recording
all right okay okay yeah because he
won't save it I guess if their servers
down so it keeps recording till the
service back up so we can save it maybe
maybe except that it's live like the
only
like it's live on YouTube right it's
private live but it's on YouTube like
someone could be watching them over here
so it's clearly being saved on YouTube
while we're talking right right so you
don't need ooze from the time it went
down anyway
oh no no even then not even then it's
still being saved on YouTube yeah yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah I don't know it's
happened a few times now where like I
was live at a coffee shop and all sigh
okay end nope then at one time I was
like I just kind of it emotional in one
and I had like you know you're like
snots running down it wouldn't you stop
I was like recording it's like it's just
gonna keep recording forever now Eric we
just have this star like I don't know
how embarrass you would feel about other
people seeing you cry online but I don't
think it's a bad thing to have that
stuff out there you know you know honest
emotion I don't I don't see it's a bad
thing to have that out there you know
just you know this is this is a part of
that you know this is a part of
conversation sometimes or whatever yeah
no I don't know it is a bad thing at all
I mean that's a part of what I'm capable
of doing I came up with the idea of like
this is always save the entire world I
just have to make it in the world and of
it is that collapse piece it's like
doing the interpersonal work and now I'm
realizing how much of what I have to
contribute is that like even what I
posted in game B I mean I know how
world-changing it is but last in the
Facebook group a few days ago of like
asking for help with the Omega rule and
some people were like yes thanks for
posting this and I'm like that
vulnerability piece is something I have
to give because it doesn't feel as I've
done enough of the introvert like the
personal work for that vulnerability to
not feel icky and it doesn't take a lot
for me I'm like no this is growth so
what I want to do if it says like I want
help with this piece so I can grow and
be better and create this thing and
that's not gonna happen if like to my
vulnerability helps other people and
other people's vulnerability helps me
like it's funny how we have this piece
of society this piece of our culture
that is so about perfection and about
show yourself perfectly when that's the
that's just not what we give each other
like showing up to someone's house and
it's immaculately clean doesn't actually
give me anything showing up to someone's
house and it being messy is like I also
don't have a clean hose very big saurian
thing isn't it I mean I remember when I
was a kid my parents both worked and so
once or twice a week whatever there was
we had a cleaning lady she came around
and did a couple of hours of you know
just to bring and tidy and dusting and
that kind of thing and the night before
the cleaning lady was coming around my
mother would insist that my brother and
I tidied up before see how messy our
rooms were but ya know there's a very
Victorian thing this this presenting a
certain thing to the outside world that
just isn't isn't isn't the truth of
things I think we're emerging out of
that right was living the process of
emerging out of that and that's a big
piece like I'm reading pretty Brown
right now turn off you're familiar with
her work she does yeah yeah I've seen
I've seen a couple of talks I've seen a
couple four TED Talks yeah yeah and the
amount of like what we give each other
we're vulnerable and when we're willing
to own our shame right and are to me
this is necessarily for name Brown but
like our shadow side like the more we're
willing to work with that and the more
we're willing to accept it and other
people and the more are willing to see
what they're doing wrong what we think
they're doing wrong is a reflection of
what we actually are doing wrong yeah
it's just so funny that like the biggest
thing we can give each other like I've
been putting myself out in the world in
this way that's frozen bull and although
up until now now I have two people
working with me and we're meeting every
Friday live on YouTube that's been a
long time not doing that and the funny
thing is what I have given the world
what people have gotten out of it it's
like oh you're not enemy this is crap I
also can do this I'm like yes exactly
you don't need to have it perfect like I
can't edit video I can't even really
learn how to edit video I don't even
know if I'm supposed to this is what you
get right like
and so a lot of it is me talking by
myself on camera and even that I'm like
this is weird and vulnerable and I don't
like it I like this I like having a
conversation with people and so I
created the idea cafe YouTube channel
because I was like oh this is what I can
actually do I can actually post an idea
cafe or at least one little table of it
repeatedly and have a conversation I
enjoy and showcase what that looks like
so the people hopefully the audience
wants to participate that the people
want to participate want to create the
platform to actually post that so that
everyone has and it doesn't need to be
live on YouTube because that's Boulder
bull in a way that other people aren't
comfortable with I'm like right we can
do it in a way that doesn't it doesn't
doesn't work we're gonna die you say I
stop going live and then I'm like who
could we said put this up should we not
but I think we're gonna have to just end
it and leave the studio in order for it
to stop recording I have to figure out
how to come back in and which is what I
did last time is it by oh maybe if I
just do that
why should I leave here then stream and
then I can ask you later if you want to
what we want to do with this oh yeah
it's not doing it at all like it's weird
it's not um alright bye I want to go
down from this
you