[Music]
[Music]
I came to know Andrew Sweeney because of
a series of articles about Jordan
Peterson and intellectual dark web he
posted on medium those articles there
were not only excellently written but
also tried to explore the cultural shift
in which that movement appeared we both
share the sentiment as a lot of people
do actually that the intellectual dark
was an important new tribe addressing
important issues in our culture so I
invited him to the podcast and we
chatted a little bit about this
phenomenon about his importance its
aspects there's certainly a lot of more
to say about the ID we then we and did
cover at this time and I think time will
tell if this movement itself has the
ability to actually bring some higher
order into the cultural chaos we face
today there are a lot of promises there
also a lot of problems and we will see
how they are doing for now I think it's
important to see that there are people
who are actually trying to navigate
between the problems and fallacies of
the left and right and their ideologies
offering new and sometimes old
perspectives and sometimes even
integrated grand narratives which seem
to have have been lost with post-miranda
team so I hope you will enjoy this
conversation I will post the links to
andrew's article below the description
that's it well it's interesting like III
started to write obsessively about
Jordan Peterson around the same time as
you did your your first podcast with him
I think right I think it's about that
time I write in the beginning of
sort of rise to popularity and I started
to write about him and and immediately
there's this there was this huge
polarization between people who just
hated him you know and then people who
were not you know it was kind of like I
lost a few friends along the way just
just by even speaking about him which
was which was a strange experience for
me because I always find them to be
quite reasonable if anything else you
know yeah I still I still don't
understand that phenomenon that like a
person who can be so reasonable and so
clear mind it and so articulate could
polarize that much you know it's still
something that forwards my mind somehow
because when you talk to him or when you
see him in these these lectures or in
this public performances there's nothing
I would even consider controversial you
know it's like yeah exactly
yes it's not it's not it's not it's not
controversial it's it's not right-wing
it's not neoconservative it's not all
right it's it's absolutely none of the
labels which he gets branded with
constantly and consistently and and I I
think maybe it's because he's uh he's a
man or something and that he's speaking
in a positive way about masculinity and
there seems to be this enormous wave of
well you know I was reading Newman's
book and he talks about the castrating
mother or something you know they're
asking feminine right so if there's this
sort of you know as soon as a strong and
assertive male you know presence appears
on the scene in the age of Donald Trump
he he he he's immediately thought of
with suspicion right I like to I like to
view a person like Peterson as a as an
indicator or like a symbol for a larger
larger movement a larger social cultural
movement for example I saw two or three
months ago I saw a documentary about
Picasso you know and and it was like
from
from this televisions and Arthur I don't
know if you know it it's like a it's a
more it's one of the better channels so
you're sure yeah so and and there were
some experts which were interviewed and
they all said well you you couldn't have
a discussion about art like from 90 you
like for 80 years without centering the
discussions around Picasso so because
it's like it's he was a symbol for a
whole movement and for development of
art and stuff like that and you know
it's like every discussion I have and a
lot of discussions about philosophy and
where we add in our culture and it's
always revolving about Rob Peterson you
know it's it's yeah you know it's like a
focal point of some thing I don't know
what it is I would like to explore this
kind of thing maybe in this podcast with
you but I think it is a it is a movement
it is something more than than just a
person you know yeah I did yeah yeah you
know while he's you know he speaks about
archetypes and he speaks about young and
he speaks about being you know carried
away and taken by archetypes you know
and he is she's a sort of archetype I
think in a sense or he's he's animating
a kind of an archetype right it's it's
like almost the opposite of the Picasso
archetype that you're speaking of you
know because Picasso represents wildness
you know Picasso represents the
destruction of forms true you know and
and and the dissembling of of the world
in a sense and and Peterson's sort of
trying to bring it together he's trying
to bring bring you know order you know
but that's not that's even that's the
sort of a reduction of what he's saying
because he talks about the balance
between case in order but the weird
thing about I think his movement is it's
sort of uh it's sort of a counter
movement to all the movements of the 60s
right or all the movements of you know
let's say liberation private it's like
the liberation movements are sort of
they've reached their maximum in terms
of
the structures now and now and now now
there's some kind of construction taking
place and he's sort of he's sort of
coming in at that point where you know
after after I guess I guess Trump would
be the maximum of sort of chaos
you know this anomaly president this
president Trump and then you know the
Trump apocalypse and and all of this and
and then and then so so you have this
sort of you have this sort of weird
president of the biggest country in the
world who's like this weird male figure
and then and then Peterson's kind of
moves in as being that the sort of the
you know positive male role model in a
sense as opposed to through the good
father yes yeah the good father as
opposed to the irresponsible father or
the you know the whatever the the
archetype the Trump kind of represents
right yeah I don't I don't know if
Picasso would be like the opposite
because I think he made like seventy
thousand pieces of art and was
constantly on constantly on the verge of
between chaos and order so to speak him
and constantly creating so mother the
the archetype of the artist was for me
and my perception Peterson is more the
archetype of the academic of the classic
liberal of the old British school with
the moderate view something like that I
I agree with you yeah yeah yeah but
Picasso was sort of you know he was
celebrating life in this you know ran
this radical radical way Peterson seems
to be talking about human suffering
that's true that's true does he he seems
to be you know it's it's I guess the
Dionysian and the apalla
you know Apollonia you could talk about
it and not and not sales yeah now I was
thinking in the lines of what whether
historical figures who rose to fame
equally fast and changed the cultural
outset that immensely similar to to
Peterson and they were actually like two
persons coming in mind to mind that the
first was Sousa leery you know like an
more from from the postmodern outset
like equally an academic the same
department exactly and and like the
forerunners of a huge cultural movement
and and the second one is strong brown
in you know John Brown the the
abolitionist
I don't know John Brown I know the name
but I he was like a Puritan who lived
fifty years of his life in obscurity
until the the horrendous treatment of a
escaped slave array led to his decision
to fight the ruffians and the the South
southerners and with quite brutal way so
and and his hanging where were Thoreau
and Whitman and all those people like
attended that was the the drop of the
how do you say that the the moment the
or the instigating moment for the civil
war in the United States so that is so
he was like a crucial figure which rose
to fame and who stood up for the wrongs
in a way and he instigated this this
this this whole America which we know
today and those were like the those two
figures which somehow in in their
cultural impact resemble a little bit
for me that he doesn't phenomenal I
thought of Marshall McLuhan but I guess
Peterson is different in the sense that
he's Marshall McLuhan is more of an
abstract thinker or you know a theorist
he doesn't have this kind of almost you
know Peterson's almost a Holy Roller
preacher you know in a way you know he's
he's he's out there changing people's
lives in a very direct Rek way I say
Holy Roller preacher in the positive
sense right you know it's like he's you
know he's even though he's working with
science and evolution he's taken almost
this evangelical quality to to into
modernism or something like that right I
don't want a particular focus on on
Peterson yeah
because I mean you you have written
extensively about that and you want to
talk about the Intel intellectual dark
web exactly because because as you know
I think if we want to understand where
we are at the moment and and even if we
want to understand the Petersons
phenomenon I think like a good focal
point is this into an intellectual dark
web because I think that's it's an
important movement in a way a
development where a lot of people
participating not just active like
there's a whole group of persons who
engage in a form of new dialogue but the
amount of cultural resonance they
producing is quite astonishing so and
what what is your take on that on the
intellectual dark web well in the
beginning um I thought the name was kind
of a misnomer like I didn't really I
didn't I didn't have too much
appreciation for the group because I
thought they had too much of a kind of a
materialist bent like they were sort of
a bunch of a few of them were new
atheists and Enlightenment thinkers and
you know and I'm more interested in I
guess the spiritual dimension and and
deeper dimension so I I kind of I didn't
I didn't see I saw their value as a
bunch of you know people talking and
having a conversation and I thought that
was great but I warmed quite a bit to to
Eric and and his brother I think these
guys are really sublime and interesting
thinkers grappling steam biology so you
know David fuller kind of pushed me in
their in their direction and so and then
and then there's a guy named Jonathan
green Hall I don't know if you've read
his stuff but he's a friend with the
Weinstein brothers and he's he's a he's
a they've been buddies for years and
he's a very deep thinker and so so so in
the sense what I think they represent is
well I was trying to I was trying to
think about this let me just look at my
you know I was trying to think about
this is what they represent is
and a middle middle ground for
discussions in in a period of extreme
polarity after Trump so so so this the
sort of shock of Trump and the shock of
people with very progressive worldviews
you know seeing this person who seem to
be sort of the shadow of all their their
fears arise into public life created
this sort of you know void right where
we have this you know where the the
media the New York Times and The
Guardian and and all of these all of
these newspapers seem to their their
their their point of view seem to have
become so completely formulaic and and
and and dead and and and you know the
social justice movement had become the
establishment in some way and so any
kind of progressivism had become a kind
of toxic place to be in and then and
then on the other hand you had mm-hmm
and you had Trump so there was there was
no nor nor to be no place to be and then
Peterson arises into the mix and starts
having conversations with people you
know on both sides of the spectrum and
allowing that that to happen you know so
you know Ben Shapiro you know I'm not a
conservative by nature and I've never
felt particularly concerned but if you
know it's interesting to listen to you
know an intelligent conservative like
like like Shapiro like normally I would
just I would just put them in a box and
so so I thought well you know somebody's
actually talking to the Conservatives
the Conservatives and there are
intelligent conservatives out there
right no and then and then and then the
the the reasonable progressives like the
weinstein brothers who who have who have
been you know vikt victory of this
social justice
you know tribalism
but up but I actually you know very
concerned with with you know with you
know helping people and distribution of
wealth and and all of that you know
Peterson's having conversations with
them them as well and this sort of this
tribe of a conversation comes comes
appears you know and all of these people
all of these people they become kind of
you know like a little little tribe and
and and and and the interesting thing is
that it's solo fine right there's
there's nothing there's nothing slick or
contrived about it it's just a bunch of
people having having having
conversations and long long-form
conversations and and and the fact of
this being so so huge you know it's it's
like Rockstar they're these these act
these sort of you know academic types
becoming becoming academic geeks
becoming rockstar figures it's it's
total it's totally weird it's like the
inversion of the sixties right right
where where as you know the in sixties
were all about you know bending genders
and and you know and destruction of the
hierarchies and creating a you know a
new world utopia where these guys are
seen seem to be wanting to come together
to to create a livable society a livable
world and have long conversations to to
try to try to figure that out
right and so ya know I think they're I
think they're all great and then I did
write a piece called the intellectual
deep web because I thought there was
this whole I thought that you know I've
studied Buddhism and and you know and
things like that and and so so I I'm
interested in in meditation and I and so
I thought this whole I thought that the
bent their bent was more you know maybe
maybe maybe more political than then it
could be even though they're they are
sort of a political and that there are
other figures perhaps deeper that could
emerge as well so so yeah so there was
um what was his name Alexander
Griner he had this idea called the inter
he was he was a guy from rebel wisdom
and the guys from mobile wearable wisdom
invited me to their their men's group
and right and he had this idea yeah
there needs to be an intellectual deep
web right which would integrate you know
all these other aspects which are or not
or not not being talked about in the
intellectual dark club I think what what
you're saying is it's very interesting
in regard that there is this dialogue
which is a dialogue which is not
confined to the left or the right and I
think that the towering figure of all of
that is Jerome in a way because he is
able to deliver for the ride and for the
left in a way and and has this long form
discussions like two or three hours and
provided the medium in a way where all
this could flourish in the first place
you know either the Reuben report and
and all that all what they are doing is
like they they all use this medium and
in a way I think it's a reaction against
those in a way I think it's a reaction
against the conversations we have
day-to-day on Facebook because it's all
like fragmented and everybody has an
opinion and nobody has a clue you know
and everybody gets like easily offended
you know on this point was for the last
ten years like so like there's nothing
more useless less than a Facebook
communication and conversation so yeah
that's right
so because nobody has attacks just text
people talking to each other in text
right people that has been so toxic on
the human soul
right the human voice like I guess you
too opens up the human voice right so
people are actually having human you
know their conversations right now
rather than attacking each other with
these little fragments of text exactly
so I think that they're fed up you that
in a way and so then there's this medium
Jerome with his millions of listeners
per podcast I I've heard some say he's
the most famous interviewer of all time
who has ever existed
cause he has like so many listeners who
tuned in for three hours to listen
something about archaeology or I don't
know what so and the weird thing is that
he's not he's not in the mainstream so
it's like a huge underground movement
that's bigger than the mainstream to
like the mainstream has become the
mainstream has become the most
irrelevant you know place to have a
discussion no everything's happening
underground or everything's happening
off stage or everything everything's
happening in this casual you know casual
way in this YouTube you know diffusion
that's it's like the met the gatekeepers
are gone right right
well well well they're still yeah yeah
uh no because because I just wrote wrote
a piece about I I haven't read it I had
haven't had the time but about this
Peterson Harris debate and if you see
like the the videos which are leaked
these are like thousands of people who
just come to a two or three hour lecture
and consistently this is not like an
isolated phenomenon but the people are
like leaving YouTube in a way to attend
to those events which were you know it's
like a theater or something you know
what I mean it's it's it's it's
completely bonkers what what is
happening yeah it's it's it's quite wild
that such a normal simple you know
almost conservative type of event just
two people talking could could create
that that kind of a crowd exactly the
simplicity of it is is is it's almost a
return to our a more primordial mode of
of conversation I chose and even through
the long form you have time to explore
like especially if there are experts on
their field to explore some topics very
profoundly which is something you don't
have with Facebook for example so I
think that contributes at least in part
of to the development of that of that
group
people who like try to talk about things
nobody and the mainstream is talking
about or not even allowed to talk about
or just talking about things with some
kind of nuance you know talking about
things that haven't been message to to
such an extreme and and toxic you know
extent you know you know we get these
these these MTV type of you know news
and MTV and since the 1980s have kind of
gone together and become one one thing
where we're so we're getting our
information in these tiny little you
know packaged bits huh but but most of
you know but were kind of confused we
don't you know really know what what is
what what is going on and we're not we
don't know you know we don't know what
the left and right is anymore
in a sense no it's like doesn't though
that kind of that almost almost that
kind of duality you know become so
polarized in caricatured you know it's
hard to see what you know people think
on both sides or what people feel or you
know you know what's actually really
going on and yeah so you you you you
you're doing your dishes and your or you
take a jog and you're listening to you
know Rogen and and you know you these
these kind of things are compelling
oddly enough you know maybe even more
compelling than Game of Thrones at times
you know yeah exactly what I'm you know
it's compelling to listen to to people
have you know a real heartfelt deep
conversation you know more compelling
than than the Breaking Bad perhaps you
know it's a weird phenomenon I I'm I'm
astounded because sometimes like late at
night after work I I want to I want to
see like a serial or something like some
some of those things and then I noticed
like the Joe Rogan is life with somebody
and I think well I switch over to that
and then I'm like to two hours are gone
you know that's right what happened what
about amazed I've also noticed that it's
it's caused me to learn faster in a
different way than just reading you know
because you
you can you can get a lot of information
by listening and you know Peterson makes
this point is that people just listen to
these things and and that the list
almost like the aural mode of
communication is is is as has gone past
the the written mode of communication in
terms of how people get educated so you
know so you can listen to the Peterson's
maps of meanings course and learn all
about the five traits of personality and
stuff the kind of thing you know you
might have taken an undergraduate course
in but you can learn about it and you
can apply it you know to the people you
know in your life and you know and and
your passionately engaged in it because
you know it's like it's like I I didn't
study psychology in a formal way but now
I feel you know like I know something
about it and just and that's just from
and that's why I was washing the dishes
not while I took a period of time out of
my other exams doing to to to to learn
this stuff so but now I know that I'm
very high in openness and low in content
a bit lower and conscientiousness and my
wife is very high in conscientiousness
you know so we have a good team a
balance and but she's a bit low and
openness so that's why she has these
views about you know III really learned
a lot from seeing you know from
Peterson's personality courses and see
how people are very different and I
think that's the spirit of the the the
deep web is that is it a bunch of people
who are have highly different
personality types to are coming together
and having mature conversations right I
think that's exactly right as a reaction
to this sort of you know cultish you
know facebook world that people have
been sort of living in in the past ten
years there's a thesis and I want to
like an idea I have which I would like
to formulate and think what and hear
what you think about it because I was I
was thinking okay you certainly know
spiral dynamics and the idea that
culturally the culture is developing
over over stay
just in a way so we are more or less
living in a postmodern era and before
that industrialization enlightenment was
the more modern thing before the
pre-modern and what I noticed that every
era when when it's beginning when it's
starting out it has a group of people
coming together and you can find that
when you when you look at post modernity
for example you have like the the
Parisian movement with yeah you have to
go and their Drive go back to the 20s
you know with with dolly with Henry
Miller with get Rudi Stein oh yeah yeah
yeah
so no I've read you I see your article
about your hero so these are my Parisian
heroes as well so no but but you have
like post modernity you have this group
of artists and they know each other in a
way in their build they they they create
a tribe so to speak yeah if you if you
go 300 years back into the past with
modernity you find something very
similar with with Newton with lightness
and and like where where theories are
created what was it Malthus and Devine
for example they had similar ideas they
were in contact in some sort like the
media was not that developed so they had
to communicate with letters so and I was
I was thinking okay we are approaching
maybe a post-postmodern time mm-hmm
you know wouldn't it be to be expected
that there is a group of people coming
together who embody that kind of stage
of development for the first time and
producing the outlet and the blueprint
of what trickles down in into society
and the years to follow and I was and
was looking for that for the last five
or ten years and I was thinking if the
and thinking about the integral movement
but there wasn't yet have been happening
nothing of that sort
yeah well it seemed that they that the
integral movement kind of they
they felt like there was something
happening in the integral movement in
the beginning that seemed very alive and
then they kind of retreated or something
exactly the stage and and so you know I
was very excited about the integral
movement in the beginning but now I'm
wondering where they are you know like
why aren't they out there engaging with
you know all these people
exactly right some of their ideas are
probably more advanced in the
intellectual darkweb but but but but I
guess they're not hating the culture in
the guts you know in the same way what
intellectual darkweb is doing is that
they're people with their own platforms
coming together and testing their ideas
and bringing them out into the world for
example by using YouTube and I think
they're engaging with the world so and
my thesis is and I want to know what you
think about that if we could think of
the intellectual darkweb as an as a
tribal group emerging from
post-postmodern consciousness
yeah well that's that's how I've been
thinking about it as well I've been
thinking that the perfect human
community or the the archetypal human
community is the tribe and the tribe is
the place where people are most alive
and most engaged and with each other and
it's it's like the The Economist shoe
maker said small is beautiful when you
have that small group of people it has
the maximum effect uh-huh and if each
person has a different each person plays
a different role right they're not
ideologically driven they're driven just
by their own particular individuality
and passion right and but if they're all
different then that's that has the
maximum effect and yeah I think that's I
think I think that's you know our
thinking about this in terms of
Peterson's anti tribalism but I think
there has to be a kind of enlightened
tribalism right there has to be like
because that's that that to me is is the
way to live right it's small groups of
people expressing the maximum
individuality or somehow human beings
are meant for that you can see that in a
football game or you know you could see
that in a rock concert or anything if
you have a group of
ten people are five people there there
them there
they're the most powerful and engaging
you know mode I think of people for for
you know for pushing pushing the culture
forward certainly yeah
so I so I agree with that I and III I
agree with I think these guys are on the
front lines and maybe maybe the maybe
the integral movement became too
conceptual and in some in some in some
kind of way and putting people in
categories and then deciding that
somebody is green and somebody is red
and some you know you get there were two
categorical and they weren't maybe
passionate enough and engaged enough and
you know take going out there and taking
risks somehow that's it's it's it seems
to be a performative contradiction of
integral that they claim to be open and
to integrate everything but what they
don't do is integrate other
post-postmodern philosophies and have an
actual dialogue with that I mean there
there's there's meta modernism in its
different forms which claims to be
coming after post-modernism there's
diggy modernism there's performance
isn't in all those different ways of
concept of a world view after
post-modernism but they don't engage
with that and and they's they stay
within their within their within their
bubble in a way really hopefully that
will change you know so maybe they're
too centered around this one person can
will over maybe that's that's the
problem I don't know maybe but he's like
Ken's great I don't want to I don't want
to put him down in any way but but maybe
they have to branch out and and you know
maybe maybe there has to be different
personalities that are expressing you
know the kind of strong views that he is
no I completely agree but just just in
exploring the phenomenon of the idea we
I think I mean you can't find more
different people than Jordan Peters and
Joe Rogan and ben shapiro yeah so there
in every kind of way well that's
beautiful and also you know even me I
just wrote an article about Sam Harris
and I was attacking Sam Harris in a
sense because I disagree with Sam Harris
but I learned something from Peterson in
the he went out and he's having these
talks with Sam Harris and on a friendly
terms and and that's that's fantastic
that's beautiful that's the way it
should be done rather than you know then
me just sitting and writing nasty things
about Sam Harris because I disagree with
them you know congenial long nuanced
conversations that's it's it's it's yeah
with without any any restriction it's
it's kind of great no it doesn't need to
know where if you talk only to those who
share the same worldview so you need
somebody else who comes from the
opposite opposite end of the spectrum to
challenge your ideas and to develop
those ideas and I think that is what
they are doing in a way
what do you mean but can you can you
elaborate what you mean by post
post-modernism for me well what what I
mean by that is and how's that different
from integral or what they would call it
they would call that integral wouldn't
they they would call that integral yes
that's true
so from for me post post-modernism is a
cultural stage which is the soil from
which all those those philosophies made
the integral or performance is imodium
modernism springing forth in a way that
is a stage of cognitive or social
development which integrates in a way
the virtues of all stages below but are
able to transcend the fallacies so and
and I find it very interesting to
compare those different philosophies and
theories to see ok what what is their
common element for example from integral
theory and media modernism and
performance isn't because when you look
at at the at the Dutch school of made
our modern ISM not that handsy Frye
enough thing but the stuff from
kamadeva moines and he says for example
meta modernism is the capacity to
oscillate between post
modern stands and the modern stands and
you're not you're not confined to one
worldview with with with the values and
your opinions but you you you are free
to oscillate and with that comes a form
of creativity and optimism I like to
compare those different approaches so to
speak so to see okay what what is it
what what is in its core post-postmodern
because it's just unfolding we don't
know what it is nobody knows what
post-modernism is that's for sure yeah
so but you know there are some
philosophies to make it short who go
explicitly after post-modernism say okay
no we want to we want to grow beyond
that so and what is that common element
what is their common comb I find it
quite interesting I don't know yet but I
like to explore that so well I mean
that's the thing it is is to exist in a
vulnerable space where where you're not
you're not burdened by by ideology and
that that that's I think that's been
that's Peterson's main message to me and
that's the intellectual deep dark webs
right you know what they have to offer
you know and and and then and then so so
you know hope hopefully that's the I
mean they it's it's interesting because
you know Eric Eric thought of this term
as a kind of a joke right right the
intellectual dark dark web whereas
there's nothing particularly dark there
it's like the darkness is elsewhere the
darkness is in is an ideology no the
darkness is is in sort of you know rigid
fixed modes of being and thinking and so
so it is kind of a you know I I'm not
I'm a pessimistic person by nature but
it does feel a bit you know
revolutionary sure I do you know Jordan
Green has this theory of like he does it
though the he says there's the the red
religion in the blue church and he says
that traditional media is like the blue
church
right it has its safeguards it has its
gatekeepers it has its it's official
messages it's what can be said and what
can't be said and and it's been very
effective you know a crowd control and
you know and keeping the society from
from from falling apart but then at the
very edges that there's the red religion
and this is this is where things are
kind of dangerous and alive and that's
that's kind of what YouTube is and you
know not that the intellectual deep web
there's nothing particularly dangerous
that they're saying or that's going on
there but YouTube is dangerous in the
road I think it's it can go both ways
right it can go towards this middle
space of conversation and and you know
people people you know deepening
people's perspectives and of reality and
it can go in in the space of you know
dangerous ideology is being propagated
and you know I knew this guy who was a
Stalinist I was I was I was amazed that
there's these whole communities of
actual Stalinists up there you know
listening to and so anyway no no no I I
think you're right I think it was Jordan
Peterson who said recently that we don't
know what YouTube is because it's it's
like it's like there for couple of years
and it hasn't shown his face to the
fullest yet what is possible and in a
positive and negative way I know because
I have I have a niece she's five and you
know and I've read some articles how
like these bots these artificial
intelligence spots like create now
children's children's videos and so if
you just follow some links like kids
videos you put in your loot of kids
videos and then and then after you click
ten times you come to those weird videos
created from from an AI and and there
they are quite brutal and at least not
suitable for five-year-olds I am so on
and so on
yes
extreme toxicity you know and then
there's at the same time there's this
there's this new possibility it's a two
things emerging at the same right moment
and what I wanted to say about YouTube
is I don't know I have you ready vanilla
channel Evo Neelix work no you are at a
book in the 70s called disclosing
society and and to me that's what that's
what YouTube is doing it's it's sort of
disclosing society and I'm a teacher so
I've noticed that students learn in a
different way than they used to you know
over the past 10 years that there's less
of this symmetrical message of you know
me teachers speaking and giving them a
lecture that they're there with their
computers and their smartphones and they
have you know on their smartphones they
have pornhub but they also have you know
the equivalent of the you know Library
of Alexandria and and and so so they're
navigating between you know me as a
teacher and the Machine and the message
and it's all it's all mixed up and you
know in one sense I think odd they're
learning a lot more and they're super
bright and and and the other sense I
think I think maybe they're they're
going mad and I don't know what the
answer is right it's complicated school
is I think that you know Peterson has
noted this as well that that that
education you know traditional education
has not adapted to the to the online
online world world yet so it's crumbling
you know and so a lot of the learning
that people you know a lot of the
learning resources that people have you
know are really far removed from from
school probably you know and you know I
mean I've always been like dad my
passions that you know I wasn't a very
good student and I always had these side
passions that I read Henry Miller you
know instead of what I was supposed to
be reading but but but I think I think I
think there's this I think there's this
you know people are living in with this
very divided attention and the benefits
are that you know they can you know the
reason people go to a Jordan Peterson
lecture or whatever is because they they
they want you know it's
it's based on their life right it's not
it's not abstraction it's not you know
it's not it's not education as a diploma
it's education as you know as learning
growth and learning and that kind of
thing so that seems to be immensely
immensely positive but you know
dangerous dangerous times indeed yeah
that's a great podcast school Scott a
school sucks project do you know that
one no no it's like I think it should
belong to the to the to the intellectual
dark web because there are people there
xxx Russell you know him I've heard his
name I heard that I think I I had a
podcast with him one of my early podcast
and I think he might be one of the the
most intelligent people I know quite
frankly and and he actually tried to
have some discussions with Peterson but
there never happened they never take
place I don't know why because he's an
historian and he is quite critical of
the school system but he is a staunch
defender of post-modernism and but but
he sees the the fallacies of
post-modernism but he has a completely
different take on the whole phenomenon
yeah and I think what I find Peterson's
critique of post-modernism a bit
reductive right
IIIi think that the postmodern period
might be a necessary stage the girls
daughters and but also to transcend it's
like this you know the Zen phrase
there's mountains and rivers then
there's no mountains and rivers and then
there's mountains and rivers again so
the postmodern thing is like you take
away all the mountains and rivers right
and right but then you have to you know
you have to go back to some kind of
reality so III yeah I mean I three thing
as I was reading I finally got around to
reading Foucault when I discovered
Peters it was interesting that I was I
was reading Slavic Z Zak and Foucault
and all these people when I came upon
Peterson and yeah
maybe the postmodern stages maybe maybe
maybe Peterson's discussion of
post-modernism is a bit reductive right
and I think that this is Russell he he
seriously could challenge is used
because what what what stuck with me is
one one expression he he had was girag
one thing he said and he said for him
the postmodern stage and the postmodern
advancement are the most supreme
inventions humankind has ever had namely
the idea that in a way everything is a
social construct you know and you can
have that perspective because you know
there are no given hierarchies you know
there are no given hierarchies between
races or between people you know that is
the first time in history humankind has
deconstructed these basic notions that
there are differences between men you
know between white and black and poor
and rich or men a female and he calls it
the most supreme invention of of
humankind and and you have to give it to
him you know it's right so but I think
Peterson is not looking out for those
virtues of post modernity you know he's
you know well he's correct about the
pathologies of postmodern right
certainly yeah but as I say I think
about perhaps he's throwing the baby out
with the bathwater a little right yeah
so that would be interesting if they
would have like a discussion that would
prove that that the way of communication
is working they they they have but it
hasn't happened yet but I but I'm eager
to to see that it seems to be a new mode
of learning and in a sense that that's
coming coming out and and but through
through conversation it's new and at the
same time it's it's very it's very
ancient true those it uses the most
primordial way of communication so
that's the interesting thing where we
are people who need to talk and to need
to hear and have to do that in a in an
honest and authentic Wayne and I think
that that mode of come
education is delivering that what I
would hope that will come next would be
another artistic movement you know
because that's probably missing from
because they're an intellectual dark
webmin right and then the intellect has
to has to also you know all of these
other forms of expression you know how
are important as well you know dance and
music right and so so I mean never you
know you can't imagine these sorts of
things but but do you know do you know
role as women you know no he is he is
the originator he's a German professor
of perform at ISM and he has a book
dedicated to the different forms of art
and architecture and music after
post-modernism and it is quite
interesting so it's like it's like an
integral theory but like not not in a
way model-driven but looking out into
the world and seeing okay there's
there's clearly some kind of
architecture there's clearly some kind
of art literature which which
distinguishes themselves against
post-modernism and he tries to model
that why how is it different and it's
quite interesting yeah it's so it may be
hard to define at this point like when
you're in the middle of it right so a
good example would be Life of Pi do you
know that book never read it so it's
about you know if you have postmodern
literature it's all about stream of
consciousness and everything is
subjective and you never know like if
you if you read James Joyce for example
it's like all in any way convoluted and
you have to you know yeah right so but
but James Joyce's is but he's not
strictly postmodern he's more of his
high modernism is usually considered to
be high modernism because he's still
working within a narrative frame I think
you know right he's still he's just he
has his musicality of words but but
there's still a story you know right oh
take Samuel Beckett for example that
racket back it is like the end of
modernism and then moving into
post-modernism where
could be anything but right the problem
with post modernity is that there's no
real contents about what it is when when
it started and what you know I think
from from an historical point of view
you could attribute for example joys as
being postmodern although I think from
literary theory he's modern you know
it's littered high modern is my site a
bit illiterate serves Beckett they're
considered high modernism like the end
of modernism come right ultimate extent
of like host Joyce is the ultimate he
was the ultimate he is language to its
ultimate musicality I think you know
nobody uses nobody ever and and then
Beckett came along and use language as
compression the most compressed type of
language you know you could possibly
think in the most barren but there's
still a reference point right to to to
there's still a there still where as my
understanding is a post-modernism this
sort of post reference point but if you
look Finnegan's Wake there where there's
no reference point in there that's true
that's true yeah I guess that's
different than the Ulysses I guess he's
maybe you're right maybe that's it
that's a good point maybe maybe
Finnegan's Wake he's moving into
post-modernism but it's also nonsense
you know it's or it's possible to read
maybe maybe you can read it but who can
read that right you know Gege Jeff sure
this book you know um diesel bobbin is
his nephew use but you're supposed to
read it three times it's almost
impossible to read and the idea of the
book was to break down your mental you
know constructions your cliche mental
you know tourism just break the whole
structure down because the book almost
makes no sense so he told that his
students it was the most baroque
impossible book to read every told his
students to read it you know three times
I got halfway through it if I've
threaded once all three perfections yeah
no I
it was my time actually when I was 20
and I was into that and you know it
was part of my worldview I actually was
not that but this this other book like
what is that with
a remarkable man that yeah yeah
so that was my time I was in Paris for a
couple of weeks and you know in my
little hotel room with the bottle of
wine and I was reading that book and it
was like fantastic I really loved that
guy yeah me too
but yet it's completely the imelda book
III think he means something but but you
really have to dive in to delve into it
too you know
yeah to get that basic idea that's the
thing it's not it's it wouldn't be
post-modernism because it wouldn't it
would it wouldn't mean nothing you
wouldn't lead to nihilism it would lead
to an illumination right I would I would
say I mean the works of birth of the of
gaudiya well breaking down breaking down
your your mental constructions will lead
to illuminated worldview probably like I
have this idea that that the mainstream
media is the castrating mother and I
wanted to I wanted to I kinda wanna I
kinda want to well maybe maybe that
would be subject for another kind of
discussion because one of my one of my
interests in all of this is well I went
to this men's group with David fuller
and Robert rebel wisdom they invited me
over there right and what I what I was
well I was surprised at the group
because the group was a bunch of kind of
hipsters and London cool people and and
really into all kinds of interesting
things and very cutting edge group and I
was sort of thinking okay they're
they're gonna be a Peter Sohn type so
they're gonna be neoconservatives or or
they're gonna be but it doesn't seem to
be the case it seems to be a lot of
intelligent people are you know into
this stuff right and people who are
intelligent on different levels of
experience like spiritually intelligent
and until you know it politically
engaged whatever it everybody has a
different everybody has a kind of a
different
what's the word I'm looking for a
different different level of D of
communicating or understanding this
stuff and it's it's interesting how how
how deep that goes like some people are
into Peterson and they want to just get
their lives together and then stop
smoking pot and watching so much porn
and and then there's other people are
very into the much deeper existential
questions and then there's other people
are into the esoteric union are
architecting types and and all that and
so it's it's it's quite a diverse
spectrum that you know right that arises
from this this whole intellectual
darkweb community and what's coming from
it and one of the things I was - I was
talking talking about David fuller a
David fuller has these men's groups and
the idea that the idea that you know and
I I the fact that men's groups kind of
bothered me in the beginning in terms of
I thought you know just it just wasn't
something that interests me but the
whole the whole the whole sexual
political aspect of all this and the
fact that the Petersons is is sort of
and and the intellectual darkweb they're
they've been kind of um demonized
because they are they are they're there
they're there
you know or the Petersons has been
demonized because he's he because
because he's coming on with a very
strong and masculine message and so and
then you know is all his all images is
you know his whole thing is ISM is of
the the hero the the masculine myth
right he's entering into the culture
again and I think this is a positive
thing and I also think that this will
strengthen that the feminine archetype
types as well and and and rescue them
from this victimology to which which
which has been plaguing you
you know the the feminine world in the
media and exactly I don't know if I
articulated that very well but that's
just one of the things I've been
thinking about about no no the the wife
of bread Weinstein Heather hurling is a
name uh-huh I don't know if I think I
think and she just wrote a fantastic
piece about female toxicity so and and
you know they're it's like it's this
dark feminine that is not being it's
it's it's it's it's not being it's
there's the dark feminine archetype
that's missing from the culture it's not
being represented it's not being seen
usually yes and and I think in
traditional cultures there was always an
image of a Kali of a dark woman but but
but we had this image now of women as
being these pure victims of so so III I
think I think this is and I was reading
tag Lia Camille Paglia it was a good
writer and I really think that I think
that I think that when an important yeah
I think that I think that that's that's
an important aspect of this whole
conversation nightwing so to I think I
think I think I think you're completely
right because I I was thinking okay how
could the cheer feminism look like you
know and and and I think mature feminism
would look like to with to start out
with with the affirmation of all the
virtues and privileges of woman has hmm
instead of going or the the shitty
patriarchy and shitty man and all a
beast and why not why not dismiss them
all in the first place you know so let's
reaffirm what what what being female
means yeah responsibility and associated
with with that exactly you know and this
is the the article the wife of bread
Weinstein was was was was writing so
that you can't you can't choose clothing
which highlights
sexual signals and then to harass the
men if they are looking and this is like
a vital point I think they're all and I
think a lot of criticism comes from that
that they all have like a traditional
worldview regarding sex and marriage and
and all the things but I mean they they
can argue for that because they they are
biologists and they can see where where
the roots are coming from yeah but it's
also just these vicious attacks that you
get well you know on Facebook or or
whatever from people because you're
defending Peterson it it's almost like
and he's considered to be this patriarch
in and there's this sort of hidden
hatred of men that that that seems to
have you know poison poison poison the
culture and you know this idea of the
nobleman becoming an important thing you
know important thing in the culture
again right Gordon you know just as
they're obviously has to be an image of
the noble woman so no but but let's
let's let's take some minutes and dive
into that because I think that is I mean
we were stuck starting this conversation
about asking why the polarity
why why does Peterson and his friends so
to speak like invoke such deep
admiration as well as deep like
adversity you know what why is that I
mean because I think the culture just
encourages consensus you know and if you
come out and say something in a fierce
strong masculine way people are or
become afraid or something right it may
be that with violence or or or something
like that right especially from the
postmodern types who are more feminine
and more sensitive and they're all about
like what is like violence violence less
communication and stuff like that but I
mean in order and
he says so in order to have a discussion
you have to you know pursue and your ID
ideas and to challenge your ideas that
is always a little bit aggressive in
sense that you have to approach the
topic you know yeah and and the the soft
sensitive guy you know who imitates the
feminine you know he's he's a he's he is
at a disadvantage you know in the
culture and and you know not that not
that you wouldn't want to become the
alpha male type or the you know
aggressive you know but but at the same
time it seems I don't know just from my
own personal experience is that I had
you know a lesbian mother and and I grew
up very progressive and I had very long
hair and it almost like fell in love
with women by imitating them right and
so it wasn't important for me
masculinity wasn't important for me
until later you know that that I had to
break out of that and and so pull air so
I had to reestablish kind of polarities
I had the actual idea of being male
became important to me again worse right
postmodern sort of fog you don't you
don't want to identify with male or
female or any kind of kind of polarity
but later later it became very important
to me and I realized that we're sort of
living in this fatherless kind of world
in in postmodern society and again this
comes back I started to talk about Trump
because Trump is the image of this
pathological man in a way or this you
know grabbing you know unconscious
sort of lying type of you know he just
did and and that that that that's
becomes the male figure when the actual
dignified male person is is put down to
the extent that true doesn't even a kind
of kind of exists so so I always thought
that the the election of Trump was the
the reason or the election of Trump
Trump was as much a
a reason if this extreme progressivism
as as it was with the the the the rise
of the the right like good the extreme
progressives and and the right are in
bed together in a weird weird kind of
kind of sense and and that's this
polarization and that's this
polarization where both these sides
don't really make any sense and then and
then and then the jeddak's will dark web
comes in and and right no no has these
nuanced conversations where you know you
can actually talk about these things
again it's almost like you couldn't talk
about them before I don't know if you
had that a sense but some of these
things were just it was you you're you
were not able to talk about but now
whether you know the people with with
whom you can talk about stuff like but
but only with like with the hand before
your mouth like let's you know let's you
know I think there were some things that
I wouldn't have had the courage of
saying before these guys came in exactly
I started saying him because because I
because I knew that I was surrounded by
virulent progressives right who wouldn't
who would takes who would not allow for
a new nuanced conversation or even to
have a conversation right with somebody
who's a little bit conservative like or
traditional like you know Shapiro or
something like you know you can't
couldn't had a conversation with
somebody like that they were just the
devil you know they were just you know
evil or bad and those are the bad people
over here and the good people over here
and that's I think that's the essence of
that the thing that I like about the
intellectual dark web was this sort of
this sort of space of the in-between
where where it's like you're not you're
not you're not burdened by by by by
having to you know and not burdened by
it by all these ideological presumptions
you know which okay
kind of fell apart for me when Jerome
was elected like I didn't you know I
didn't know what was you know it's like
I just an ordinary sort of progressive I
just follow the New York Times and I
just have these and these these in these
opinions and and and then there's this
sort of
collapse of the sense-making
apparatus and then but it turns out to
be a positive thing because then you
then then then then you can start to
really think about stuff rather than
it's just going along with with whatever
ideological presuppositions you're
you're raised with or you you you you
you filter through your you know media
world or if for example a year ago you
couldn't say I'm a misogynist and I
think alpha males are great you know
there of course there there's toxic
masculinity of course and we should work
that this doesn't get out of hand
you're not but the idea of an alpha male
is necessary you know and it's of the of
the good hero of we are talking about it
about the good father and you know to
say now in the current form I don't
necessarily support feminism although I
think like women should have all the
rights and privileges and
responsibilities like they should have
yeah but at the same time like I'm a
male I think it's good to be a male and
I think there's something to strive for
yeah I agree and there's there's there's
a kind of there's there's a sense that
we've been raised by females I don't
know how to say that all your teachers
are females and that the transmission
from the father is missing I got that
feeling I while I went to this men's
group and and what one guy asked he said
where do you get your information from
and almost all them in there I got all
their information eyes sexual
information or just life information
from their mothers right and that's why
they were suffering so much because they
didn't get that transmission from from
from the father but again that's why
Peterson I think is so powerful as a
fatherly archetype alright it was a good
man archetype it's the same with gender
and I don't know how it isn't friends
but I know how is in Germany you know
it's like why I ask myself why is that
why is that the topic why is it
important item personally care if
somebody identifies as a
as a male or a female but what I well
where I draw the line is if you start to
indoctrinate the children as it is
happening now in Germany for example so
so you start with with six year old to
seven year olds and give them like this
just gender bred man male female
whatever it is you know it and I don't
think that is a good idea because you
know we all play I dressed up you know
when I was that age that doesn't mean
that that I was confused in a way or
that I was transgender you know that was
a something I felt that I went through
but now with with German Peter Kovaks in
a way it's it's a complete mess because
you know it's a it's a the the intent to
form their thinking in their their
self-identification and I think you just
have to leave them alone you know they
just have to remain children and you
know if they're gay or gay if they're
not you know late they'll don't figure
that out they don't need your you know
they don't need a heavy-handed message
to know to tell them what they are so
and that's for me that's a problem but
it's a straight it's a strange
it's a strange you know well you know I
was looking look at look at listening to
this I there's all these people you know
protesting Trump right and you know and
they're all progressives and they're all
protesting Trump and they all think
Trump is the devil and maybe I don't
like Trump but they're they're all but
they're not protesting the the president
of Saudi Arabia and and the president of
China and and they're not protesting
these really bad things that are
happening there there there there
they've got all their focus on these
petty sort of gender issues and and and
and and you know I'm not that all the
issues are petty but but people are yeah
it's it's well you know Peterson's
phrases good ideological positions it
takes hold of people and the way out of
it is these kind of conversations that
burn
this is a conundrum I I didn't solve yet
because I was wondering why could it be
that that a consciousness or a group of
people like say postman and people who
claim to be globalist Emperor allistic
and multicultural and devote their time
on issues like that instead of climate
change so solving the the problems with
the sea and the ocean pollution with
with with everything so but they but
they are confined to this micro problems
in a way instead of well why why don't
you go ahead and solve the real problems
yeah big problem so why I don't
understand this why why they have the
guts to UM like posed as advanced but
not but not at the same time approaching
the problems we have and this is
something I don't understand
so why why again I think it has
something to do with this infantile
ization is that remaining infants for up
for a long time and not not not stepping
into this sort of you know bigger bigger
role you know and being obsessed with
micro aggressions and small petty petty
things you know personal psychological
you know my new show right rather rather
than you know stepping out into the
world and just you know and and and
becoming you know strong men and strong
women and you know you know I'm just I'm
just you know I how do I say this I
think because you mentioned Buddhism and
we talked a little bit about the
connection of post-modernism and
spirituality and I think you know you
have as an adult and as a spiritual
develop person you have to go into the
world and you have to deal with the
problems at hand you can to stay in your
spiritual community and and do the next
healing thing you and visit the next
safe space spiritual safe space you know
just
you know you have to go into the world
and confront that and be that hero in
tanana and I've been around in those
then in those communities and and and I
I'm I agree with you I agree if you
completely you know it's it's it's you
you have to become a full human being in
the world I've seen a lot of people just
become wounded and remain wounded
because they're there they're attached
to a certain teacher or guru or path or
or or and they're not they don't work
with with reality indirect enough direct
enough away Brooke so it's wrong agree
with you there and do I think we did it
we did it okay yes big pleasure talking
to you yeah if you enjoyed this episode
of lateral conversations and you want to
support my work in this podcast you can
do so by using the patron link or the
donate button from PayPal or you just
can buy me a coffee I will put the link
below the episode I want to thank
everybody who already supports me very
much appreciated
I hope
each unit next time all the best to you
guys
and a good one
[Music]
you
you