whether you're watching on YouTube or
listening as a podcast remember to
subscribe and hit the bell to track
upcoming releases
there we go recording yeah there we go
okay well Nora I remember when we spoke
to each other we were in a convent
surrounded by groups of people eating
with their families and a bunch of trees
and you were just off to somewhere that
I was thinking of my mind is sort of
like a forest by a river to do a warm
data lab and I really appreciated
meeting you then and I hoped we would
talk again and and it's an interesting
thing to find ourselves in this moment
now given some of the developments of of
the world and I'm I'm glad to be here
with the opportunity to ask a few
questions and to share with some with
the world with with people
a little bit of as something we can
presence to help steady and realize
perhaps a way to be grounded a way to
make effective choices and to find a way
to come into a way of being in integrity
with each other so that's my sort of
hope that's why I'm wanting to talk to
you
and how how
how would you characterize
your world at the moment
I just want to say first of all Tim that
the thing that I'm most appreciating
about the question you just asked is how
what a struggle it was to articulate and
I think that that actually is important
because I've we've had it interviews
conversations before and I know that
that's not your normal pattern of
communication and and I'm I'm actually
really serious about this because one of
the most important things that that we
can do right now is to put in check some
of those more rehearsed scripts and
certainly the trajectories of where we
all were three and a half weeks ago and
so I what I heard most of all in your
question is that the trajectory is
moving and and I think that that is a
sign that you're paying attention what
I'm most worried about right now are the
people whose trajectories are not
changing who are trying to figure out
how to position themselves in this
moment how to platform this this crisis
into the right post or podcast how to
you know catch the next meme or I even
jump on the latest news story and I just
I think for me one of the things that is
is in view is just how important it is
to be in a heightened state of attention
to the fact that there's so much
changing and that the game of three
weeks ago is not the game of now so the
generating of status the the you know
all of that stuff is in a different
frame and it's actually I think
[Music]
it's not easy for everyone to do that
it's just not our
remember you know plans change and when
plans change there's a lot of confusion
around that and everybody's plans just
changed completely you know seniors in
high school that are getting ready to
graduate can't graduate and people who
had weddings planned and people who are
you know then there's the the people who
are just trying to feed their kids and
get through the day people you know I
think domestic abuse is on a serious
spike right now people who have
difficult home lives and are stuck in
the house so there's there's the bigger
questions too of what's what's swirling
out there how is this going to land and
it's not we're not close to seeing that
yet so you know I think the only thing
that can really be done right now is
just to pay attention and to to pay
attention with as much kindness and and
care for yourself and others as you can
and there are big strategic pieces that
have to get put in place you know
there's stuff that the governments are
showing up for maybe yours is doing a
little better but I mean for the most
part it seems like the general political
framework is as a at least ten days to
two weeks late on their shutdowns so
that's what I said
at the beginning of this before you turn
the record button on I'll say again
which is that I in our family we're
already dealing with with people who are
in serious condition so it's no it's not
just a time to be home and read and be
with the kids this is not just a
vacation or you know this is there's a
there's another wave coming and people
in Italy will tell you about it it's
where you have to say goodbye to people
who are dying alone that you love and
you know we're not built to be alone we
don't know how do you do quarantine with
a split family how do you do you know
what happens when today
my husband's 72 year old father is
coming in from Mozambique where he's
been and like what do we do how do we
have to take him in he's in danger were
and he's coming through airports it like
what do we do how do you hold this how
do you quarantine someone who's your
family and there's in your house and not
only do most of us not have the
technical knowledge of how to do that D
the other piece of it of how to have
those conversations you know how do you
have those conversations across families
and well it's probably better you don't
come we love you
stay away but this person can come and
you can't come and you know there's
hurtful things happening right now and
so I guess there's there's this
beautiful need for community and for
contact and in the midst of this there's
this other layer to of just
you
what's going on
how do we show up in in a way that is
not reckless that's all I want to be is
not reckless
yeah yeah the experience I'm
right now is I think it's a it's a
microcosm of the challenge I'm facing
most days and I think a challenge upon
all of us and I mean right now
it just so happens that in the last 15
minutes 20 minutes of my life that the
challenge to be together is very
difficult and I find myself here
committed to be with this process and
it's not and and the
you make his is deeply involved in that
there was something you said to me about
when we spoke for four or five months
ago about what does it mean to share
voice and I am deeply interested in this
question but not from an intellectual
perspective
I'm deeply interested in the being with
expression itself and that involves
presencing what is and when what is is
threatening overwhelm this is when
integrity is most challenged and
groundedness is challenged by definition
and so that's how
feeling and perhaps what does it look
like to express in a way and to act in a
way that isn't reckless I mean I think
for one thing it's about asking the
question again and again another thing
is understanding that there are patterns
and ways of perceiving that are so
ingrained that they're very difficult to
change and they're gonna change unevenly
so what you're able to perceive and what
your neighbor is able to perceive may be
very very different so you may be
perceiving the importance of of you know
watching out for you know quarantine but
other people may not actually be able to
perceive yet how important that is and
it's it's frustrating to have these kind
of trajectories of yeah but when are we
gonna go back to business as usual right
now if you're you know even remotely
attend to systemic process you're those
you know this is economic this is health
this is education this is this is this
is a big punctuation no matter what
happens there will be life before Korona
and life after and right now guess where
we are
we're in neither of those categories
we're just in it
how of being in it is so critical
because it is every move we make is a
field of ability opened and closed and
so the way that we show up the way that
in a way that you think about what you
need at the store the way you think
about what what your own personal
relationship to your family is how are
you connecting with people who you care
about but you've had arguments or rifts
with you know what's happening with the
elders in your life are you
communicating to the world so it's it's
really it's really in all of that from
from how to get food to your neighbors
when they're sick or when they can't go
out to oh I need to hold on for one
second yeah
no my doorbell is ringing one second go
ahead please I'll be right back okay oh
my gosh it's more than okay is
everything all right yeah yeah it's um
okay you know what it was
what my chicken coops arriving oh cool
I'm so excited
cool are you sure you don't need to you
don't need to tend to it now I'm good
okay okay it's okay this Nora this is
life hey this this
Podcast has not been about positioning
although i have very much felt the pull
of of the you know like the I very much
felt the effects of the inadequacy of my
positioning at some times sometimes but
like I'm I'm just here to be honest with
you and I'm here because if I wasn't I'd
be lying to myself and it's hard enough
to live in this world and in this life
even doing one's best not to live a lie
and I will not I will not live one hmm
and and I think we don't even know you
know so I what's essential that's the
question and I I don't I think we're yes
finding out and in our lifetimes we've
never really had to ask that in that way
that the the the way that we sorted out
what was essential had to do with a
completely different set of systems
um I think I mean maybe everything will
just go back to normal but I don't think
so I think we're in this for a while and
I think it's going to really shift our
world and so that's what I my my sense
is and certainly looking at how harsh
the virus actually is
[Music]
I'm our systems are not even remotely
ready for this
now it's um it's gonna be a time of
total transformation and you know people
have been throwing that word around for
the last couple years I think
irresponsibly transformation was
something beautiful and it was something
too you know we had we had weekend
transformational workshops like remember
that crap and a bit beam to one me
neither but there were certainly all
they were around oh yeah yeah and just
people using that word you know and and
it's that thing of looking at what
transformation is is it's not really a
weekend thing no and yeah so this I
guess that's what I I'm really
appreciating how how
how important it is to get into the most
humble and of our human states and you
know I just want for the record to take
note that they're the two of us are
sitting here in the state of quite a bit
of privilege and we're feeling the shake
I mean I'm not a wealthy person I don't
think you're a terribly wealthy person
but still there's a lot of privilege in
this conversation you have access to a
credit card yeah yeah and to take the
time to be thinking about this and to be
you know having this moment of
exploration a lot of other people who
are just in a moment of emergency so
this is an incredible luxury to sit
right now at the sidelines and it's not
we're not completely at the sidelines
but we're we're not in the
[Music]
a lot of people who don't even have a
home to quarantine them let's just
remember that
you
it's such a challenging thing to
maintain the humility of that because
well for many for many reasons but hey
um look I'm really I'm really feeling
that the pull here to share to share my
own experience in a way that I'm in a
way that I'm not in a way that I'm
comfortable with with you as an
individual I don't know how comfortable
I am publicly in my current state as I
really have to say I'm just nothing less
than me being here with with what I can
be is appropriate in this context and
I'm just man I'm just I just am NOT in a
not in a high functioning place unless I
go right through unless I go right
through the heart here and and it's um
because I right now I
feel privileged and it's not that I am
NOT it's not that I don't have a sense
of the suffering of others
it's that as I'm confronted with the
immediacy of my being I am myself
suffering and that is a dynamic that we
all face when we tune in to the state of
play and our involvement in it I think
most of us if we look deep enough
because the depths of what hmm
the the depths of the pain of life have
been you know
wanted at many points in my life to
escape from that and I care a lot about
reality of that and realized that this
is a potentiality of experience for all
human beings and the dynamic of
integrating oneself wholly with that
potentiality and embodying that
integration from a in a grounded place
in the world coming back to the center
is the pattern of doing that seems to me
to involve it's kind of kind of like
this I feel and and I'm not saying this
because I I in the following metaphor
I'm not saying I know to be true and I'm
expressing this because I care a lot
about what you have to say and and I I
really couldn't have a higher opinion of
you Nora from the time we spent together
it seems to me we can drown in a puddle
or we can drown in an ocean and from the
perspective of the person who drowns
they are more or less the same and
therefore the dynamic of how we deal
with our respective puddles becomes of
paramount importance and I it's it can
be so
challenging to be capable of taking the
suffering of the world in and remaining
grounded enough to still be in an
effective place of decision-making and I
just I felt I felt the urge to say this
because otherwise I'd be leaving
something out yeah I think you know you
there's always a context mm-hmm and that
that context matters and it's like you
said I think that the thing here is
about decision-making in the moment and
what kind of wherewithal what sort of
perception what sort of how you said
groundedness is in place there because
there's there's all these decisions and
then they're so contradictory right now
everything is is it my mother used to
say at sixes and sevens everything is in
direct contradiction we have to bring we
have to get we have to be together but
we can't be together
we have to be apart we have to support
each other but we can't touch each other
we can't be near each other we have to
and you know on the one hand that's a
philosophical dilemma but when it's your
your mother
or someone who you love that's in the
hospital that contradiction you know
like you said a puddle or an ocean it
doesn't matter if you're at the door of
the hospital or on the other side of the
world you can't go in to be with that
person you cannot be near them and so do
we like what is continuing right now I
think that's a really big question what
does it mean to continue what are we
continuing and what are we not
continuing and and how do those things
start to interlace as as this these
larger pieces are moving and and you
know there's things that are getting
ratcheted up into full-tilt it war
strategy language complete with military
assistance and so on and and keeping
keeping there clear a head and heart and
that is is not easy for anyone but but
also were we're triggering back into a
world that made sense that you know this
is so bizarre I think we all have to ask
ourselves several times a day is you
know unless you're really in the throes
like the medical people in the medical
profession there's a lot of is this
really happening going on you know you
see those those photographs of people
partying at the beach and just you know
vectors it's a vector party
and so it's the is this really happening
thing and then what does that mean that
it's happening how what what you know
where where are the lines I don't know
[Music]
but there's a good thing of what's
essential and it has been possible to
justify that what was essential to some
people was not essential to others in
the system that that that has been in
play and right now the cost of that is
coming up large and visible to those who
didn't want or couldn't see it before
but the cost of of exploitation was more
than everything and so the wealth that
was gained on it it doesn't have worth
any more and it I think we're going to
continue to see that we don't know
what's going to happen with the banks or
the stock markets or the you know supply
chains or the or the or the or the and
and I mean I just I just want to say
that the food that we get at the
supermarket is actually produced by
people the tops of these industries are
filled with gazillionaires and the
bottoms are basically you know the
picking and the tending and the actual
work with our food is done by people who
can barely feed their own children there
was a cost
not what-what-what producing life should
have been we you know the the the
process has gotten wildly off course and
in in ways that have been extremely
destructive across all of our systems
economic education health I mean in
every direction and the biggest one is
actually identity because that's where
all of these come together and so we
know when I see those kids at the beach
or when my you know people that are
close to me say things like oh you're
really overreacting you know it's just a
flu everything's gonna go back to normal
in a couple weeks we're gonna be out of
quarantine and we're gonna go back to
normal and there's too many
relationships that are built on other
relationships that are built on other
interdependencies and other inter
dependencies that are coming unraveled
right now for that to happen so it's one
thing if there's a bump in the system
and the economic system takes a hit and
the stock market crashes and people lose
a lot of money and you know remember in
oay twe have an ear crash oh that's one
thing it's one thing if the education
system is suddenly you know up in arms
about something but it's another thing
all together when all these systems at
once start to come unraveled because
there's second and third order
contingencies and interdependencies that
we're holding not just the economic or
the education or the health system in
place they were holding entire cultural
ideas of what the future is or what
success is or what wealth is or what
health is or what family is or you know
these things that we're running much
much deeper than the actual structures
and policies and things that could be
measured and detailed and defined and so
there's the changes that are taking
place are taking place across and
through multiple contexts now and that's
why it's difficult to find words for
them we don't even really have words for
that liminal space but when we talk
about what's continuing and what's not
continuing the things that aren't
continuing are are so deeply entrenched
that it's hard to even from for a lot of
people right now it's very difficult to
see where they are
so I mean can you imagine right now for
example a world in which it makes sense
to buy a first-class plane ticket to a
luxury resort with your prada shoes and
your Rolex watch like all of that is one
big heap of non-essential and the lines
and tentacles in which those things were
wrapped so that they did make sense
last month those all those lines and
tentacles have gotten at the very least
reframed for some people I don't know
for everyone yet but I think it's moving
quickly and I don't you know I I don't
think that the appetites will be the
same at the end of this yeah you know
one of the essential functions or
businesses that are allowed to remain
open in Australia as of today one of the
few is alcohol shops bottle shops I'm
not sure Nora I'm not sure it all and I
know you're not sure either thing about
the alcohol shops and the cigarettes and
the you know the the coping mm-hm
people are coping and some people are
coping by you know trying to get
attention in social media and being you
know still trying to be who they were
and other people are coping by having a
drink and other people are coping by
eating sugar or whatever you know people
are coping with with big change right
now and so I'm not saying you know that
it's a good idea to be destructive or
that it's essential to be destructive
but I I do think that we need to be very
careful with where we draw the judgment
around how people are trying to figure
out how to be in a world that's changing
this fast
yeah and that comes down to the people
partying at the beach too frankly you
know yes I'm level it's just they're
just not getting it and and you know
there's a lot of stuff out there about
you know this is about people who can do
exponential math and people who can't
but even that is a wild
oversimplification it's it's how do you
hold this my mother is 91 and she's in a
elderly living apartment complex in
Washington State in the States
I'm Indian I there's nothing there's no
possible way that I can get to her even
if I were to you know take a boat or you
know find a way to get to the US and get
in they would not let me in to see her
so I just have to say that there's a
there's a pretty good chance that I
could never see my mom again
you know that's
right there for me and when I talk to
her and she says yeah but we only have
nine more days of quarantine and I say
mom I think it's gonna be longer than
that and please don't go outside in nine
days but for her you know I to her the
other day and she was putting on her
eyebrows and her mascara while we were
talking I said mom where are you going
that living room you know she's just
completely stuck in her little one-room
apartment and maintaining like I I have
to live with myself I gotta put my
eyebrows on or I just I mean I got I
only have one place to go it's the
living room but I'm gonna look like me
I'm gonna keep my dignity together while
I do that so whatever it takes but at
the same time this is coming in hard and
I I think the thing I'm really worried
about is just how to deal with the
aloneness and dealing with huge change
and massive trauma in aloneness and this
is so not where we are built for I mean
we're we're creatures that rely on
contact physical emotional
communicational familial cultural I mean
every single thing in our world is made
of togetherness yeah yeah so that's the
piece I'm really concerned about is
that's the essential that's the
essential yep and and without that
there's gonna be a lot of other weird
essentials yeah what kind of
replacements are we gonna put him in
there so that we can talk on zoom' or we
can I mean yeah so if somebody needs to
smoke some cigarettes or have a drink I
don't think I have much judgment around
it right now I mean I think we just
gotta get through this yeah and I think
that's a perfectly fair point more than
fair the e the e so there's these double
bonds or attentions that we are always
dealing with and we have here then this
relationship between a judgment and non
judgment and we have also the notions of
openings and closures which to me is
essentially something like choices which
have consequences and and then what is
the process of making choices that open
the way perhaps more than they close it
unless the clothes precludes
possibilities that we actually might
want to keep open what is worth
continuing we have these notions of
continuity of relationship jamba Viki
put something nice he said the other day
continuity of contact as a
characterization of a faith but in some
other words for me it is how to be with
how to be
with transformation how to howto there's
something magical that happens in that
moment of expression which is never a
moment there's something magical that is
where I am here and now there with you
and I am here to tune in and I can come
out with expression and there is
expression which is more conducive to my
and let's say I love one of your terms
by the way the meaning of at the the
mutual learning environment there's a
way of my being here which is more
conducive to our mutual learning than
not and so if and so and it would we
don't need to revisit the alcohol point
but what was in my mind as I mentioned
that is is the the I would I would go so
far as to say that the sort of abject
failure in our society to have an
understanding of what is essential to
enable continuity of what's worth caring
about
and it's like we have to build that from
scratch because we have never been in it
you know people were seeking the the
solace or the the healing for their the
wounds in their lives from shopping
trips and you know weekend workshops on
transformation and you know things have
gotten very weird and so out of this
weird concoction there's suddenly a need
to be able to clear all that nonsense
those weird lines of I've been signed
out huh are you here still yeah okay
I just got a note that said I was signed
out but we have to clear all this
nonsense of past of things weird you
know totally entwined in and suddenly
remember something that is something
that the compost pile knows better than
I do
which is actually how to make
relationships that build life and I
honestly have never lived in a world
where the that was the essential thing
to do I've never been to that world
I mean I've I've been to the forest and
so I've seen it there I try my best with
my family and the work that I do as you
know but but also I you know I like you
I mean here we are were several
generations in two ways in which our
physiological processes are digesting
proteins or manifesting desires or have
intimate longings for
things that are and ways of being that
are located in a system of systems that
was non vitalizing hmm and now we have
to suddenly wake up and know what's
essential and we don't know we're like
essential yeah okay essential I
definitely need face cream right I gotta
get a Paula bourbon like these are
essential things and I mean I'm laughing
it's not funny but I'm laughing because
of the I guess surrealism of it all
the absurdity is just vast but I think I
think I like that that sort of framing
there that the compost knows more about
how to be in a world of vitalizing
relationships than I do
hmm because I have been in cultured into
a lot of processes that have blinded me
mm-hmm
and that have been served by
exploitation that was beyond where I
could see conveniently hmm and so I have
this idea of essentialness that is
connected to brokenness so the wisdom of
what you say is it's it's so evident to
me and I'm also feeling the urge to clay
here what I consider the another side of
the dance and with with many people who
I respect and delve deeply into the more
mystical kind of metaphors of making
sense of the nature of our experience
and the interconnectedness of the world
this often takes this often occurs and I
often find myself being on well it can
be different sides of it
but often often um often a side of well
I'll leave that for now and just and
just say what what came up to me into
presence because because it's I think a
sobering thing for you to say what you
just said
that that that compost knows more about
how to be in touch with vitalizing
relationships and yet yet there's also a
sense here that I'm experiencing right
now like the very act of and we can use
this as an example the very act of being
here I can reflect on the transition
here of my own state and as as
uncomfortable I am in even reflecting on
the sort of the coming into this
conversation in a cycle of agency that
was diminished and I had to really
present the vulnerability of my emotion
in order for the connection between us
to be coherent for you to get a sense of
who I am and where I'm at and inform
this that process is is part of the
process of a vitalizing relationship yes
it is and that's the thing we are the
compost we just don't know it
mm-hm that's piece and that's exactly
what I'm saying it's there it's so
deeply there I mean it's what we're made
of that's why we don't know how to do
anything alone it's the same piece it's
like we've been in all these relational
processes all along we just identified
them very weirdly
and now those weirdnesses are melting
and we're that's what is the discovery
point I think that the zone here is is
that it may be possible for there to be
discovery
as well yeah but you know we'll see
yes okay well with you it's their
weaknesses yes we do we do not what are
we some hundreds of trillions of
organisms we are that we are vitality
mm-hmm just infused hmm well that there
is a beautiful place to to end this so
noir thank you much for thank you so
much for taking more than than more time
than then could have been but I
appreciate you being here thank you Tim
and I I just want to end by saying that
there's a lot of doing here that needs
to be done there's a lot of doing and it
also needs to hold the time of
reflection and and rethinking reap you
know to be careful that the doing
doesn't become an extension of the way
of being that's in change that's that's
getting reorganized so I think that's
that's the main thing is there's a lot
of urgency and it's gonna take if every
urgency that we go into we go into
thinking about whether how can we save
this emergency in a way that also builds
vitality hmm right that is a piece okay
well I think that requires some further
further discussion and perhaps we can do
that with John in a couple days time so
I will be there for that one I promise
you so I will send a invite for that so
we both have the same thing in our
calendar and okay all right no thank you
I'll stop the recording here