everybody it is Jack Murphy and you are
back on the Jack Murphy live podcasts
the flagship podcast for the liminal
order you can find me on Twitter at Jack
Murphy live you can go to the website
Jack Murphy live.com get the book
Democrats a deplorable and come down to
the website and check out what we're
doing the liminal order the liminal
order is a men's group seeking to train
and equip men to be the best versions of
themselves that can be train the mind
the body and the spirit in the limo
order all with the intent of being of
service take care of ourselves first
that we may better be able to serve our
families our communities and perhaps
even the nation we've got some exciting
things going on right now in the limo
order including a fitness challenge and
an eight week workshop on
fourth-generation warfare come down
check us out WWL Imanol - order calm but
enough about all that today's guest is
somebody that I'm very super excited
about been trying to get him to come on
the podcast for a couple of months now
and the time is right it is perfect
right now for us to do this conversation
I'm talking about the one and only
Bronze Age mindset or Bronze Age pervert
who's written a book Bronze Age mindset
he is an anonymous author and
commentator whose book is currently the
subject of mainstream media debate the
book was already a huge underground hit
but today people like Claremont
Institute and Politico are talking about
Bronze Age pervert the book has
allegedly made the rounds within some
powerful members of the Trump
administration White House officials and
now into conservative think tanks so
without further ado I give you guys
Bronze Age pervert how's it going today
sir yes hello very good very glad to be
on your show Jack yes I'm very happy to
have you here and I'm just gonna say
something up front I'll be honest I
don't know what to make of the book or
all the ideas contained within it
there's a lot of stuff there which seems
perfectly normal and then a lot which to
some could seem completely crazy it can
be confusing which is why I wanted to
talk to you directly myself so I get the
answers for me and for everybody
listening and that's the spirit of the
conversation I want to have today which
is one of just sort of exploration an
understanding and of curiosity and
I appreciate you taking the time to do
this and to going into it with an open
mind
noise pleasure is mine to be here thank
you so much perfect
well like I said this book Bronze Age
mindset was originally sort of just like
an underground sensation I think it came
out earlier last year and it's just sold
tons of cops that copies it was at one
point in the top 150 overall not just in
one section but overall on the Amazon
website and I believe they sell
something like 8 million books there so
that's that's a pretty impressive feat
and now the book has made it into
conservative think-tanks and mainstream
media and there's been a series of
articles that have come out notably
in Politico and from the Claremont
Institute where Michael Anton gave it a
very thorough review almost 5000 words
from what I understand and it sort of
brought the book and these ideas closer
and closer into the mainstream and you
know mr. bap I'll just call a bap if you
don't mind you know before we were
talking before we started recording you
mentioned to me that you had some things
you wanted to say about those media
pieces and you know I'm just gonna open
up the floor for you a little bit here
so what how did it feel and what do you
think about the sudden interest from
mainstream media and from conservative
think-tanks what does that mean to you
well on one hand is very nice because I
want my message to get vital exposure
any author does and I was very Mike
Anton gave it such a thorough review as
you say on the other hand I don't think
he agreed very much with me but that's
fine he gave me a fair review and I
intend to respond to him in the right
thing as for the other piece are the
political piece that is a different
matter and if we have a minute I would
like to talk about this forum for a
moment the political piece was very
concerning it was a hit piece on me okay
yeah and tell us what do you think
well quite aside from the fact that it
connected me implicitly to shooters and
to violence which is just absurd for
anyone who knows anything about
quite the sight from that lie there was
a much more sinister in significant lies
that was spread the media attacks on me
they try to oppress me in coordination
with probably with political strategists
and if you have a few minutes I want to
call out their dirty little game now
then we can talk about details in the
book but I think people need to
understand what is going on why they are
doing this yeah I would love that I mean
we're very interested my audience my
listeners were interested in the media
games were interested in the online
networks information networks the way
that people push disinformation
misinformation propaganda and whatever
to control the narrative and therefore
control reality so seeing something like
this happened in real time and talking
to the players involved is something
that we're all very interested in so go
for it man
tell me what you're thinking yes
thinking because this information what
you just said is exactly what it is is
complete lies you know the Russia hoax
failed they built it up so much it was
huge embarrassment for them so now they
are going for with the Trump you know
evil drumpf is a racist white
nationalist thing the head of New York
Times even said that they were switching
to that strategy and in fact they were
already veering in that direction they
were trying to combine conspiracy
theories because it's in these people's
fevered heads that Putin or excuse me
pootle er you know the latest
incarnation of Hitler okay that he's
been spreading avoid nationalism around
the world an absurd thing which if you
want we can talk about later but the
point is they were already switching to
the drum fees avoid supremacist trope
and it's very significant Biden began
his presidential campaign at
Charlottesville I don't know she
remembered yes of the many fine people
comments yes
why would Biden begin his campaign there
it's obviously the narrative for 2020
okay it's been obvious for a while I
didn't realize they would try to make me
a linchpin of their lies and conspiracy
theories
and the political article was disgusting
smear job and it was the most by the way
it was the most viewed political page
that day when it came out about two
weeks ago it was shared by all the top
left Democrat media establishment all
the corrupt Hillary guys pitted all the
oligarch the billionaire many others and
it tried to how should I put this they
tried to say the really sinister part
apart from the violence accusations
which are absurd it tried to say there's
a white supremacist conspiracy in the
White House and that I'm corrupting
somehow this administration with my evil
that I'm the linchpin of a conspiracy to
corrupt America's youth to radicalize
them or to radicalize the military it's
out of a dumb like James Bond idea and
if I was more vain than I am I would go
along with it out of you know out of
desire for attention but I don't want to
it's all fake it's all straight out of
Clinton playbook
if you don't remember in 1990s she went
on TV and these are her words she talked
about vast right-wing conspiracy against
her husband Bill Clinton you know that's
right and this is the same thing it's
done by her operatives and their ears
and it's important for me to call it out
early so people can realize what they're
trying to do to me and I have no
interest in being part of a contrived
media push to frame this president and
his supporters or even worse from my
point of view to smear and frame the
whole youth movement which has really
nothing to do with white nationalism
well any of these things you know right
and in the Politico article what they do
is the sort of classic smash-up guilt by
like paragraph proximity and they talk
about how oh there's these accounts that
follow you also oppose mass migration oh
and these other people that oppose mass
migration you know read this book called
the great replacement and then oh this
other guy who said that he talked about
the great replacement it went and killed
some people then then they smash up
other paragraphs right underneath it
where they start mentioning
you know people in the White House and
what not so there's really like no
direct link made by any means it's just
sort of like association by association
and by association
it's insinuations and you know that the
journalists who who wrote it who
obviously never read my book and who's
not very bright but he'd never retweeted
his he never tweeted out his own article
you know so it's very interesting it was
I believe it was a hit piece that was
already lined up I don't know who
coordinated it but I have my suspicions
and I think others such articles will
come as they try to build this
narratives that I'm some kind of James
Bond villain well well it's very common
you know my experience in dealing with
men's issues and men's groups and such
you know people from the New York Times
writer Nelly bulls and others they're
constantly trying to find links between
people the men who are looking to
improve themselves and get better
they're trying to find links between
that and and mass shootings and they're
constantly trying they're constantly
trying to make comparison constantly
trying to trying to say that that people
that question what I call feminist
overreach you use more colorful language
in your book I would say but Mike my way
my way Saget is feminist overreach
they're trying to tie anyone that talks
about that to mass shootings and that's
a guilt by association kind of thing and
that's not a game that's not a game that
we like to play and is there has there
been any sort of negative fallout for
you so far from from the Politico
article I mean just so you know this guy
Ben what's his last name Bench tracking
jerk he sent me a DM a few months ago
asking me if he could attend one of the
private meetings of our men's
organization the limo order and I was
like absolutely not
there's no way in hell first of all no
one has ever invited who's not a member
second of all no press will ever be
invited to any event without full
disclosure to everyone who's in
attendance and that guy is a White House
correspondent according to his business
card so I am very curious as to why Ben
from Politico all the sudden is
interested in small private on
men's organizations underground
underground books written by anonymous
guys who's also now he's supposed to be
allegedly a White House correspondent I
not allegedly he is a White House
correspondent so how and why are all
these things coming together right now
what is the plan you think what are they
cooking up I mean I think a couple of
things I think the main one at least has
regards me and I'm sure they will
involve other people in Manos fear or
whatever is what I just said they try to
make this narrative that we are
corrupting the youth and these other
things okay after the rash hoax failed
they need some way to smear a Trump and
they're trying to use me and probably
you also to smear him okay and but my
book isn't even especially a political
book if I had to describe it to enorme I
don't know how you describe it but he's
like a modernist prom it was all nice
lady a Boomer lady on Twitter I don't
know a small account and when someone
else was making some time ago similar
accusations about my book again without
having ready but she said you know this
is not a manifesto she said Bronze Age
mindset is this generations on the road
I don't know that I have no idea I fell
off as much influence as Kerouac did I'm
not even especially fond of his book but
it's much closer to something like that
then to any political manifesto it's
just absurd to try to make me into this
and by the way since this connects to
what you just said about the way you
promote in self-improvement for men and
why these people are so threatened by
that I'm not saying that I just wrote
some kind of artsy book out of a desire
to pretend I'm harmless
my book is not harmful in the sense that
you know I don't teach violence I don't
and quite the opposite and so on but it
is very damaging to the establishment
it's damaging to the so-called elite and
to their agenda and the pretensions I
think what you do what rush darts what
these other people do on the Internet is
the same is it shows to these people
that they have no more say really
with the use they are not the future so
of course they try to smear us the only
way they know how by tying us to
violence sort of whatever pretending
that I'm some kind of foreign guy trying
to corrupt the military that I got into
you that's what they will go with next
right I'm gonna jump ahead a little bit
here but I mentioned that the book was a
taking shots at her critique of the
establishment and the elites and it
makes them afraid one of the questions I
was gonna ask you later is of the
establishment itself at whom did you
take aim because I think Mike Anton
Michael Anton his reaction to me was
like this guy bronze-age pervert is
talking to the audience that we
establishment conservatives want to
address and he's doing a better job than
we are and for that purpose we should be
afraid so it seems to me that your book
is probably can be can be sort of
discarded by people on the left because
they already hate us but for people on
the right I think that it's actually
sort of terrifying because you have
opened up a conduit to the next
generation and that's something that
they have unable been unable to do so
far and for that reason you may also be
subjected to attacks from people on the
right as well what do you think about
that oh I have no doubt and in fact many
people so-called on the right are are
bad people they they will attack they'll
come out with all guns against Trump in
2020 not by the way that I'm a big Trump
booster but just be aware that many
people so-called on the right Russ doubt
that other people like that at New York
Times and elsewhere they're hardly
really on the right but how to answer
your thing look the people on the left
and the right hate me because I talk to
young people outside of their knowledge
and outside of their surveillance and
what they need to understand is they can
try to talks me
isolate me destroy me I'm guessing they
will try all of these things they try to
identify me as a representative of this
online youth movement so that then they
can destroy me and they think therefore
also this whole 4chan youth movement
that's been going on online they don't
understand and I want to also tell you
this I think you do understand what's
going on online is much bigger than me
it's much bigger than bronze-age pervert
or Bronze Age mindset I didn't invent it
and the conditions that led to it will
exist with or without me it's a whole
movement of young people who communicate
with each other with images with jokes
with a highly specialized form of
knowledge that the whole establishment
had no access to whatsoever they missed
it entirely and there are guys who came
on in two thousand fifteen or fourteen
and they were fifteen or sixteen years
old so half of the teenage years they've
lived in this in this world okay which
has spread well you say the left doesn't
care they do care it's spread well
beyond the so-called right that's what
I'm trying to say it spread among in the
pop culture of the youth at large
except outside the eyes and control of
the establishment that's why they're
panicking and my book is only just the
tip of the iceberg of that you know it
it's just the one thing that came out of
that that made it to national media
maybe the first but there are other
things that will come out and they're
missing this entirely and that panicking
they have no access to this entire huge
segment of the youth who are good kids
you know they go to school they have
good jobs etc they then it doesn't work
to try to smear them the way they these
people try so they try to smear me
instead right well there are kids coming
up and coming of age politically
speaking who have only ever heard from
their leads and elders that
white says straight men are the root of
all evil and so there's I think that
there's a growing dissatisfaction with
that that sort of label and there's no
there's no way any self-respecting
individual male like that can can
support or be involved in a process that
sees them or their fathers or their
grandfathers or their legacy as being
the source of all of the problems and
something that needs to be eradicated
and while those kids may not understand
what critical theory is or what actual
social justice or intersectionality is
you know all that has really worked its
way into all of our media and narratives
universities everything and it's not
sufficient enough for the leftist
philosophers and and ideologues to just
discuss things it's built into their
ideology to destroy and dismantle things
in fact that's their explicit Express
stated goal and the morality code is
based around intersectionality which
just has which has the white male at the
middle of it now personally I
hate talking about all these issues
about race and gender and that
because I was raised to not think about
that stuff I was I'm Gen X I'm 43
I was raised don't think about race
don't think about gender judge everybody
by their merits and let's just be happy
you know I was like okay that seems
reasonable to me
and now all that has sort of been turned
on its head and people are coming up are
not going to really want to stick with
that now this brings me what you said
brings me to a question that I have for
you and you mentioned that it was you
used the language and ideas and imagery
of sort of the very on line a sort of
underground changi community and I was
fortunate in some respects that I I got
online big time like around 2007 so I
and I and I connected with a lot of
these people so I have seen this stuff
evolve over you know more than a decade
now and as I was reading the book I was
struck by sort of thinking it was like
it was like urging people to do things
and describing the circumstances but at
the same time it was sort of like
surfacing and underground to the to the
mainstream if that's if that's even
possible with the self-published book
but it seemed to me it was like a
collection of of all the things that
I've been reading
thinking and people have been talking
about overtime was there any intent that
you had to sort of memorialize what you
had discovered and the things that you
had talked you know the people you would
talk to and the things that you'd read
and your own ideas and contextualize it
and in that in that community and bring
it forth or was the book just all coming
straight off the top of your head and in
the way that you've been thinking about
things for many years now yes more much
more the second thing you say yeah
because my intended audience was really
this youth generation that you talked
about who and not the mainstream I have
no desire whatsoever to talk to the
mainstream I wrote the book we can talk
later if you want but I wrote the book
for that audience principally and I like
you I've been online since around
exactly that time and maybe you also but
I think I don't think I take too much
credit I've been in part the origin of
some of the means people use and have
been using for a while so I've been part
of it for a long time no I that's just
how we communicate with each other right
and I saw you finally I have to it isn't
just about white youth I I must
emphasize that it's yes it's much bigger
the the there's a joke running around
that this dissident right is is mostly
non-white and there's I think you know
but I think there's a lot of truth to
that people would be very surprised to
learn yeah I would agree with that and
and again me personally I'm uninterested
in race and ethnic specific
conversations and such like that the the
gen-x are in me sort of route best you
know takes a takes a sour look at things
like that but you mentioned that you
you're writing specifically for the
youth movement so what what do you say
to someone who doesn't know anything
about you who may not know anything
about rhetoric or satire or hyperbole in
literature what what do you tell them
about your book how do you tell them to
approach it and what do you think
happens to someone who picks up
your book and reads it who isn't isn't
steeped in rhetoric doesn't understand
sort of the big picture and the
techniques involved yes I imagine they
might misunderstand but the book to
ignore me which is what you're talking
about that's the name for normal person
let's say mainstream person right that
kind of person I think unless they are
malicious or demented would realize for
them it's a humor book I mean there are
things in it that are so absurd to
ignore me right so my hope is that such
a person with maybe chocolate it and put
it down is aside from that or even that
I really don't care what they think I
didn't write the book for them who did
write for normies but let's just say
just like a college freshman who doesn't
who doesn't know that like American
politics has been steeped with rhetoric
I mean I remember reading about like an
election around the turn of the 19th
century where the presidential
candidates in the newspapers that they
owned themselves mind you we're like
writing about the other guys saying if
so-and-so wins there's gonna be open for
negation streets and like I mean just
like crazy stuff like end of time stuff
it's so like there's a tradition of
rhetoric and hyperbole in American
politics but when you're 18 you don't
know that and and you know there
are some some passages in the book that
I think if people read quite literally
you know could lead them maybe to a
different outcome that perhaps you had
intended well you'd have to tell me what
you have in mind
but I can tell you I have very big
audience in Scandinavia the first review
of my book was in Swedish and since then
it's been circulated widely in
Scandinavia I've huge sales the huge
sales in Japan so my book is not really
yes it's not specific to American
political culture or even just to the
lingo of this internet world I think I
try to go beyond that to talk to someone
who doesn't know anything at all about
it and
hence the many references to books from
antiquity to philosophers and so forth
who have inspired me and has inspired
the ideas in the book so I've tried to
go beyond just the say small corner of
the internet but I should emphasize the
attraction of this corner of the
Internet is that we are not completely
although you know the stereotype is were
all things we all have Asperger's right
but we don't just talk to each other we
have tremendous reach outside of our
corner of the internet menacwy known for
this post and we can talk about how has
your reach outside of this corner of the
internet changed now that this book is
picking up momentum it's too soon to
tell you have to remember the anti
review came out on the 19th of August I
believe and less than five days later
came the politico review and from what I
see online is I see horrible lies told
about me which I come on your show
partly to counter ok because I don't
want to be part of political struggles
of information warfare of these kinds of
things I don't want to be contrived as
part of this conspiracy that making do
you do you feel like that you stepped
into the arena with this kind of book
though I mean you can't you can't throw
rock and not expect one to come back at
you well I don't know my again my
audience was not the political world it
was not I do know I did not intend to
change one election or the other my aim
was to begin to change culture and I
encourage readers of the book to do just
that to make movies to write books to
read certain books so for Peter the whoo
or you know myopic strategists for
Hillary Clinton to take interest in it
doesn't make objective sense unless they
were planning something nefarious it's
not in
music to the book itself you see what
I'm saying right it's the impact and the
conduit to the young people and your
ability to influence them which is
self-evident across Twitter and social
media the way that the the images of the
very you know - Zeek miles and the and
the books which I like I mean hey it's
all it's all fun and you know picture
people taking people taking pictures of
their book in various locations and
whatever else I mean the influence is
very clear and you know those Democratic
strategists might be dumb in some ways
but they are smart and others and they
can't acknowledge and do understand that
you know having a in in today's world
getting your message into people's ears
is one of the biggest challenges given
the you know the widespread number of
new sources and stuff in the competition
for people's attention and if you're
somebody that actually has people's
attention well then a they want to
figure out how you did it and B they
probably want to take that power away
from you
I keep thinking though about how you
said that your intentions weren't for
the political audience and I'm thinking
back you know personally like when I
first started tweeting and writing you
know I tweeted and wrote a lot different
when I only thought like 50 people we're
gonna read it yeah now that I know that
like you know the size of a small town
could possibly read every tweet and
sometimes even millions of people can
see a tweet thousands of people read my
book like I have in my my own sense of
what I call platform responsibility
right like I would never write some of
the things I wrote when I was first
starting anonymous for fun as a joke etc
yes as I would now do you feel like if
you had the same platform size when you
wrote the book as you do now and will
seemingly have in the future even bigger
would you write the book the same way
how will you handle power your power
growing and the unintended consequences
your writing so like how do you plan to
handle that
I think I would write the book the same
way I I don't think there's anything
irresponsible in the book and I think
it's a very wholesome message the
practical advice I give if there's
something not like that you should tell
me what you have in mind but no I think
I think I would do the same well you
have you asked me and so I'm going to
have to ask a couple questions so
wholesome
I don't know that wholesome is the word
that I would use to describe it indeed
some of the few concrete example call to
action items in the book are relatively
wholesome and benign but for example go
to the gym worship the Sun and steel
which I love that's a wonderful phrase
that's something I've been writing about
anyone that knows anything about
improving yourself knows that you need
to aspire and perform at a high level
physically and build your body and such
that's great on top of that you talk
about content creation you you you urge
your audience to create videos and to
write and to express themselves which in
today's day and age is a fundamental
part of how we're going to figure out
how to adapt to this new technology that
we have Jordan Hall who's been on my
podcast and will be coming up again soon
he calls it the express and explore
phase of this new technology that we
have so everybody's expressing
themselves an exploring idea so that I
see that that's that's great advice and
then also you give them advice to form
very tight male friendships fraternity
societies and orders and and I you know
obviously I take that very seriously as
I've already created and done something
in that very exact particular vein which
is to create a fraternity of men who
seek to support each other and want to
prepare themselves to be the best people
that they can be and if something crazy
happens down the line be prepared to
take appropriate action and buy action
that can mean protect your family I
don't know what but you know just be
prepared and aware so that to me is like
the wholesome part there's a couple of
the the rhetorical flourishes let's say
or sort of the
and and this is gonna dovetail with
another question I want to ask but sort
of like predictions for the future and
or slash requests for the future I don't
know like for example there's a passage
where you say that in the future either
I can't remember is it there will be or
there should be or there shall be a
sweeps you know sweeping hordes of
barbarians you know coming across the
globe now how a is that wholesome B is
that something that you predict by
observation or is it something that you
wish to see come to fruition is it
inevitability is it desirable you know
let's talk a little bit about that well
remember I also say I think somewhere
that zoo animals from the zoos should be
open and that animals from the zoos
should run free in the city you know and
I think I know but I as I'm reading that
similarly that's a met that's a metaphor
for unleashing the Beast Within upon the
world I mean is it not or was that just
a throwaway it's it's a joke we've been
trading among each other but it's
obviously to anyone reading that you
asked about someone not steeped in this
internet culture anybody think that
realizes it's good humor you know the
media tries to and I'm not saying you're
doing that here I know you're playing
devil's advocate but yes media tries to
deploy humorousness as a strategy they
do this with Trump all the time you see
that he jokes he says he's the chosen
one or something and they they tend to
not know he's joking so there's
obviously my book is listed as humor
there's obviously a lot of stuff in it
like that now as for the specific
question you asked about the future
that's not a call to action
many people have let's say predicted the
withering away of the state and its
replacement by sub state actors that's
not a call to action it's based on
observations about political life across
the world and it's entirely possible
that at some point in the future who
knows when it could be a hundred years
that's not the call to action
but right right I mean and that's also
part and parcel to like fourth
generation warfare to where the lines
between military and civilian are being
blurred and the combat comes in all
different kinds of levels whether it's
mental moral spiritual or physical you
know those things are evolving so you
know it is a it is an observation of
something that may come in the future
and and this is exactly why I wanted to
have this conversation is because I
tried to read the book as if I were
someone that didn't know anything that I
know right and when I read you say that
women's freedom is an infection a fatal
infection upon the West it makes it
makes it makes me laugh right because
it's funny but you know to somebody
who's not who doesn't understand that
there's a deeper more nuanced argument
within there they're going to read that
and just be terrorized right and
so you know that's your way of saying
feminist overreach I guess is what it is
what I'm understanding and you know I
think that there are probably people who
will hear me ask these questions hear
your answers and hear you say it's humor
and these are jokes and whatever and
then they'll still be like nah it's
still just a secret code to turn
everybody into pirates running around
the world you know just taking what they
want right right right
which is right so again again this is
exactly why this is exactly why I wanted
to have this conversation and and before
I move on from sort of like this meta
part and the structure and stuff like
did you you said you've been very online
since around the time I have did you
hang out around any of those old blogs
like Roissy or the old roof place did
you ever read anybody you ever read Jack
Donovan cuz like a lot of what I read
sort of felt like echoing Jack Donovan's
way of men and certainly there were
terms and ideas and memes and turns of
phrase that reminded me of very specific
that commenters back on those old boards
I told you about that I am I was like no
oh my god I know who it is but you know
I'm guessing you hung out in those areas
like did those those guys have
influenced you like are you connected to
them in any way or sort of like that old
not operationally if you know we're not
friends but at least Rossi was very
important for all of us many of us went
on Twitter because he was there yeah
Jack Donovan not so much I have nothing
against him but I'm telling you being
honest I had never read his books I
think he's probably okay the
inspirations for my books the
intellectual inspirations I don't make a
secret of in where I lead people
directly to the writers I say read
Nietzsche read Schopenhauer writer you
know I was I'm thinking sir stylist yes
yes no I at one point there's a I do
copy one phrase from a commenter on
Rosie's blog but I don't think this year
of interest to broader audience and
that's not me and I just thought it he
had a funny turn of phrase in one you
know a but hexed okay I like that is
this the example you just gave of how it
could my rhetoric you say could be
misinterpreted other thing about women
because okay so you're right I do say
that giving the franchise to women the
voting franchise was the biggest self
owned that Western civilization any
civilization has ever done okay and I
stand by that as a historical
observation it has nothing to do with
call to action but as a historical
observation the so-called liberation of
women has is unprecedented in human
society the few times it's been sort of
tried it's it's led to disaster because
as I argue in the book and elsewhere it
is an impossibility what you do when you
free women to vote and not just women
but when you put universal democracy the
way it exists now it
doesn't actually empower women or people
at large
you give certain actors in society you
talk rhetoric you give certain auditors
or manipulators in society power and we
can talk about historical rightness or
wrongness of that but insofar as call to
action remember in the book I follow
this up by saying and you should never
try as some idiots to to quote unquote
put women back in the kitchen or to
curtail their rights in any way I think
I say this in the book too I say it is
women that will save us because women
more than men can still follow their
wild passions and they will vote
sometimes they vote for men or whatever
who can break through the machinery of
the modern tyrannical state which only
pretends it's a democracy by the way but
but remember I say that we you know so I
do a turnaround in terms of practical
call I say no it is women women voters
who who may actually vote in people like
well like Trump and others or Trump is
just the beginning he's not okay so so I
I can try to mix in the book what you
would call extreme states statements of
truths of theoretical truth with
moderate calls for practice okay so in
terms of practice I'm I'm a moderate you
can say but I will never edit what I
believe to be the truth because it may
offend some and you are right with what
you said before power and truth and
maybe publicity and truth don't mix but
I had much smaller account then and yes
when you are obscured and you lack power
your fears to tell the truth right part
of um on a meta level I thought that the
book was a demonstration in freedom
right it was a demonstration and I can
do what I want say what I want and I'm
gonna get away with anything that I want
and this is sort of a way
a way to follow it's sort of a role
model it's sort of like not to these
extreme perhaps because most people
don't have it in them to be extreme but
in a sense of like maybe finally
somebody a guy out there who's like
always put his needs second it's finally
gonna be like okay well it's okay I can
want something that I want I mean this
is just like a small example but did you
have any of that in mind were you trying
to lead by example with your words like
that absolutely not not not in the sense
that I want let's say a sixteen or
seventeen year old guy to go around
saying such things in public in fact I
encourage them to be quite cautious in
some ways it leads me by the way to
something else I want to clarify two
enemies who are probably listening now
or watching my every move again I have
no doubt that they are going to try to
isolate me to dark sneak and and that
that trying to try to Ducks me as part
of this whole frame job they have and
they can go ahead and do that I've
arranged my life in such a way that
daxing is really going to change much
for me I haven't been living in America
for a while okay so other people may not
be in the same condition as me but for
me what the daxing will do and what this
constant digging on their site will do
it will embarrass them okay I there are
things about me let me just put it this
way now without giving details about
myself I they should be very careful
because I'm connected to their friends
I'm connected to their patrons I'm
connected to institutions they look up
to a lot of people and institutions
would be embarrassed a lot of things
they like would be embarrassed let me
put it that way I don't really fit the
profile they want to contrive for
so-called alt-right which is by the way
a label I reject and actually none of
the online or very few of the online
prankster kids fit that profile we can
talk about this if you want they just
tell lies it's all vile I yeah I mean
they put their alright label
on me and uh you know that was pretty
far far from the truth and and I'd also
you know I was doxed and you know they
came after me and sure they got my
Normie career taken care of I got fired
based on things that people had dug up
out of Internet trash from years ago and
then other just sort of normal things
that any reasonable person should be
able to discuss like the merits of
sanctuary cities and the impact of
undocumented immigration on like things
like school budgets and things like that
reasonable things to discuss but I set
up myself in such a way to kind of
anticipating maybe that would happen and
I have been able to turn a doxxing into
a positive and to use it to you know
become become more powerful and I
suspect in some way is that if that ever
happened to you you would be able to do
the same thing in fact I have absolutely
no doubt that you have thought about
that quite a bit yes yes they need to
understand I'm not going anywhere
some people disappeared unfortunately
when they get talk'st I'm not but it's
important to understand why they're
doing this they believe by isolating me
or isolating you that they can put cat
back in the bag when it comes to this
youth movement it's not going anywhere
and when you mentioned earlier about why
they would take interest in you and us
who built our own audiences over time it
just shows how artificial before all of
this popular culture has been in America
probably in the world as a whole they
pick a young guy out of Los Angeles or
some other place Miami and they raise
him to be a singer and everything is
public relations he's completely and
through raising up such people they
entirely hope to modulate popular
culture and the minds of young people
and we have been talking to the young
entirely outside of that okay and they
can get rid of us you know but they
can't get rid of this and it's not just
white youth this needs to be emphasized
the entire sections of the youth not
even just on the right are dissatisfied
and they've been communicating with each
other online outside the view of the
authorities and establishment and that's
going to continue no matter what yes no
and it's only going to actually
proliferate and you know for folks like
me and the members of the liminal order
we've got over a hundred guys now seven
countries around the world three
different continents our goal is to sort
of get out of the spotlight get off of
social media out of the glare and to
sort of go back underground and put down
dark root or deep roots rather and in
fact part of my inspiration for doing
that with luminal order was talking to
Curtis sharp and he suggests he
suggested that exact thing which is to
is to stop engaging with the Predators
on the savanna and to actually sort of
become a little bit more quiet and a
little bit more judicious with the
things that you do and you say and to
sort of allow things to have time to
grow and to evolve and I know that
online the kids the young people you
know we don't mean children here we mean
you know like 18 24 somewhere in that
range they're definitely taking their
conversations out of their learning to
up front about it because it's gonna get
you in trouble
and so those conversations are certainly
still happening I wanted to just sort of
now get into some of the meat and the
concepts in the book because there's so
much fascinating stuff in here and I
gotta say reading it reminded me of
reading Camille Paglia
in that like every sentence and
assertion you made was backed up by
historical references to antiquity and
the classics and stuff which I found to
be very impressive and very interesting
there's by no means any way that I could
fact check or confirm everything that
you said in there but I'm of the things
I did know about you seem to get them
right and so I'm gonna trust that but
the book contents is something that I
also really want to talk about here and
one of the main things I want to talk
about is this idea of space and claiming
space
is there you know can you give us a
little summary on that it's a very
primary theme within within the whole
book and it's something that I want to
dig into about dig into a little bit
with you yes I think I can sum it up in
one quote that I I think Carl Schmitt he
said they've put us out to pasture
regarding the fate of Europe after World
War two when it was reduced to a
province and entirely dependent and I
think this experience of essentially
being put in I don't want to say mental
asylum but something like that and in
closed own space is something that many
young people grow up today feeling very
dissatisfied with this lack of ability
to explore so forth so I wanted to talk
about this feeling in context of biology
in general and meaning of life in
general like meaning of life
biologically I mean yeah I see I see so
what what is constraining young people
in in their space who's putting them in
their space how is the this space you're
talking about already preoccupied what's
occupying it I would like to just free
to expand on that a little bit please
yes I must say I think before we start
the talk I I told you in regards of
particular ideas or passages of the book
I would prefer not to elaborate too much
detail because I put them this way in
the book for for the reason the book was
something I've thought about for perhaps
10 years or longer and I expressed
things in it in a very condensed way for
the reason while writing some passages I
found myself going for many pages with
explanations and arguments the way
people normally would and and I stopped
myself and I limited myself to
expressing the main idea as I skipped
many steps of reasoning on purpose and
so for this reason I don't want to get
too much into detailed elaboration of
passages so I think the book speaks
speaks for itself
but I can tell you regarding what you're
asking now in the book I say we don't
know who the owners of this space are
and I meant that and I will leave it at
that but the feeling that your
possibilities for action are entirely
constrained is undeniably there and it's
not just there in the first world it's
much more pronounced people don't
realize this if you go to a third-world
slum it's it's much more it's not it's
much more advanced this is feeling right
a sort of a sort of a lack of choice a
lack of freedom I guess this was just
one step in a series of questions I
wanted to go through which was you know
trying to find a frontier like where
where is it right now where people can
feel like they're exploring where is it
that they feel like they can get that
sort of vitality that you described from
seeking out new adventures and new
places and unknown things and weirdness
and underworld like well I think you yes
I think that isn't is yeah I think
that's the point I think it's been
completely squashed down tamp down
throughout the 20th century with much
more so after the cold war started but
you said one word there at the end and
it's the last section of my book and
I'll just put it at that there is a
frontier it's just not what people think
it is mm-hm
because the way this world is controlled
you asked who the owners of this space
are the owners of this space are the
people who just assassinated epstein in
front of the public knowing there would
be no consequences for them they are
stronger than the president they're
stronger than the Department of Justice
you don't know who they are they don't
care and that
is the frontier except a normal person
has no access to it the Epstein I like I
call it an assassination the apparent
suicide of Jeffrey Epstein just kidding
he that should have been there's a
massive and I used this term loosely now
red pilling sort of revealing moment for
the entire nation that there are these
forces out there that seemingly can just
murder the guy we all knew the guy was
gonna get killed
yeah and then they did it right in front
of our faces and they're gonna get away
with it it if that didn't just stop
everybody in their tracks like nothing
really is gonna I don't think it seems
to me that we've sort of accepted that
would you agree that we've accepted the
presence of of people that can operate
with impunity and and commit murders and
steal billions of dollars and start wars
and I mean have we just accepted that as
our fate I'm afraid so I'm afraid
everything they say about Russia that
it's run by spooks who bribe and extort
people with compromise and this kind of
thing is how America and in fact all
modern states run except here it's much
more occulted by this whole language of
democracy and rights and so forth and
people have been hypnotized many too
into buying that language but more and
more that they're seeing the way the
cake is baked right to sorry to use
cliche but they saw it with the Podesta
emails yes you know it's so obvious but
I am a bit black pale or pessimistic
about this I have an older friend who
says Kennedy when he was killed everyone
no one believed the the government story
the single so I interfere oh yeah yeah I
mean it's come to be believed because
it's the historical narrative that got
put in books but apparently at the time
no one believed the story they all
thought the CIA did it or whoever some
some secrets agency we don't even know
about
and but did that change anything no I
think so you ask who owns the space and
I I can only begin to to think that that
is who right well one of the frontiers
that I saw and I see in my life and that
I seek out is one that's inside my own
head I'm finding through meditation and
the time that I take to become present
inside my own thoughts or even table to
discard them
that there's like a whole frontier
inside of my brain that I had no idea
was even there
and I recommend guys to take ten minutes
every day to try to meditate and to try
to calm themselves and to try to explore
that space because truly that is sort of
one of the only places where you can
actually find freedom and and liberation
in fact Charles Manson I think claim to
be more free in prison than on the
outside because he had more time to
dedicate to going into his mind and
going into his space where where are you
on meditation and and non-denominational
spirituality perhaps like that I didn't
get the sense that you were a Christian
per se um but what do you think about
the frontier inside and sort of
self-mastery has a way to deal with some
of these issues that you've raised in
the book yes I know of many people use
meditation profits from it I don't know
very much about it myself I am against
quietism which I know you are not
recommending it as the sole weight sole
purpose but quietism yes I'm against
retreating into one's own mind I'm in
the same way I'm against many people on
both the right and the left who are
dissatisfied with modern world want
intelligent people to drop out of the
system to move to middle of nowhere
Montana or Alaska or something and I
don't like that that's a way to self
castrate yourself I think now I think we
need to continue the fight against this
very oppressive I think it's one of the
most oppressive direct tyrannical
societies that we live in now okay and
you cannot give up the fight against it
now it has to be a peaceful fight as I
repeatedly say in the book in fact they
want people to engage in violence
because it allows them to increase their
surveillance and their power so but when
I say you fight them you have to fight
them spiritually you have to engage them
the way I tried with the book with some
is that with media with videos with as
most of all with mockery
it's what absolutely kills them is
mockery yeah they can't stand being
mocked you know that so they come after
me and people who mock them right in
fact that's one of the things that I
have wrapped up with you know on my
notes here was that was a there was a
very concrete call-to-action that you
had there which is I'm just gonna read a
quote real quick the long game of
persuading the public is far from one
keep the eye on the task far from the
accomplished to discredit authorities to
mock all public PIDs to show leaders of
government bureaucracy finance
corporations big tech and media for the
pathetic ghouls they are and you know
that is a pretty it's in wonderful
language and ghouls and stuff is very
strong words but this is a very specific
concrete call to action for people and
it's also not one that's extreme or
radical in any way and in fact it's I
think a playbook from the left even the
mockery especially and you know I can
totally get behind that and I can we've
seen the effectiveness and Trump you
know utilizes mockery to the chagrin of
many but it is effective and when you do
mock people it does sort of denude them
of their power
and it is something that I become more
and more aware of as I understand the
differences between rhetoric and
dialectic and which is which is more
powerful today I mean sitting down and
trying to walk someone as you did as you
said you decided not to walk people
through all the rationale and the
reasoning that you went through to get
to your positions
you just went straight to the main idea
and then you know put some really
powerful language behind it is is today
an era in which dialectic and reasoning
like that is not gonna be effective in
any case and that rhetoric and and and
big powerful language and mockery is is
really our primary tool and or has not
always been I don't know I'm not an
expert in this particular field if I
would agree with you it's always been
and the only people who believe
otherwise have maybe mild case
Asperger's which is fine we love them
you know but I you look at someone like
Nietzsche who I keep mentioning in the
book there are many people middlebrow
people who read him and they say oh this
is all rhetoric it's already see they
are the ones who can't get beyond his
rhetoric but Nietzsche isn't interested
in talking to the middle brow he talks
to to audiences he wants to talk to the
people on one hand and perhaps artists
and others who would make art literature
writers on the other and on the other
hand he's in dialogue with great
philosophers like Schopenhauer Plato etc
okay and he doesn't care about the other
audiences and this is lost this is lost
on many people when when those are your
intended audiences you don't need to go
into all the details what you call
dialectic and and present all of your
reasons on one hand in fact it's in poor
taste it I find it horribly boring
what's what's the point of that people
who really like to think will fill in
the steps on their own they will follow
your illusions they will follow the
you put in and read on their own they
will make the connections on their own
and then with the rhetoric you will
affect the others who read it for
entertainment but I have no interest in
in for example convincing someone
writing at New York Times or even a
pundit blogger I mean many odd friends
but I have no interesting convincing you
know London Review of Books ok right no
interests right and you know you very
well describe the sensation that I had
when I was reading the book even though
I was I mean I read it a while back I
read it and reread it again in the last
few days even though I was struck by
some of the imagery in the language I
could feel myself sort of backfilling in
the steps and like what does it mean on
the ground today and like what does it
mean for me in my in my day to day life
and for people that are seeking answers
and truths and stuff you're right they
will they will fill it in and it is also
a powerful persuasion to clearly
describe or sort of push off your
unintended audience right you want to
disqualify people from reading is
reading your book I have no interest in
respectability I need to emphasize this
because you brought up a beginning that
my idea is going mainstream and so it I
don't think it's possible for them to
the mainstream and I'm very glad of the
opportunity to increase publicity I
can't refuse that because I don't want
my book and my message to spread but I
don't care about mainstream
respectability and I did not do this to
springboard to that I have no interest
in that you know I I told you mentioned
Curtis yarv in I told him recently the
same thing I'm about to tell you there
is nothing published now under people's
real names that anyone will read in 20
years let alone 50 or a hundred you know
I don't really care about what I've
called the name
 world it's the world of the Dead I'm
not talking about you or him by the way
but believe me I know this world well
I'm not saying that to brag but I know
its highest institutions very well they
are dead I have there is nothing
worthwhile that can that can come out of
it I'm in dialog only with the audience
I told you I wrote the book thinking of
when I myself was 16 17 18 maybe through
23 something like this and what I would
have wanted to read and the writers I
would have wanted to be introduced to
and I wrote it for them and on the other
hand I try to be in dialogue with other
writers you know I'm just a humble
blogger okay well I have no interest in
the world of the dead of the new time no
and frankly we don't need them anymore
we have a direct conduit to the people
and straight into their brains and that
is the revolution that's happening right
now and that's what the journalism
journalists and authors and big mouth
intellectuals are talking heads are
struggling with is that we're able to
bypass them you know in the old days you
know you would do anything for a New
York Times Book Review
you know today if the New York Times
calls me my first instinct up the phone
at them to get the out of here cuz
I don't nothing good nothing good is
gonna
will come of that in in some respects
but you know we certainly don't need
them to amplify the message and
sometimes maybe the best messages are
ones that you know you didn't really
have any intention of amplifying
terribly too much anyway that sounds
like a true expression of art and a true
expression of creativity which the book
is just an impressive feat of I as a
writer I love the prose I love the
imagery I love the tone the rhythm it's
obvious the book was very carefully
edited it's really just a well
constructed and well put together and a
very very easy to digest
if you kins if
you can keep going through those moments
of like Oh like holy what am i
reading here and allow the more subtle
you know sort of on-the-ground stuff to
settle in and give you a sense of what
you may be able to do to escape the
numbness that you described and so one
of the things and I don't wanna these
next few questions are only meant
because I what you've written in your
ideas in these regards and I'm
interested to hear your feedback and
like other ideas and how I can help my
own audience the panic is preferable to
numbness line with something that really
really stood out to me and there seem to
be a lot of emphasis on feelings
feelings of despair feelings of
confinement a feeling for more feeling
and do you think that right now people
are limited in their like human
experience is there is there something
that we can do to to grow those
experiences or this feeling I mean
numbness if you and I and I know this
isn't literal and I totally understand
this but panic is preferable to numbness
that makes sense to me right um is there
a value in seeking that stuff out as a
way to feel something beyond numbness I
mean people what do you say to the
readers out there who are already feel
numb yes well obviously near
thrill-seeking
is something I don't agree with you can
do bungee jump or this kind of thing but
ultimately that or even travel today I
was talking with some people about this
movie the beach you know the movie the
beach the movies Leonardo DiCaprio is a
is a great mockery however of the hippy
idea that you can escape this numbness
the the grind of modern society by
through this kind of travel okay or also
seek is mere thrill seeking I think in
the book I try to emphasize that you
will only really be able to escape that
feeling if you
managed to attain actual sovereignty of
some kind actual independence of some
kind and personal sovereignty yes and
and that can be achieved primarily I
think in the fight against what I've
called wealth I'm copying Hobbs right
but it's called the Leviathan right okay
so so rather than let's say you want to
escape the numbness yes it's true
panic is preferable to that that doesn't
mean I think that you should take drugs
to induce strong feelings or go on a
bungee jump or try to do the beach and
go to to Thailand in a backpacker try to
find artificial adventure because that
will feel altom utley artificial because
you're still just playing in a
playground whether the surveillance are
watching you see right so the real
freedom as Nietzsche says only the
warrior is a free man so he means it
spiritually by the way okay so I I think
I mean it the same way in the book the
only freedom you will really find is in
spiritual warfare against this immense
force of smothering evil that is
suffocating life out of the world and
not just by the way out of Europe
it's absolutely destroying the third
world suffocating or life out of it you
know the Chinese are going to completely
kill all the megafauna of Africa I don't
know if people realize this or the big
animals in Africa are going to disappear
within our lifetimes probably so it's a
it's a system of immense evil that needs
to be fought and and I believe that the
real veil and the real freedom is doing
that and that doesn't mean that you need
to even run for office or anything I
think the biggest task that lies ahead
of us is cultural warfare but that you
know that I don't mean over fights over
abortion of this guy I mean make movies
make books that inspire people yeah
I think that that's a hundred percent
correct and I think that there's a very
dirt of dissident literature and art out
there today I went to the Modern Art
Museum in DC the other week and I was
struck by the conformist nature of the
dissident art that they had up I mean
it's all in the same veins of what I
believe Garvin would call the cathedral
what Jordan Hall called the blue church
and all that contained therein
it's all just sort of art echoing all
that stuff and it's not dissident it's
not subversive in any way when was the
last time like a dissident or subversive
movie came out or even music I mean
there's not is there even such a thing
as punk rock anymore maybe I'm just old
you know they've completely co-opted it
okay Rage Against the Machine is now the
machine I mean I've seen them talk and
and they and they they toe the new party
line and such and so I think that your
book in particular is a great example of
the possibility of dissident or
subversive art because it is important
to take to read the book with that
perspective rather than like a literal
handbook they're freaked out by anyone
who is not owned that freaked out by you
yes they're freaked out by certain of
which that freaked out by Rush and by
many others whose names are not yet
known from our corner of the internet
like manequa known for and other
incredibly talented people who I think
deserve attention and who actually do
have a very large audience among the
youth but they're freaked out by people
who have a message that is an own look
at how they react to PewDiePie right I
mean he's the biggest one of all right
but but he's so big they can't stop he's
got 100 million you know me they can
start they can they can try to stop or
some became they can't but look at how
they freak out over him so when I say
cultural warfare he's having a lot of
fun right he's not explicitly political
I think I mean things like that people
can do things like that right I think
right and I think also people can create
new Association
and create new friendships and new
communities and such and I think that
that's something that you really
emphasize especially in the air towards
the end there were some quotes that I
like man they really hit home to me like
especially this one the friendships you
have made meeting each other in person
or online are the greatest event to the
last few years and source for the
greatest promise I can't tell you how
much I agree with that sentiment it is
an absolute miracle the people that I
have become connected to the way that
we've been able to congregate both
online and in person because doing
things in person now are is an essential
next step the ability that we've had to
come together around ideas and not just
come together around a job or a location
where I live or a school that I went to
is just is exceptionally powerful I
think we have no idea still how powerful
that's gonna end up being and the people
that I have met along this journey here
have been the best part and the new
relationships I have I was looking
through my text messages the other day
and like the first tenor from all people
that I've met in the last five years
no one's from my old my old friend
network or old family network they don't
understand anything in fact I'm you know
to them I'm the bad Nazi racist
misogynistic you know rape advocate when
in reality I'm out here trying to teach
guys how to like you know strengthen
their mind body and spirit so that they
can become more could you know
productive to their families and to
their communities which is really what
my big goal is these days and I found a
lot of support for that in your writing
you know men coming together have done
great things over time and it's time for
us to start doing that again and I'm
really excited about that and one of the
things and this is gonna be like one of
the last issues is I want to dig into
before we just sort of come to a wrap
here was your sort of discussion about
are so many things sir the masculinity
purity of purpose is manliness manliness
is the first requirement of the
philosopher these ideas and the mention
of masculinity
to be seemed like to indicate that it
was really important to you do you think
that masculinity is specifically under
attack today who owns the masculine
space right now and I don't mean like
manosphere I mean like in general and
what can be done to resolve any issue
there beyond Sun and steel which I love
and I keep tweeting that out by the way
yes of course
Sun and steel lifting and so you know
all the benefits of that and your
audience and mine I think also know the
mood benefits the psychological benefits
aside from the physical ones
but aside from that I think just what
you said right now if you are able to
form strong friendships with other men
based around the higher task that is
what these people feel the most they
want us completely isolated and I'm
afraid that they will turn they will
somehow try to shut down Internet to to
prevent these I don't know if they can
but but they're trying to do that the
quote that you have about purity of
purpose I encourage people to read yukio
mishima and that book or that quote is
from second installment of his tetralogy
the sea of fertility it's called runaway
horses it's bad but actually the first
installment of that tetralogy called
spring snow which is just a love story I
think people can read that and it's
about very sensitive you can say
sensitive artistic boy not what you'd
think of as you know Chad or something
like that but but he at the end of that
love story shows true this what you just
mentioned purity of purpose of course I
talked about other heroes in the ancient
heroes and conquistadors and such in the
book but yes I think that is a necessary
element crucial element of manliness and
it's completely edited out of experience
today well
the man is supposed to be a Capon eyes
ATM Bank for for women and kind of ATM
for taxation and supposed to go to work
and least the beasts of burden beasts of
burden I think that there's definitely a
growing sense among dissatisfied men out
there that they're that the the burden
of performance on men do they are seen
as beasts of burden civil rights being
curtailed across can't college campuses
family courts you know there's there's a
whole list of reasons why men are
starting to feel as though the clamps
are coming down even tighter around them
I think that you may not probably
disagree with this that basically all of
society and its laws and structures are
meant to constrain sort of the male
spirit in some ways in the sense of
adventure and and and conquest and
risk-taking and all and all kinds of
things and I personally I've always felt
that my whole life I've always been I
was got in trouble in school and always
challenged Authority I looked to game
the system rather than be a part of the
system when I was a kid and I'm sure
I've carried some of that with me and
there's no feeling that I hate more in
the world than feeling like there's
somebody that has power over me
and I feel like lots of guys out there
feeling like there's sort of a an
amorphous power sort of wrapping
themselves around them that's assigning
them and controlling them and that's why
this idea of coming together and
communicating and sharing ideas and not
even harping about that but just like a
shared purpose is essential which is one
of the reasons why those passages in the
book struck me so much and I'm starting
to hear this more and more from people
Jordan Hall and others to where this
they have different ways of coming to
assessing today's problems but the
solution seems to be pretty close to the
same which is form communities be strong
be good to your family and your
community
and you know try to for me find the
freedom inside of your own soar
spirituality and try to carve out that
inner space and inner peace so that you
can better deal with all this stuff and
be strong we're gonna lead through
strength and I think that that is kind
of the gist of your book I mean people
will read it and say that you're looking
for pirates to roam the earth raping
pillaging and taking what they want
through sheer force of will but I'm
gonna argue perhaps and you can confirm
or deny that basically what you're
saying is that people should be a strong
and dedicated focus as they can be and
be good to themselves and their and
their brothers is that is that right yes
it's definitely a teaching of peace it's
even in the book description on Amazon
teaching about ace I like that I like
that and I'm glad that we've had a
chance to talk and I'm glad that other
people will have a chance to listen
because I'd like this to be in the
record you know for you your specific
views on these specific matters so that
one day somebody is gonna go through a
list and oh is it gonna be a long list
sir all the things in the book that they
can talk about but you know I think
again that that plays to your to plays
to your advantage there's a million
trillion things I'd like to ask you
about but I'm gonna be respectful of
your time and start to wrap this up for
you and for me what um what's next
what's next for you what's next for
Bronze Age pervert is there a sequel as
are more books what is next in the next
few years for America what happens in
2020 tell me well let me get to that
just I want to say one more thing to our
common audience yes I am all for
building friendships and all of these
and I say you should in the book and I
myself have met people in person among
our common friends on my idle of their
your friends but I've met people I've
met on lines okay oh yeah but but I can
afford to be maybe more reckless or
indiscreet I want to emphasize if you
are young if you are 17 18 19 please
take care of
or OPSEC operational security protect
your identity because we don't need
people to darhk's themselves to make
martyrs out of themselves I can make a
martyr out of myself it won't really
affect me but you should not you should
be discreet and we need people to do
well in this society so just take care
of your upside now you ask me about
future my next book I've already told
people is going to be philosophical
erotic novel for women yes
so you say I say that the thing about
women actually some people who are
hardly by the way on the right notice
that my book is extremely generous and
worship full of women's okay
I think that reveal you know you know
like Penelope okay okay and so you know
women women love my teaching you know
because I teach them also to be the best
and this next book will be a
philosophical erotic novel for for women
and I hope to put it out soon within the
next few months maybe in January of next
year something like that well that will
be the first philosophical erotic novel
for women that I have ever read I look
forward to that tremendously what do you
see happening in 2020 in America what's
next what's gonna happen in the next two
to four years what do you see women love
that I talk about this also on my show
recent podcast I'm in Brazil the mulatto
women love that I I don't I don't doubt
it
so as for 2020 who knows I think it's
too early to say I think Trump looks
like he will win
right now but it's very hard to say
because they can crash economy I think
they will come they will do anything
they they can
look at this guy who's supposedly on the
right Ross Douthat
this guy who is a federal agent
like like William F Buckley was okay who
is in the New York Times today trying to
raise up all kinds of trouble against
others on the right they will come out
they will do anything so I think we can
expect even right they will run McMaster
or something for as a spoilered
candidate they will do anything to stop
Trump right so for people who don't know
there was an editorial in the New York
Times today where raw I don't even know
how to say his last name Ross do it do
that that's whole I don't know it
doesn't matter but what he basically
said is like he said that there was a
there was a problem with racism on the
right and it's the Wrights job to deal
with it so he's basically like calling
people to arms for some sort of
expulsion and attack and stuff but you
know the problem with that is who gets
to decide who's racist and who is it but
certainly isn't me anymore certainly
isn't me anymore so these guys these
guys will run yang as a spoiler
candidate they'll run some general
they'll do anything and Trump has been
to many people a disappointment in
policies and so forth but in what he
symbolizes in his in the way he talks
and so forth is a huge slap in the face
to the establishment they will never
forgive that and they have to they're
going to try to destroy him at all costs
you know they try the coup on him that
the Russia hoax right and I'm afraid
that they're trying to contrive niat and
Russia hoax 2.0 I want that just I don't
want to be the next George papadopolis
okay great well I understand that but
you know with powerful words comes
powerful responsibility perhaps and the
your book and your ideas have certainly
touched a nerve with thousands on
thousands of young men around the world
fascinated to hear that there's an
audience for you in Japan Sweden not so
surprising but an international audience
there's definitely common feelings that
you're tapping into there's definitely a
strain of this numbness and a lack of
own space for individuals that you're
talking about there is a sense of
oppression and darkness and bleakness
and evil that is seeping into people's
consciousness as whether they're able to
identify concretely where it comes from
or not they are having those feelings
and so your words are gonna continue to
spread my friend there's no question
about that I'm sorry about this sound
you see how they try to sabotage me they
invent a machine turn on the
air-conditioner goddamn air conditioning
but again like I said I could ask you
about a million things I wanted to talk
about hierarchies I want to talk about
power I want to talk about understanding
how to cope with in the hierarchies I
want to talk about dreams in the
underworld I want to talk about a
million things but we're pushing up on
almost two hours here already and we can
save some for another time maybe I'll be
glad to talk to you about mafia in the
underworld you know because that's how
modern world is run yes now they're
chasing me the the mock invaders you've
been to Brazil you know they have humans
they have kind of Voodoo here and
they're trying to chase me I mean I'm on
the move this week I'm in hiding oh man
well I hear ya you're not the first one
I've talked to that's been dealing with
this this happens to quite a number of
different people they'll come at you
from all different directions
bank accounts just you know social media
just limit your ability to conduct
financial transactions get your band off
Amazon there may be a million other
things coming they can't stop me you
know my books have already spread what
they can but my books they can't stop it
now I can't so it makes me stronger but
I'm afraid of this black magic they do
voodoo you know well I think if anyone
is prepared to handle this you've sound
to be and I look forward to having
another conversation with you perhaps we
can also dialogue in writing as well but
mister bronze-age pervert sir mr. bap
thank you so much for coming
online and talking to me I really
appreciate it we try to get this done
for a couple of months and this is a
really good time and I appreciate the
energy and I appreciate the time and I
hope that we get a chance to do it again
thank you pleasure is mine enough to
talk to you jack thank you I have a good
one for back goodbye