[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
I'm if they would call in sauna he is an
author and an activist he's recently
done a TEDx talk which will a little bit
about in the interview I'm delighted to
have him here Colin thank you very much
for joining us
I've read your book you've written two
books one's called Earth Day the other
one's called into the OEF there is a
novel into the OE is more of a more of a
sort of nonfiction explanation of the
open economy so why don't we start there
I mean that's that that's obviously your
main theme so why don't we start there
give us a brief introduction as to what
an open economy is all about sure thing
I love having me on
Ericka's and delighted to to talk to
talk about this to anyone who'll listen
and what we have then what we're talking
about is an open economy or an open
access economy and anyone who's familiar
with the scholarly world will be
familiar with the expression open access
which basically means that that the all
sort of a scientific and scholarly
research is publicized so it's put into
the public domain as we know that a lot
of scholarly research is privatized and
more or less kept behind lock and key so
and open access economy then is
basically a way of extending that's
philosophy to the economy in general
where we don't keep resources and
services under lock and key as we do now
and short long story short basically we
had we have an economy where everything
is free where and we volunteer to keep
aside the business of society going and
we use technology to to fill in the gaps
where we and the things that we maybe do
not want to do so much so at the moment
in our current economy access to
resources is granted through the
exchange of money for those resources
right and so and resources or I guess a
value is placed on resources by how much
money they attract right yes of course
yeah I mean as most people know who were
who have maybe questions capitalism or
the way that society works in general
these days is that we have created this
kind of arbitrary value system on
everything which has kind of made us a
bit crazy that we're assigning this
numerical value to all things and all
beings and it's it's kind of made us a
little bit insane where we're actually
prioritizing the numerical value of
things over the actual esoteric value or
the physical value or immunity of those
of those things so in a way the the
numerical what I called like a numerical
insanity has kind of overtaken normal
rational common sense insofar as we
actually have a society now where even
though it is technically feasible to
actually feeds and clothe and house
everybody even though it's technically
feasible to do that quite easily we
still have a put everything behind a
value wall where basically you must
justify your existence in terms of this
numerical value in terms of your of your
wages or your personal wealth and you
you use this to access to various
resources we need I think there's a key
point that we need to home in on here
and that is that as you've already
pointed out you know technologically
it's quite feasible to feed clothe house
provide clean water education internet
access blah blah blah for everybody on
this planet right but by keeping these
things scarce or at least the appearance
of scarcity in these things this
increases their profitability right
there's a and that there I think alludes
to the sickness to the insanity that you
were talking about and and that concept
of scarcity whether real or created or
imagined is is absolutely central to all
of this right yes absolutely yeah I mean
like to say this said that this
numerical insanity has created this sort
of like a numbers game where everything
is attributed a value and your time is
has a certain value your resources and
your skills have a certain value and and
you must
be you must generate wealth with the
value that you have or not and that
wealth that you create grants you access
to the things that are required to live
to try and solve problems in society for
example homelessness yeah if you want to
solve the problem in society but there
is no way to make a profit out of doing
so then that swattin can never be solved
under this paradigm right it's simply
impossible yeah absolutely and I mean a
lot of the the governments and NGOs are
starting looking out towards ways of
trying to create sustainable and ethical
methods of conducting society but the
mean that this obviously it's it runs
completely counter to the to the
numerical and insanity that I referring
to that basically everything must
justify itself in an American Way so and
the ethics and sustainability must
always by definition there must always
take a second seat or third seats behind
profit incentive and the reason for that
is is that the because our because this
numerical insanity is index-linked to
our means of survival and that means we
must use these numbers to - great - and
for the means of survival because of
that then this it completely overtakes
our survival instinct which obviously
our survival instinct is transmuted into
instinct to make money yeah yeah yeah I
mean it's and it's it's perfectly it's
perfectly rational rational when you
actually when you reason it out that
it's not just that we want enough money
for to have the things that we need to
live today but also we all we all fear
for the future because we don't know the
future so we want to really we really
want to amass as much personal wealth as
possible that's what greed is Right fear
of scarcity in the future that your
greed is all about yeah exactly so it
secures our future there so I mean this
this idea people say well why are people
so greedy aware people do that but
actually there is actually perfectly
rational explanation for people's greed
and that is that people just want to
have safety and security in the future
and really you can't argue with that I
mean it's a perfectly reasonable way to
I
and what happens is and of course then
with certain individuals and is a
individuals really are largely minority
they have this kind of misfiring of this
kind of accumulation of resources and
the transit where they just want they
want millions and billions and billions
and billions and so it goes on so I mean
this that it turns into another kind of
kettle of fish where like a twisted and
addictive sort of pursuit and but it by
and large most people like you and me
and who were kind of in or around
middle-class area that really just wants
enough money for the foreseeable future
you know we want to want to see see
there our future is pretty much secure
either in our job enough to not have to
worry about it basically exactly and so
I mean most people that most reasonable
people I speak to they're just minutes
they just want to have enough just not
to have to stress but one of the key
features of one of the things that word
we talk about a lot in the open access
economy is it's like if obviously people
will will try and say well look what
what about if I want a Ferrari what if I
wanted a yacht for that big house on the
hill and I think that these things are
basically distractions because the most
important thing that we have to consider
and in any sort of change making sort of
approach is that we have to sort at the
basics of living and then that's like a
food or water your energy or your
clothes your house and long-term
sustainability yeah exactly yeah well if
you think about if you talk about
sustainability or non sustainability I
mean all that is really like a toxic
byproduct of the the capitalist system
where obviously you have to keep
generating profits by correct by
creating things that maybe break after a
few years I mean this is not just
capitalism right I mean there's a you
know every every system that's been used
for the last however many hundreds of
years has essentially been the same
thing yeah I mean it's it's it's rooted
resources through the use of money I
mean even the Soviet Union even now it's
China you know what I mean they still
use money they still did cost you know
cost analyses of projects and blah blah
you know what I mean it's not unique to
capitalism I think it's a far far deeper
issue than capitalism alone it's true
yes actually I suppose when I use the
word capitalism really I'm referring to
all those monetary-ism really is what
you mean yeah exactly yeah and I mean
it's like to say all these countries
played they just have competition by
another name or they may be slightly
more socialist some countries are
slightly more socialist and others but
we find like all countries exactly it's
all shades of the same color yeah
absolutely
alright I think I think I think we've I
think we've covered the sort of you know
there the associate the sociological
evils of money let's talk a little bit
more nitty-gritty what do you see as
some of the practical transitional steps
that could be taken to get us from the
mess that we're currently in to a more
sustainable holistic humane type of
society yeah yeah of course it is the
burning question on everyone's lips and
and I think before you can answer that
question I think we have to be very
clear about what it is we want what are
we actually trying to get towards and
because there's there's quite a
different mixture of messages out there
as well there's a few different kind of
approaches to this kind of future
moneyless world and by and large it
falls into two camps you have the one
camp which basically okay let's let
science and technology basically more or
less run everything let's automate
everything let's build big cities where
everything is automatic and you know and
everything is kind of very very
futuristic and space-age no one needs to
work or release we minimize that as much
as possible
that's one school of thought the other
school of thought which is the school of
thought that I would more subscribe to
is the let's create a more compassionate
society let's create a society that's
more connected where were more and
investing in each other where we
actually we work more even because we
want to do that because it it's and it
serves us better to do that so it's in a
way I don't like to use the words almost
put it's kind of more along that kind of
line of approach
about a simplification and a
localization no I'm reluctant to use the
word armas but it's a good it's a good
way of keying into what I'm talking
about it's basically where we're at the
end we value a community we value each
other we are compassionate towards each
other and nature and other animals and
that sort of stuff and by using that as
a platform or as our basic starting
point for creating society then we can
apply technology in whatever ways we
want with it by as much heard little as
we want to actually solve a lot of the
practical problems so in its it's quite
specific indifference I mean a lot of
people I talked to who support maybe and
The Venus Project or the zeitgeist
movement are very much in the science
and technology camp kind of saying let's
build an environment where basically you
don't have to work where basically
things are automated and we will get we
get artificial intelligence and the box
and we'll get this move we've created
like a cybernated world where as a lot
of other people then really just what to
talk about let's build something from
the community level let's create better
behaviors on an individual level these
two approaches are not mutually
exclusive right I mean they they they
they can borrow from each other I mean
you in fact I mean in a way they're
complementary because on the one hand
you're talking about a philosophy and a
mindset and on the other hand you're
talking about the tools with which to
you know make make a smooth efficient
running infrastructure so you know these
two things strike me as being actually
very complementary to each other they
don't need to be they don't need to be
set against each other
yes no I'm not set against each other at
all in DST right they can be
complementary but the point is that to
you asking that transition to create the
right transition we need to know which
shall we pray missile routes which are
we putting first are we putting science
and technology first or are we putting
community and individual behavior first
because these one of those is the key
destination and you're talking about the
use of Science and Technology but
through the lens
of a compassionate society and it's the
lens of the compassionate society of the
place within how do we go about doing
that I mean one of the points I've got
written down from having read your book
it's the importance of education and I
completely agree with that and so how do
you see the education of young people
and and ongoing education of older
people as well but how do you see that
changing under the current paradigm
where everything is about test scores
and league tables and you know sitting
exams and common curriculums and funding
issues and so on I suppose the short
answer is over time as priorities change
and as we start to look to other ways of
actually interacting with with there
with with each other and with the
planners in this sort of approach that I
am talking about which is moving more
towards compassionate and connected
society if we do that then education
obviously will spring naturally from
that once people start to realize that
well actually certain behaviors are
actually beneficial in certain or not
not beneficial then people gravitate
more towards that and the education bill
will spring from that but and if we
actually am on a side note maybe we can
talk about this later we are actually
creating an education syllabus at the
moment there's a team of us who are
actually creating this really textbooks
for schools that are that are basically
trying to instill promote values like
compassion cooperation and social
intelligence in young kids this is
something in our life I think we're
actually working on right now and called
life games books but maybe we don't we
don't now so apart from that there are
other that what stage at what stage are
you at the moment with the development
of there I mean if you've got anything
because people to take a look at if they
were interested well there's a website
life games books calm the people to look
at that the product actually won't be
ready until probably April April or May
this year we're actually releasing it at
first and first and then the text books
would be coming out in September so and
that product is it's almost ready for
Marcus we're actually working on they
act now as as we speak and but I want to
show you your PIN offender
they're gone a little bit because you
didn't ask me about transition and I
want to just go back on that point a
little bit now in terms of transition to
actually out of money society into a
moneyless society I think the first
thing you have to consider is how did
the money society come about how did it
actually begin and when you actually
look when you have to scratch the
surface on that and investigate it's
actually very very very interesting
topic and the and it also shows you how
to actually escape from the monetary
society and how we recreate the
alternative - give me a couple minutes
I'll explain that in it basically in
medieval England which is a good example
I use and it probably can be applied
mostly across other cultures but in
English English history is one that I
would know most about but in medieval
England then we had like this feudalism
and arrangement where basically the
entire of the United Kingdom was
basically split up into to the small
municipalities or counties which were
owned basically by the local Lord or
Baron or Duke or whatever so they was
too late was a all the the entirety of
Great Britain was basically split up
into these little little mayor sort of
pockets that were owned by the nobility
and if you leave tonight on one of these
lands owned by the nobility you are
obviously a subjects of the local lord
and what actually happened was that all
your basically all your labor and
resources was completely or almost
completely owned and controlled by his
lordship or his parent ship and so what
happened was that in the in the in the
Middle Ages that actually a lot of
people who became very aggrieved by that
they did agree by the excesses of their
Lords or the parents and also with the
fact that they pretty much had nothing
much - nothing much to gain in life you
know there were they're all in labor
with pretty much owned and what actually
happened was that these serfs who lived
in all these areas they actually began
to convene and secretly in in forests
and in
airplane lands and they began trading
they began saying okay will rather than
we just giving over all my labor and my
and my my tools whatever to my lord that
basically I will actually I'm going to
go and meet these people on the mountain
somewhere and we're going to have a
little party and we're going to like do
a trading and then and basically from
that friend the idea of markets of free
markets this is where the term free
market comes from where basically these
serfs forgetteth sort of a semi
illegally they were meeting up with
other people in similar positions and
they were they basically created these
free markets and this is where free
market technologies run it away right it
was the it was the birth of the idea
that well actually hang on I can trade
with anybody you know I can do anything
I can make anything I want like a trade
would anyone want that this was kind of
revolutionary at the time you know it's
very revolutionary and so this basically
is this is the seed of the capitalism
that we see today this was the beginning
of us and that's sort of that's that
obviously that free marketing
proliferated widely and and reasonably
quickly of course that's evolved then
over and over and over and again now and
of course we now we have billionaires
and homeless people you know so we're
kind of fell we sort of there went from
one sort of repressive scenario or kind
of evolved and then ended up oppressive
scenario so my point is then that if we
look at the way free-market capitalism
began and how it evolves this is the key
to understanding as to how do we
transition out of that and into
something else and the short answer is
that basically we we have to now start
acting like lessor stood in in this free
market but this time a really free
market where it actually we're not
trading River actually and giving and
taking goods and services with each
other beyond the monetary or the trading
system so basically this means it's us
what the plain way in a minute is or
it's been how this means that we can
actually start and engaging with us in a
free culture that we want to see in
small ways now
so to bottom up things a grass roots
growing from the Lausanne thing
that's it it has to be a bottom up it
has to be a grassroots movement because
no other no top-down social design has
ever worked in the past do you see any
value at all in you know political
demonstrations appealing for your MP
well I think that everything doesn't I
don't think any effort is ever wasted I
think that protests are good yet because
they're good first or like they're a
flashpoint for people they kind of they
they make people think they they they
bring attention to issues I think that's
important yeah but I don't think that
transition will come from that
I don't think transition ever really has
come from transition comes from
basically from normal people like you
and me beginning to behave differently
beginning to act differently changing
our habits towards a different way of
operating and that's what happened with
the birth of capitalism and this is the
only way I believe that it can happen to
transition out of capitalism is we have
to start acting and behaving in ways
that are in that sort of system that we
want to see in respect to education
right because that's that that's that's
the way it spreads right is well I don't
necessarily mean formal education in
schools I mean learning about things you
know and there are loads of and there's
loads of online tools that there have
actually helped us to do that like free
world or is one that we do which is
basically it's like a map based
inventory of free goods and services
that people are offering right now so
you can go on the map find out what
things are available for free in your
area somebody's giving away you know a
guitar or they're giving away violin
lessons or or language lessons I mean
this this is a small small like
microcosm if you like of the sort of
world that we're trying to aim at the
free world travel is going to ask you
about that so I mean you bled into it
nicely so tell us a little bit about
that well the free world charter then
was an asteroid like an aspirational
kind of document that I wrote maybe bed
nine years ago and it basically
describes where I what I consider to be
like the foundation
principles of a money free society which
basically is about how we would position
our priorities what what things should
we be prioritizing and in order to make
that work and in a way you can you could
align it sorta to like religiosity maybe
the way that we we say when we know in
Christianity you might say the Lord is
the it's the most important thing and
then you have like the priests and the
royalty and you know the way you have
this kind of hierarchical system
hierarchical system of priorities in
your mind of things that basically are
really important and things that are not
so important what we did or what I did
or the free word charter is I said well
okay the most important thing is
actually nature and our shared fortunes
on this planet of all species this is
the most important thing of all because
this is a physical reality and we cannot
whatever we believe we cannot survive
unless this thing is actually really and
well sustained and maintained and then
the other disk collectors ten principles
from the Charter and one of them is
about and valuing them the valuing all
species you know the one is about saying
that we're all equal
shareholders in planet Earth basically
you don't win regardless what anyone
says that we are by birth we are equal
shareholders and that and the other
thing is that the best way to actually
conduct society on earth is actually by
not using a trading system but by using
education and cooperation to actually
and create a system where everyone gets
looked after because at the end of the
day if we want to if we want to maximize
our chances of success at life or
success of creating a good future world
we have to we have to find the most
sustainable and fairest ways to do
things and the fairest and most
sustainable way is to do away with the
market system which is basically
trashing the planet and basically look
after each other you know and that's it
and this is this is how we all behave
anyway in our in our own little worlds
and ever in our families in our tribes
and I guess somehow when it gets scaled
up it gets distorted into this yeah yeah
yeah
yeah that's the challenge really the
challenge yes I mean if we all kind of
we all tend to look after each other
we're nice to our family well more or
less we're kind of we tend to look after
our family we don't ask for payment we
don't really trade generally with with
our small circle of people so the big
question is can we actually expand our
family how to encompass everybody or at
least the the larger community I believe
it's possible yeah that's really for me
that is it's a big question you know is
yes and can we take that innate trust
and responsibility towards each other
that we do within our small circles and
can we expand that out so it's a very
interesting question I'm sure you're
aware of this research that says that
when societies get larger than about 150
individuals it's no longer possible for
everybody to know everybody you know and
know everybody's stories on an
individual level and therefore they need
to buy into other collective stories you
talked about this quite a lot in your
book about the impression ability and
the plasticity of the human mind and how
easy how easily we are influenced and I
mean it's a double-edged sword right you
point this out in the book on the one
hand it means we're very easily
manipulated but on the other hand it
also means that we can change very
easily and very quickly right and so
yeah no I absolutely agree with all of
that and so just sorry sorry I don't
want to do too much talking this is it's
really about you but you touched on
something a moment ago about letting go
you know expanding and our compassion
beyond our immediate circle of family
and friends to include the broader
community that would mean going against
and again this is this is down to our
plasticity and impression ability
there's been going against centuries of
divide and rule where we have been
taught to mistrust and be suspicious of
the other right and so again how do we
go about overcoming I complete I listen
I am I completely am on board with what
you're saying what I'm not quite getting
is practical sense I think this is very
important to remember that our society
our system that we use that maybe were
not so happy with
is a product of our behavior it's
product of our actions it's not
something that anyone forced on us were
not I don't I really don't subscribe to
this theory on this Elise who are kind
of like whipping us and they were kind
of laughing at us or trying to turn us
into slave batteries or
something like this I mean I have no
time for that because I mean society is
a product it's a system that evolves out
of collective behavior there's just no
other way to see it you know even if you
try to go and control the society you
know if if you're if you're gonna have a
revolution if people don't like the sort
of stuff that you're saying or that
you're doing you know and you can whip
them and whip and whip them but
eventually you'll be found out you know
if it's something that people it doesn't
resonate with the behavior that they
want to have anyway this is why and
certain communist regimes have failed
over the years because it just didn't
resonate with the way people naturally
want to act so and the point is that
letting go yeah in terms of the our
behaviors if we if we want to change our
society we have to change our individual
and collective behavior it's as simple
as that if we want a more compassionate
society we have to be more compassionate
know if we want more sustainable society
we have to start recycling more or
reducing the trash that we use I think
that's that's no-brainer that sort of
stuff but in terms of actually moving
beyond money and creating society that
doesn't rely on money that's not again
it's not going to come from outside no
one is going to come up with this big
magic plan and say oh here's how we we
get rid of money we just do this this
big formula and we are we we build this
infrastructure that's not going to
happen it's not gonna happen that way
either it has to happen with our
individual collective behavior it's a
bit of a boring and tiresome answer but
this is really is honestly the truth the
only way to actually change society is
to change
I agree with you and that sounds like a
lot more that sounds a lot more
realistic than some of the stuff you
hear from activists you know what I mean
it sounds a lot more down-to-earth a lot
more realistic I want to talk about and
I mentioned the free world of sight
which is like
thing that we did and like it's an
offshoot of the free world charter when
we wanted to put into our things into
action where you can give and share
goods and services freely with other
people and that's just one site and this
is like a very much a fledgling sites
it's it's very much in its infancy we
have like the two thousand members are
all around the world or something like
that and it's it's it's a bit of a hard
slog to be honest with you it's not it's
not the most and active sites you know
so it's it's it's it's like pushing a
rock up a hill sometimes what we're
doing here is really very very extremely
counterculture and counterintuitive in a
lot of ways some people but that's not
the only size that's and there are other
sites there's a whole plethora of sites
now make pure B you have karma tribe and
Cindy you have Street Bank you have kind
Easter and I can't remember the others
now but there's at least ten other sites
some of them really active something not
so active which are basically people
unconditionally giving goods and
services and that for me is that is the
golden tickers that if we can make it
work where people are starting to goods
give and share goods and services with
complete strangers for no reward for no
payment but in the sort of in the
expectation that they can also receive
absolutely everything doesn't it instead
of under this model where we're
competing with each other the better I
do the worse you do under this gift
model Charles Eisenstein books all about
this I don't know if you come across
Charles I dress he talks a lot about
this that under a gift economy the
better you do the better I do and the
better I do the better you do you know
what I mean and let's it's a better than
zero-sum game and it's a really but
there's also a little small thing where
basically that you did something good
for someone else and that's okay it's
it's a little rush that we get from when
we help other people but it's kind of
muted out because this that because this
glamour phone number is because it's
linked to our survival
basically over overrides everything else
yeah absolutely we sort of we have a
wrong really about giving and receiving
we think that when we give something
that we lose but we don't always lose we
actually we gain a sort of a bit of an
emotional hit a bit of a kick out of
doing that and I see this all the time
in the in my own work I mean I do a lot
of stuff things for free I'm sure you do
too as well and it's kind of nice you
know it's nice when you help somebody
out if you know for a couple sit down
with them and cover our if you help to
know whatever it is they're trying to do
you get a big kick out of doing them but
when somebody pays you 100 quid or 200
quid to do that you don't you don't get
that same rice or it masks that feeling
so without without the money system we
actually we can start to actually really
experience that idea of the rush you get
from giving and sharing with other
people because it really is palpable
it's real oh the foot yeah absolutely
and and and I mean it's if everyone is
doing it it's not just about you know
it's not just about the feeling of
pleasure that you get from giving but
it's also the the security that comes in
the knowledge that you know that what
what you need is out there for you
because that's that's that's the nature
of things and you know that that yeah
greed is now transmuted into this
confidence that what I need will be
there and you know that whole fear of
scarcity in the future thing is gone you
know well that's you hit the nail on the
head there without the word confidence
really is is the key to us because if we
because the system that we've created on
free world err is not yet a confident
system okay we have like literally it
yeah it's too small at the moment but
exactly we have a handful of people
giving and sharing a very small low
weight low valuations and that's fair
enough but that is where we have to
begin you know and it's low confidence
it's low value but over time when
involves just like the serfs did in the
free market
yesterday's years ago then that we build
a confidence in that model we build
caught we feel secure in the fact that
when we give something that there's a
big wide circle
yeah come back to us later you know and
the first it would have the internet
right I mean let's say that change that
changes everything
yeah it really does this it really it
hasn't been possible before now I missed
on a large scale you know but the
internet makes it possible yeah
absolutely yeah
we have people like offering programming
services and like proofreading services
loads of things check it out.3 were
there and they some of them will say ok
I'll do this I'll give you an hour my
turn to air at my time or people even
offering business advice actually which
is kind of ironic but anyways it's
interesting and the point is that when
we when enough people have confidence in
that system they will have four more
things they offer higher valuations and
eventually the confidence will grow to
such a point where maybe maybe people
can offer houses people cannot order a
car and run through stuff mister because
things I wrote about recently actually
was I mean if you owned a house would
you offer your house for free now on one
of these websites well of course you
wouldn't you know it's ridiculous
suggest and it's like throwing money
down the drain but if you turn that
around and say okay would you offer your
house on this website if you knew that
actually there were hundreds or if not
thousands of other similar hazards also
being offered you know that website
something you're not losing out so much
easy to give your house away because you
can just go and grab another one so that
someone else is giving you no that's
that's that's the level of confidence
here it's going to take a while to reach
that yes that's possible
you know that's possible and we start
with a little valuation we start with
 USB sticks
we start with pens you know with
tribulations smalls services which would
probably have now and over time this the
confidence in that system will build and
eventually we can we can move towards
you know whatever they're giving hold
silos of grain or houses or helicopters
or whatever who knows so it's not an
it's not the most tantalizing of visions
really it's not like it requires work
you know it requires effort on people it
requires time yeah but it's in a bit a
bit but it's rooted in individual
responsibility isn't it yeah because I
mean that there are other like groups
who advocate
moneyless sort of system and they maybe
they would want to build cities like
build a like a some kind of a very
highly technological city and invite
people to live there and try out that
under like to create like a miniature
prototype culture and I think there's
some value in there and a lot would be
learned even if it failed a lot would be
learned in the process right yeah yeah
yeah exactly yeah well it the one of the
problems is that if it failed it would
probably be forever held as an example
of proof that such as never work for me
I think I think it would be useful
experiments but I think that unless we
invest we really tackle the behavior on
a really fundamental individual level I
don't think this kind of thing can work
full-time you know because maybe you can
work in a small area like isolated from
the rest of the world like a kind of an
island it could maybe work like that but
if you want we don't want to have like
the whole world with just little islands
of communities we want to have a world
connected world helping each other I
love I love what Michael Challenger does
we'll move on - I love Charles
Eisenstein
I think these approaches to me are the
more valid ones that we have - we have
to start looking - so behaving
differently the science and technology
we don't have to think about science
technology because it's already there
it's still cliche you know you're gonna
you can have technology to to feed
everyone or you can have technology to
make bombs until you actually have the
appropriate behavior then then let's get
the behavior right and then we can use
technology whatever way we want so
technology isn't going away it's not
going back in the box and of course once
we take away that the profit motive
it'll be it'll be can be unleashed
really to its potential so it's it's all
to play for but I think long story short
it's it's going to take time you know
it's going to take a lot of work on the
individual I see a lot of value in like
awareness movements and people like
Russell Brand to talk about spiritual
awakenings and come to really really
like ruffle brand he was
not back in the day but I've come to
really really like one of the best
interviewers on on the Internet as far
as I'm concerned he's an absolute genius
he really I mean I don't really I don't
really go in for this kind of spiritual
angle so much myself but I see value in
as I see value in actually in
transcending the sort of lizard brain
response that we take he's incredibly
open you know he doesn't reject anything
that anyone says he questions them
thoroughly but he doesn't reject and he
always builds a rapport with his
interviewees I really enjoy I really
enjoy listening to him yeah yeah yeah
he's a good guy he really is a good guy
yeah we need a lot more of him really do
one thing I'd like to touch on with you
before I think I think we've probably
just about no I don't want to bore
people for too long so I think he
probably just about done on time but one
more thing I'd like to touch on with you
which is again something Charles
Eisenstein talks a great deal about is
is the power of story this is something
that I've become very interested in
recently is is the ability of story
narrative mythology archetype that kind
of thing to really shape the way that we
interact with the world the way we fit
with it if you know what I mean and it's
something that you did in your book not
in FME Neph day is a novel anyway and
you've done the whole you know the whole
thing is couched in terms of story but
even in into the OE
or your nonfiction book you had a series
of very short stories in there relating
people's experiences of the transitions
for the new economy and I have to say I
found that one of the most effective
parts of the book you know because you
and this this is the thing which story
I'd like to hear what you think about
this this is the thing which is or here
it's so much more powerful than a set of
instructions because as the reader you
put yourself into the shoes of one or
more characters in that story and you
live out the thing through you know you
live it out in in in a real way in an
emotional way you engage with it with
far more of yourself and so just to
close out on hmm how do you think we
could employ their power as part of the
process of engendering the compassion
and the collaboration the cooperation in
society
yeah well
one of the other projects that we're
working on by the way I didn't mention
that we have we created this sort of
organisation called free world one which
is basically and ironically it's a
for-profit company which is basically
for launching different projects that we
want to launch and one of the projects
that we're hoping to do is actually a
movie first of the F Day book because
your rights at the little them so user
stories in the interim economy a lot of
people have really liked those and FJ is
really almost like a full-length novel
version of that and not so much as more
it's more about transition and their
resistance and transition and that sort
of stuff so and we're hoping to make
that into a movie
I mean I've actually had some interest
from a producer in the US and the
director in the US as well who basically
are interested in seeing your scripts of
that of that books they read the book
and they love the book so yeah now
that's one really good vehicle we could
use is to actually try and create like a
mainstream blockbuster movie I mean if
it were possible and that would be a
fantastic achievement and a way of
actually putting the ideas into people
that you know kind of really make them
think hey what the hell you know and one
of the things that a lot of the feedback
I get from that F Day book is that it
makes it so seem very very real and very
easy and very plausible and I think
that's that's really valuable I think
acid of the story is the fact that it
will seem so plausible and if we could
create a movie like that I think that
making a big impact would be fantastic
but we the best way to do that is really
through the profit system ironically
enough now I don't get it too much
because then because I know I'm somebody
who kind of advocates like a moneyless
Society I'm very passionate about asked
so you mean a lot of people say well why
the hell are you setting up a company
and the shorter answer is is that
because they really feel the best way to
do things right here right now
yeah we basically we were putting a
called getting investors in to do this
thing like we are educational project
the life games books this has been
financed by our investors and the FDA
movie scripts are being financed by our
investors the free world their website
that I was mentioned earlier this is is
being backed by the investors as well so
we've built up and and a pool of a pool
of money basically two people who are
backing these projects and the kind of
delicious irony of it is that all these
people are shareholders in this company
and if we start actually making money
from this company we can actually put
money back to shareholders I don't know
that sounds completely counterintuitive
but actually my feeling we are where we
are right you can only operate without
that if we don't do this if we rely on
volunteering people doing stuff in their
spare time it's it's a mess it
doesn't society and our system is not we
are not organized enough to behave that
way feels responsible and accountable
unless there's a deadline and they're
getting paid for it yeah and of course
people have not just it's not just not
that people won't volunteer or that they
are not passionate enough it's that they
also have jobs that they that they have
to maintain to keep a roof over their
head so you're kind of you're you're
you're you're badgering people to kinda
give me an error or two of your of your
spare time here and there and of course
you know we don't have all that none of
us have that much spare time you know we
want to spend families and the rest of
time we're working or sleeping so I mean
it's it's trying to grab these little
hours here and there from different
people is a really really bad way of
organizing people but if we if we pay
people and say okay we're going to like
for example the we're building an app
for the life games books thing at the
moment I went paying a contractor to do
that for me and it's got I know it's
going to be done in four weeks time it's
gonna be finished well if I was doing
with volunteers who've go on and it's
it's it's just not an efficient way to
do things so yeah I'm very much a
realist at the same time we have to deal
with the situation the way we are now
the societal system that we're living in
and use that as a springboard to
actually create a system one good all
right well Colin thank you very much
indeed few time really appreciate it for
me personally you've you you presented a
far more realistic and achievable vision
of a pathway towards a moneyless and and
I did I I actually am not great about
the word but compassionate society than
most activists I've spoken with so thank
you very much really appreciate it
I called any place and get it up as
quickly as I can
wonderful thanks Larry attention to town
my pleasure
bye-bye