guy here welcome to this particular
episode with Chris so I wanted just to
give a little prelude to this
conversation because we started the
conversation and we started recording
even though it was kind of a personal
dialogue we were having so we had we had
been talking for a little bit over an
hour I think by the time the part that
you're gonna see is recorded so given
the nature of conversations I don't know
if you've noticed but you know real
conversation is gonna have like a their
own character to them so you have their
own horizons and so it's very difficult
to start a enter a conversation Midway
without understanding the horizons
that's calling forth the speech so it's
you know it's all temporally one-one
character so I just wanted to give a
little prelude to to the conversation
essentially what we had been talking
about was meeting significance how one
finds one's ground and and you could say
a test to and aligns themselves one with
one's ultimate concerns and what happens
when the concerns of your life that
don't necessarily have the direct
connection in addressing those ultimate
concerns yet you are bonded to them and
what it's like to live in that tension
and going through the transitions of
making that alignment and everything
that that one goes through with that so
that's kind of one horizon in which we
were speaking which which naturally
progressed to the nature of our lives is
being kind of a conversation or a kind
of dialogue dialectic dialogue owes you
can almost look at your life is its
unfolding as a continuing conversation
connecting
what has emerged in a lot of these
conversations on this channel on John's
channel the ones we've we've been having
with Jordan and rebel is wisdom and all
the things that are emerging I don't
even know what to call it we're all kind
of finding out together what this is but
one of the things that in the in the
last couple of dialogue losses with the
four of us I'll put links underneath to
those conversations is this notion of
the world as being about and one of the
ways to respond to the meaning crisis or
as as a way to address nihilism is is
the restoration of the world as thou yep
at the same time not personifying the
world in making the world a person than
that then nouns but what is it to
experience the world as a kind of
vulnerability to meet it with all the
ways that one greets allow the eye that
arouses what thou what kind of eye would
we be if world were there in what ways
is it now so we continue on with that
conversation through talking about
dialogue and the conversations we've
been having in the personal impact that
those conversations have been having on
us personally and a little bit about
what it is and where we see it headache
and so so I just wanted to get some some
of the some of the things that we were
addressing leading up to this point that
you begin to watch okay I hope that bill
is you in enjoy
this is this is how we integrate the
deeper structures of understanding into
our lives right is through conversation
so kind of like this as simple as just
like huh buddy you know somebody has a
has a you know goes has some experience
it goes outside of the box right like a
you know something this is like a
carnival ride or something where it's
like yeah they get off and they're like
holy I've never been flipped upside
down and they they're moved to talk
about it and talk you know and like what
are they doing when they're doing that
it's like well they have an experience
that their normal conceptual frames
can't can't conceive of right they have
an experience and there's this tension
so they're moved to talk right they're
moved into that well it's interesting
when you think about like that same
process being both one the thing the
experience that you would integrate
right where it's like like we're
conversation can erupt something right
such that you're like oh my god you'd
want to talk about it but it's the very
thing that's doing the integrating at
the same time there's something great so
the feedback loop is so this is why I
think this is why but this is this is
why I'm listening one of the things I'm
just kind of listening to in what we're
doing is people's responses to it right
yeah I noticed that too it's really
experiential like and especially my
understanding with you to sound like
I've necessarily read done a lot of the
a lot of the comments and stuff like
that but like YouTube is not known for
their for into warm comments right no it
is not not at all
and people are kind of having an
experience and feeling grateful and like
you can tell it they're writing out of a
sense of like they're part of the
conversation right yes
and that's and that all of that is just
it's it's really work we're at the print
I feel like we're at the precipice of
some bit something that I don't quite
totally understand but I'm imagining
that there's something akin to what I
would I my pictures of what the Platonic
Academy was like yes right yes but
there's a way of distributed it right
that actually some part of it holds old
through one because it's not it's like
although the technology allows for the
district distribute like the
distribution of it right you should of
it mm-hmm the you actually have to take
time and listen to it right yes and
experience it and be in the midst of it
and you have a way of responding to it
and expressing that which Bible say I
just put on Twitter Oh somebody was
yelling out why you don't have a how
come you don't have a Twitter account
I'm new on Twitter I don't quite
understand it you tried to yeah tried to
issue all social media just because of
its its its abundant pathologies yeah
maybe over correctively but anyway
please please go on for example out of
the out of the conversations this is
whole conversation of these coders
coming together going a guy wanted to
map out what we talked about and then
and he got halfway through and he's like
god I can't map all this stuff
out but there's got to be a way this
whole other conversation of these coders
coming together and oh that's cool it's
really cool talking and I'm like I don't
know what they're talking about it I've
just as I was like I asked him like I
think I asked him was it
that is there a way that AI
can actually kind of identify the
different threads and put them in a
category such that we could get done and
we can actually have it in front of us
right can it do that right I feel like
maybe
Jordan was talking about that with John
one died I think that that that's I
think that's something maybe Jordan has
been thinking about that's less I think
within his linking the different
conversations and watching a way of just
measuring the themes that create a kind
of metacognitive something I don't know
and then to understand what yeah right
yeah so what would be revealed to us if
we if we were to if we were to see the
Ray if we were to see the typography of
what was mapped by the discussions yes
way in which we're not we can't be fully
aware of it because it's just occurring
until it's intelligibility patterns of
intelligibility that are occurring
through us that we can't really map and
organize and so but were to be organized
God I just wonder like what ended up
would we learn as a consequence and we
bring that up and then we take that into
dialogue right right this you know of
all these different conversations and we
can kind I mean it just exists fast
Wow see this one's a cool one of the
things it seems missing to me about you
know the pathology of it you know
especially with Twitter apparently
because it's you can only use 42 words
or something yeah yeah exactly a
character limitation and it's just
turned into like it can just go it's
most of it right yeah and it's
designed to be to be to be pithy and
insubstantial yeah basically designed to
be to be to to reject like long-form
complexity totally yeah and so therefore
it just seems like what we're looking at
is the first area the first time in like
the first time the world has gotten to
have one unified default network just
doing what you know everyone's default
network does which is like blame and
status things and yeah yeah if there's a
way to like if there's a way for somehow
this can be can actually can go lateral
and then something substantial the most
substantial thing gets to be gradual and
then it goes lateral again and converse
and you just keep going like that that's
a
who the knows what that is like
yeah who knows but yeah truly yeah Wow
but I think though that people and
really bright people are looking at a
lot of this and going this like like
whatever that is that that recognizing
something I'm just kind of going like
what are they it right you remind me a
little bit of like circling right like
of like what the hell is this like what
the hell's going on and why I really
appreciate the thing you're talking
about too because having these
conversations you know because I don't
have any of the background of academia
right so and one of the things that John
said in a in a one of the conversations
he's like you know you got he's like
what like you you he said you and me and
Jordan don't have the same burden as I
have right like the like there's a
burden or demand right and he was
talking about like having the arguments
and those are those kinds of things that
there's like yeah and I really
appreciated what he was saying like it
was like you're right I don't have the
demands of specificity and all those
kinds of things so it seems to afford a
lot more a different it's a different
set of constraints right right that's
right however for me having people to
talk to you like this I've never really
had at this level in fact in fact a lot
of times this is like you know all of
this all of this grappling and all the
like a reading the philosophy eight
hours a day or whatever the I'm
doing like I've never had anyone really
to talk to it and about it at this level
I've had some friends that like have
have met me a few times and it's been an
exact like it was always exhilarating
but they kind of had their own their own
directions and things so so I learned it
would source source a lot of the stuff
that was happening and I would bring it
bring the understanding into what I
was doing but I I mean I learned pretty
quickly that like if I go too far into
the grappling people just don't know
what all you there yeah course what ends
up happening as you said people go like
you should stop reading all those books
like why you just in your head like and
so it's been so gratifying to
have people that have read more than I
have and all like have all of the
different and to go into conversation
with them and and have this experience
at this level that kind of ecstatic deep
evocative experience at this level is
just I I'm watching it open things up
for me and possibility is that I'm like
wow this is this feels like this this
could be a whole new level of something
I don't know what exactly what yet yeah
I feel that too I feel that for myself
as well I feel that for myself as well
and I think that it's interesting what
you say about about your like that that
simply because of your background you
don't have the same perhaps the the
stakes are a bit different or that you
don't have the same kinds dude demands
but not the same kind of demands to
formulate arguments as for instance John
does but see that the thing that I think
that that's an incredible gift as well
and it's a gift that you contribute into
the conversations that that is that is
now I think is indispensable to them
because I think that honestly because
before you came into the conversation I
mean I've seen John have discourses with
people for like four years before before
they started happening and they got like
online like this and they were always
relative I mean some of them were were
wonderfully ecstatic and and brilliant
and upbuilding but they were still
always about they
still always about the leveraging of
arguments and and and you're like the
sort of the element of reflexivity mmm
personal reflexivity that you have
brought now into in the discourse I
think what you've done is you've
characterized the argumentative process
in a way that is precisely analogous to
the Socratic or platonic Academy because
there's a reason there's a there's a
reason that arguments or propositions in
the Platonic dialogues are characterized
they are fleshed into perspectival
vessels that are the characters yeah and
so they fold in that kind of perspective
ization with the proposition and that
way when you undermine or trade out a
proposition what you're doing is you're
treating out an entire characterized
perspective yeah and and and that's why
it's an exercise in and by the way that
the book that you sent me I mean that
it's I'm not finished yet but oh it's so
good cuz yeah that's that he gets that
so well that it's about it's about the
training and it's that ineffable
training of virtue and wisdom that is
about how we characterize the process of
argumentation and I think the character
part yeah that is something that has
only been like that you've brought that
in and that has changed things
utterly utterly truly because now it's
like suddenly we're now thinking and
knowing one another in dimensions that
are now repossessing yeah the dimensions
of the arguments themselves a right and
so it's like it's like I don't know
they're so it would it's it's like it's
it's it's like it's folding out the
space of each proposition
argument and in and living within it and
you can only live within it if each one
is somehow characterized right right and
the character of the argument I feel
like is something like when you
introduced some of the some of the some
of the circling techniques into these
discourses yeah you gave them that like
that reflex of knowing that allows us to
characterize the thinking and then
recharacterize ourselves with the
thinking interesting so there's this
like and it's it's just so cool and I
could have never entered like but but I
think not being like a classical
academic yeah has allowed you to do that
yeah as a classical academic cannot do
that yeah they just you're not trained
to train not to do that oh because I
feel like I feel like what we're doing
under your like deft hand is something
like a reverse of an ad hominem right
it's like it's ad hominem because it's
related to the way that the person
figures and disposes the argument except
it's not being used to which is usually
it's ad hominem is used to discredit and
disconfirm arguments by disconfirming or
disk informing the person hmm right by
saying the person is out of conformity
it's kind of like a plutonic cat it's
kind of like a platonic slander if you
think about it because the person is out
of conformity with the enactment of the
AI das that must mean that their
proposition is undermined by virtue of
the fact that they are disconfirmed with
the truth thus their proposition must
also be dis conformed with the truth and
I think that what you're doing is like
taking the ad hominem yeah taking taking
whatever instinct leads us to ad hominem
but giving it a valence of epistemic
like turning it in the SPAC into the
service of knowing yeah it's like yes
we're always tempted to characterize one
another and to characterize thinking not
to render it dispassionate and-and-and
calculative okay so if we're always
tempted to do that but we're also always
wary of the ad hominem because it's so
often
a refuge of scoundrels and the throws of
argument how can we take the how can we
take the the instincts to ad hominem and
actually use it to repurpose
conversation into a more embodied form
of knowing and I feel like I feel like
that's what you've injected into the
discourse mom it's like a a uh
it's like dignifying the ad hominem
impulse when I folding it back into
philosophy ax I'm interesting so I want
to make sure I'm getting what you mean
by the characterizing so that would be
something like is that is that kind of
like we're talking about an idea and
then maybe I like I get it and I say is
this kind of what we were talking about
over here and then bringing in another
context into it and impregnating it and
yes into the center then taking it
walking around with it and like taking
it on and then enacting it in another
understanding is that what you mean by
characterizing yes III yes I think
that's you taking I think that's you
noticing the character of something okay
and continuing to take like the
character is there what you're doing is
you're pronouncing the character of an
idea and then allowing the character to
articulate by giving the idea it's it's
peripatetic like giving it its walk
around walk around that's yes because
like one thing you often do is like
we'll be talking you're saying you know
you just said it's like this is like Mia
as though I were you you'll say you know
so there's something about what you're
saying like what I felt when I was
hearing you saying acts yeah like what
you're doing is like you're picking up a
tonus within a particular proposition or
a particular idea so now and you're
calling our attention to it but when our
attention is called to it we realize
that there is a character to what is
said there's in which it has its own
feeling it has its own constitution
there's a complexion to the idea and
then by taking that complexion to the
idea you're saying
let's take that like let's not just take
the idea for its propositional content
let's take the idea for its complexion
and what it seems to be referring to its
arch of its back that the movement of
its own body and let's take it for a
walk so that it can stretch out and then
venture to wherever the idea naturally
wants to venture it's so like your
personifying the idea such that you're
giving it agency to guide our thinking
into a direction that otherwise how do
we only been paying attention to the
semantic content we wouldn't have been
able to notice wow that's it I've never
I didn't even know there was a word for
that that's interesting that's really
that really describes it like that's
real that really does describe it
because I think that that's how I
learned to read hmm oh that's cool yeah
please see more about that
well it's just it's so so if I were to
read if I had to actually read you had
just my dyslexia and my my reading
comprehension hasn't it like in a way
that where you can test me and like I
have to fill in the blank answers and
stuff like that true actually like
multiple-choice answers are a lot better
and I think that then because I can kind
of like feel which one's more correct oh
right like I could just feel it like
somehow but but if you ask me fill in
the blank like you know who said this
one I can't remember anyone's names so
specificity what it wait to know whether
or not a proposition what we're talking
about is akin to the proposition or not
well even that actually if there's a
feeling element to it but well so what
would happen is like I I went to the
school system I went through I don't
know two or three years they took me out
of regular mainstream schools and I went
to two to three different like special
ed schools um
and ice by the time I got was
mainstreamed back in into the fourth
grade I was still at like a 1st grade
reading level and then a woman named
Miss Bruch's just came into my school
one day and she actually it turned out
that she was my my uncle Ted's who's way
older than the Me's and I think he's in
his 70s in the mid 70s now but um was
his his grade school teacher all the way
through oh wow years later but the
hugest take me for a couple hours every
day and then she somehow taught me how
to read without me knowing it like I
didn't know it I didn't know I was
learning how to read because he didn't
it didn't dawn on me cuz I and I don't
know precisely what she did but I have a
feeling what she did is she kind of she
was able to observe just how I orient
and she somehow took that orientation
and then got me to read like that oh
that's cool
and I didn't understand that until years
later like well or when I first got this
was when I started to teach because when
I started teaching training people on
how to how to lead circles I'm like okay
good I can finally give these people
these books that have just changed my
life and I have that experience with
books like I read a book and like like
some way I can almost define my life by
the people when I was into that person
at that time right I can almost think
about my life almost like that that's
when I was into toku that's when I got
into like cool wind that's when I just
that was that period I can think it like
they have their care like times have
their character yes yes who I was
reading is really interesting s so
that's read a book and it just changes
the way I see and understand things and
talk and everything and so I thought
like of course I thought that if I gave
my students this book that they would
have that same experience and I remember
I gave
is it author birthing Tulku who is
familiar with Tokyo no so he said he's a
Tibetan lama he started Dharma
publishing and he just one day he just
came up with this notion of going on
this very Socratic inquiry into the
nature of time-space and knowledge
during western-style thing and he
created this whole body of work I don't
know how he had time to do any of this

but it's called peat the time-space
knowledge vision he wrote all these
books and these books are basically
taking all of the presumptions of
time-space and knowledge and then taking
its logic out and then questioning it
and watching it all fall apart and then
seeing what emerges and then he would
have you go into like he would at the
end of every chapter he he'd have
experiential exercises on how to
practice what you just read so was this
and and reading that was also at the
same time that I started reading
Heidegger and they were very they're
very wedded in ways that I can go god
yeah they must be oh wow and so and
that's when I was that's how I I was
reading all that while I was learning
how to circle and it was to say
movements right that I didn't quite get
but so I gave them like time space and
knowledge this big thick book and I'm
like I can't wait until the next week
that let's talk about it and they come
back in and they're like what are you to
us like how dare you what are you
talking to do a circling and I was just
like I didn't quite know what to say I'm
like obvious and I realized I didn't
know how it you think do a circling
exactly I'm like like don't you see and
then you know like that oh I actually
may be I maybe don't I don't read the
same way maybe there's a different
there's something else going on
and I think what ended up happening is
that is that I don't have the same
demand I think to understand the
particular of words so I could tolerate
a lot of things being vague in a right
sense right right right right I don't
expect to I don't have a big criteria of
needing to understand that word like my
my wife who's got like a genius IQ she's
super left brain or can be right
like I would read Heidegger to it it'd
be some German word that I didn't
understand I couldn't pronounce and like
I I'd go I'd be like I don't know and
they go on Sheila no no go back there
you got it's that word I'm not sure I
and you know we gotta go back there how
we gonna understand I was like like I
remember saying I mean if we just look
it'll become it'll explain itself
if we just keep reading and I was and I
was like wait a minute you don't do that
you don't make that assumption I was
like this may be the thing that's
distinct right and so I think what ends
up happening is it is very much like
that like a paragraph or a character
right cut like becomes kind of a
character or a shape or yes yes yes you
some kind right yes and then it and then
it kind of goes along and then that
shape comes back again in a different
context and it just starts to articulate
itself it's like an over signification
it's not the significance it's not the
semantic significance it's a different
kind of signification yeah that happens
over and around the semantic meaning
yeah that's why we keep calling it the
character right yeah it's not like some
strange chromatic right thing around the
actual text itself yes and I has
something to do with the motion like
there's that there's a there's an
implicit gesture in the language that is
referring beyond the language that's why
I'm tempted to say that you read somehow
symbolically
I mean and it's like you're seeing
through ready text I mean you're seeing
it but you're also seeing through it
right you're getting that translucent
effect because because there's a deeper
motion and a deeper gesture that's
happening in the composition and that's
why it's a police' stright because it's
not like no matter how prosaic we are
unless you're literally writing I think
a drill manual maybe even when you're
writing a drill manual there's always
poesis that create the prosaic and then
especially when people and philosophers
have cultivated the police's as an
indispensable form for the philosophy
right which obviously like but you know
which which happened from Plato all the
way then on down right in Heidegger's
like a perfect example of that then it's
like they understand that what they're
doing is they are depicting the figure
of the philosophy there did the tracing
motions that you are meant to imitate
yes not simply the propositional content
right it's a motion that you're meant to
enact and embody and that's why I'm
actually tempted to read much in the way
that you are which would makes me a very
poor analytic philosopher why I don't
have much of a desire to be one because
I I think yeah I think see I think I'm
more like you in that respect to like
I'll keep going as well typically
because there's something about there's
something about tracing the intelligible
pattern that does not depend upon the
precision of every semantic composition
yeah that's I think that's what we mean
I think that's what you and I are trying
to say by the character of it yeah
there's a pret that's the presencing of
it right totally yeah right and that's
that yeah and then like listening to
people talk and there's in this gating
kind of where they think I think we
position see I'm wondering about this is
I'm wondering about this conversation
that we're talking about right here and
if it has something to do with this this
what speaking to us in this thing about
the vulnerability of the world
right and the vow structure of reality
or the world right and and and how we
this important part which is just
fascinating of of without
personification mmm my my senses as
something to do with this as something
to do with that I think in a pre
reflective way we have like there's a
phenomena the world like I think oh yeah
or before we think about it right
there's a pre reflective character that
the world shows up that shows up as a
who first era that's because I'm huh
well that was um when I was around six
or seven I remember this transition rate
of when and and it's funny cuz I I it
was so normal when I think back on it I
just kind of knew stuff and didn't even
think about it but here is this period
of time where I'd go over to my
grandmother's house right which I spent
a lot of time there and and I could and
I play this game with myself where all
of a sudden I could start to tell like
oh there's a way that the adults see the
room right or see the kitchen table or
see the corner or see the tree or see
the thing there's a way that they see it
it's like a perspective shift right and
owls and I could kind of like catch
glimpse of that and I think it was it
was like five six seven right around
there so I think it probably had
something to do with brain development
to where where I could I could get
myself to see it the way they saw in the
way that they saw it was something like
more I don't know dimensional like and
then the way I saw it right with
something more like the wall
it wasn't dimensional it was more like
it was like a character that it was a
who it was ass it spoke it it suit it
saw me I saw it somehow it had that kind
of quality of like you
yes yes the world was a who war was a
who and then I could but then I would go
like okay how cool how long can I hold
the adult perspective and where the
hallway would go from a who to a box or
something right and I would see how long
I can like hold it without letting it go
and then it I'd lose it and then I
couldn't figure out how to look back at
it and then I could its I would like go
like how did I see that before like if I
saw the cube that way like I always
where did I sit and I would remember
like playing that game but right right
right right right right oh that's cool
and I think that there's something I
think that I bet you I think at a pre
reflective level we I think for sexually
I think that's how we respond to our
life like a who like yes oh yes yeah wow
that was really good out there and all
kinds of cool things and what you just
said um oh so when you were describing
this this this the the the the who ness
of the world in the way that it first
presents I can't help but think of the
first miss right what what what Charles
purse talks about as firstness which is
like I know I'm not even sure I fully
understand what he means by it but I
think what he meant by it is like a kind
of it's that indistinct presence of
phenomena the indistinct presence of
reality that creeps up on us I've heard
it described sort of analogously to the
state of awareness you have between
sleep and wake when you're in that sort
of liminal space and all you experience
is just indistinct sense of presence and
the world often to me in that state the
world often seems impressive as a whoo
yeah because it's not because it's also
we're not in a subject object state of
mind at that point right we haven't yet
been we haven't yet been contra
distinctive we
Ben what'swhat's the verb for to to dis
to contra distinguished Dada
well I guess so we haven't been placed
into our our boundedness yet right our
subject object boundedness in that state
and so we're simply impressed by the
sort of an indistinct present and I
think that presence alludes itself as a
who and then when you mentioned the sort
of the physiognomy of the world yeah
ah that's exactly it right because then
the face the the face the face of the
world whatever faces us yeah that's what
we mean right the world faces us so the
face of anything is the face of the
world to us and the fizzy anomic
character of the face of the world
presents first reverse in the in at
first miss as that indistinct whoo yeah
and that we don't mean when we say that
we don't mean that it is a being but we
mean that it has the character of
beingness right yeah ah that's and so
when you talked about cuz god I had this
experience too and I have it still right
when you were describing the experience
of being a kid and seeing an object
seeing the object but not seeing it
distinctly from your relation to it
right but you know knowing object is
relational knowing because it takes on a
character of reciprocal familiarity yeah
and that's symbolic coupling to the
world I still feel that sometimes now
like and I and it's funny it brings into
consciousness a present same dynamic
that is always at play I think yeah even
toward Undine ammok objects like there's
it like there's a way in which the table
in my entrance hallway has a particular
disposition it disposes it itself to me
in a particular way and the lamp that's
here has a particular disposition I have
a relationship with this lamp that is
that is distinct from my relationship
with you know anything out like there's
that there's a so there's a constant
characterization of the world
that is and our relationship to any to
our surroundings is dependent upon its
characterization because its
characterization disposes its
meaningfulness and its value and as john
would say its relevance to us so the way
in which the relevant relationship to
the world depends upon its
characterization yeah and the
characterization its character isn't to
make a category mistake and call it a
being but it's it's its it harkens to
and refer somehow to the firstness of
its indistinct presence that is the
presence of being as such right but the
presence of being as such has presence
in any one of the being any one of the
the instances of being that that faces
us and that we face and it seems to me
that it seems to me that's the
primordial 'ti of it right why when you
don't have the right relationship to the
conceptual knowing right the
propositional knowing and you don't it
doesn't loop back down into the
character ology that it emerges from
right the relation that sense I know you
that's a really it's really hard to get
it that sense yeah yeah I know you mean
I like I like a lot of times what I'll
just I'll just find myself doing this
while I'd be just sitting on the couch
and I'll just be looking at stuff and
there is quality like where it just it
just says something I don't know it's uh
yeah it's looking back at you I know
yeah it's looking back at me and it's
yeah you're right it's got a tonality
and there's a character disposition to
it and it's it's nothing I'm coming up
with I'm just right it's before I come
up with in everything it's the initial I
think um unarticulated familiarity right
that upon which everything else arises
from and kind of comes back to and one
of the things about it is I was thinking
about the
this kind of this is really interesting
when you think about it because it does
have a particularity around it right
it's like it's the particular lampshade
at the particular time of day
it's a petite just like a character
right there yes
makes it a character is it's like a you
know they say of the face
phenomenologically that the face is
probably the most like not like
saturated experience of looking at
anything that you have because it just
there's nothing about what what the face
emanates overflows from anything you can
deduce by it right right all right and
that we register faces right in desk
arity that's that net that that doesn't
make a whole lot of sense compared to
the actual structures is that not a
whole lot of difference right right and
and that level is that like little
microscopic levels of variation that we
can't consciously appoint - yeah totally
so there's a there is a quality of
familial familiarity and recognition
that's like so pre reflective right yet
it's our home right it's like it's one
of the things that you just look around
it's like there's a sense of normalcy if
there's a feeling of normalcy right
familiarity because that curtain is
spoken to you a thousand times
well I don't know and you look at it and
it presents itself yeah in in such a way
but then if you look at it like okay so
well what is something like what is
being not taking that into account how
does that live out like and I think that
lives out with shopping malls like strip
housing complexes right these things
that like basically take the stripped
down version of whatever is normal you
know thy key a thing right yeah like it
optimizes it reduces it down and then
just even even optimize its variances
between each other and builds it all at
once
that like I I feel at that place of
familiarity I feel a nullity and of
inaccuracy in a nausea that is it
literally is offensive like it like it's
an ax feel and what's so offensive about
it is that there's no one just like no
one to blame it's like it's a halt on
its all around you it is just absolutely
I hate it and it's nauseating and it
feels like why is every but what's weird
is like is like very it what seems to be
part of it is it no one who's walking
around going this is awful that's part
of it so I think that there's something
about what I'm calling like well what
why is it that this thing about the
vulnerability of the world and the bow
structure of the world like that's the
thing that people have commented on you
have videos and it's drawing a lot of
thinking and it really asks lighting up
for us too and I'm just going what the
hell is it pointing to right mm-hmm it's
really pointing to something that I
think is not totally thought through its
I was in a I was in uh I was in a text
exchange with John about this but like
going okay well you know cuz it is
really interesting to think about the
dow without personification right and
and then thinking about Corbin and the
imaginal right well actually that text
that I sent you
yeah mm-hmm lines and this notion about
logical flesh that yes that Ponte
started to flush flush out right and
then he died before he kind of completed
it which is really interesting you know
but I'm just wondering about this kind
of if what we're talking about is
touching on
is touching into the restoration or the
articulation of what we're trying to get
at hi yeah I think so
oh I think it is I think it is I I yeah
it's such a it's such a stirring and
provocative phrase the the ontological
flesh it's it's like it's so it's so
locative ah it's so evocative because it
input because it I think it implies it
connotes everything that we've just been
talking about right that the kid like
the characterized flesh the ontological
flesh has has character and and
impresses with character and and it can
be impressed and I think that's right
well part of what we mean by this idea
of the vulnerability of the world is
that can it be impressed by the relation
we have with it and and and i think the
answer in some ways has to be yes
because it seems already to be true we
seem to presuppose its truth by the way
that we yeah by the character of the
relationships we have with our
environment like I don't think something
like home having a home would be
possible yeah if it weren't already true
and already possible that the world was
vulnerable right I think that in some
way the interesting the significance of
home yeah the significance of home I
think proposition Li and not a hundred
percent even sure why or what I mean but
I had this I had this inkling that the
existence of home has everything to do
with the cultivation and the and the
envy and the perhaps the the
the file eel errata cessation of the
ontological flesh right at home is the
like home in some ways is the progeny of
consummating relation with the
ontological flesh and and that doesn't
mean having a house right although
obviously a house can be a kin
instrumentalize the idea of home and
symbolize it but of course I mean home
more I mean home in the sense that you
met before when you were talking about
how when you're off in Europe somewhere
yeah
your sense of identification here yeah
continues with you exactly exactly in
the way that a relationship with someone
continues with you even when you're not
with them physically so I think that the
idea of home is a kind of ontological
consummation with the world and the
presence that emerges from that
consummation is something like the
presence of belonging to and with the
world and and I and I like and when now
the thing I struggle with is I
understand the significance of the
project of D personalizing or
D personifying yeah but I wonder
sometimes if it's phenomenologically
possible to D personalized yeah I wonder
if it's if not fun like
phenomenologically possible within the
constraints of our grammar yeah
sufficiently D personalized or deep
personify that presence yeah
because I wonder if it's just I wonder
if it's of necessity I wonder if the
personification of the world is of of
some kind of is of is a necessity of our
species I wonder if it's a necessity of
our ontological and phenomenological
grammar and then we have evolved with I
wonder if we can get outside of it and I
so wonder if it's necessary to get
outside of it because I think now you
know creating an idolatrous tyranny from
the personification is obviously
something as a problem we're aware of
and that we don't want to repurpose a t'
or rien semmen 8 and I get that and I
know that's John's preoccupation as well
is to not succumb the is to not take the
pet the project of vowing the world and
devolve it into the literalism of
beingness in actuality I get that but I
I'm not convinced I'm not convinced that
it's possible or or necessary yeah -
completely d personify the world because
I wonder how much the constraints of our
grammar yeah like our primordial grammar
not like our linguistic our primordial
archetypal grammar I guess this is where
the young comes out of me - like I
wonder if like if we have this
archetypal grammar that depends upon the
personification of perennial cognitive
structures yeah that give edifice to our
meaning relationship with the world I
wonder if it's possible to divest
ourselves from that archetypal grammar
of personification Oh find the thou of
the world I don't know I don't know
that's what I've struggled with yeah
that that the thing I'm wondering about
it just kind of dawn on me I'm like I'm
wondering if the sense of the danger
that comes it has us resist right
putting a person or a being that's
personified if actually the way that we
think about it now is actually not
because I'm just thinking about like
well what how do I know you're a person
what does that mean like huh right it's
like you're you don't
I think precisely what makes you a
person and not someone else is precisely
in the sense that I can't I cannot
deduce you to something determinate that
will just be unless I get in the way of
there's a right there's a sense in which
the person you're not an entity well I
guess you're an entity yeah yeah right
it's like you're not a you don't have
that you don't have a nature like a tree
as in nature or you don't have an
essence like a tree as this is what
Aristotle I think got it right is is
that you called natural being is is it
real as long as nothing gets in its way
it realizes it's Talos we're not at all
like like we do have a nature we did
there is it there is a nature to us but
part of that nature is is is in our
impression ability and in honor in our
vulnerability that also allows for our
expanse ability and our power it's
precisely that we don't we don't just
unfold right we all commune yeah in the
nature of like so being a person isn't
it's not like you're a thing that that
is somehow final in fact you're a person
precisely because you don't have there
isn't something total final to you other
than your death right which kind of
defines your mortality so there's a
thing to think about like well if we and
that's a property the world seems to
share - yeah right
and there's that kind of sense of like
it's not an individual right it's like
the the older notion of to be a person
right I believe is like when I think
about an individual the notion of an
individual versus the notion of a person
ah eventually be a person yes the
individual I get this sense of just I
get I see a bunch of well in division
right I see a bunch of little categories
right that are individual you yes yes
right but a person the uber individual
behind that then you get into all those
dangers however be a person seems to
have more of a sense of like the person
is that it seems like the site of the
other the site for the for the
possibility of the other man in the
possible the possibility of its future
communion
it's like parently I'm uh I'm an opening
for the other in which I come to be and
can carry that further so if we kind of
look at it like this is like the world
right just kind of playing with that and
it's yeah yeah I have to I have to get
guys to get ready for a client coming
over so all right okay placed it it's a
good place to end it's a good place to
end that's okay this was a great joy
thank you thank you thought this is
great awesome talking with you and I'm
glad to glad to get more more of a sense
of your world and likes some more like
things to grab onto so I know what
you're looking at when you're looking at
your life yeah well you get it I mean
you get as anything as well as anybody
could and and you're yeah yeah well once
again I mean you're so you're so
comprehending and that's such a joy and
and likewise that's all I mean it's also
true in Reverse it's just been it's been
fun to talk a little bit more just to
veer into into more personal territory
for a little while to get some of the
context and just that's it sauce it's
fantastic totally it's fantastic alright
talk to you soon bye