welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
welcome to the stoah i'm peter limber
stewart of the stoah this still has a
place for us to go here and dialogue but
what matters most at the knife's edge of
this moment and today we have Yancey
Strickler visiting us again this is a
second time at the stoah and so he
Yancey
he's the co-founder of Kickstarter and
he wrote this book this could be her
future where he introduced this concept
technique called bento ism and I'll let
him explain it but it's a kind of a cool
technique in order to gain kind of self
coherency and figure out what you really
want on kind of multiple domains so he's
going to introduce this exercise here at
the stoah and we're gonna do a little
kind of we're gonna do it together
other than that I don't know what's
gonna happen so I'm just gonna hand it
over to Nancy hey yeah thanks thanks
Peter thank you all for being here I see
some familiar faces and some new faces
so so glad you took the time our time
together will last it'll probably last a
little bit longer than 30 minutes
because I'm gonna have several moments
of discussion we're gonna talk to each
other and there's gonna be three
different exercises that we're gonna go
through and all involve writing and
journaling like a little bit of drawing
so if you have some pen and paper handy
that would be helpful I think I know
some folks here are familiar with this
idea of bento ISM but I'm gonna just
sort of lay this out and explain it from
the beginning
and today the exercises I'm gonna lead
us through are some of the ones I use to
even find this idea and to keep building
on it but first just to start with what
a bento is a bento is a very simple two
by two matrix just four boxes it's
something I drew about three years ago
I'll explain to the boxes in a second
but I you know I've been a CEO and
co-founder of a company I'm a husband
I'm a father I have a lot of different
roles in life
and you know and I was uh I was often
falling short of what I wanted I was
falling short of you know what how I
wanted to think about other people how I
wanted to sort of hold true to my values
and the bento is this way of like how do
I get a how do I really see what's going
on for myself and there and there are
four dimensions there's here in the
lower left now me what I want to need
right now I have here my value as show
people the matrix this is what my now he
wants me to do
there's also here in the bottom right
future me this is the me imagining the
older wiser version of myself
maybe me 20 years from now and the kinds
of things that person knows and the way
they see the world and today we're gonna
learn how to listen to our own future me
there's also now us the people in my
life that I care about that I have to
think about this makes sure they are
integrated into my thinking and you
could to hear my future us my now us
values about deep time and focus through
the process of this I came to realize
how me being very present as a friend is
a key part of spending time with me I'm
like will never look at my phone but at
the same time this also makes me someone
that if you text me I might never write
you back so it's a it's a double-edged
sword
and finally there's future us imagining
the world for the next generation
so bento is is a very simple 2x2
structure and it's an acronym for beyond
near-term orientation what I was altum
Utley trying to solve for us how do I
see beyond my near-term orientation how
do I think bigger
I think bigger than this moment and
think bigger than just myself too so so
we're gonna learn how to do this today
and we're gonna do two exercises to do
that and the first comes from a few
months before I had the bento idea I had
stepped down as the CEO of Kickstarter
was a strange moment in life and I got
invited to become to join this sort of
like two-week personal development
course which I agreed to do because it
was a weird moment in life and we got
this workbook I was so skeptical of
called discover your
through north and you cannot believe how
hard I rolled my eyes when I first saw
this but I went through this and there's
actually a fantastic exercise that in it
being very meaningful and I'd like to do
it all together it's it's very simple we
are going to just start by drawing a
picture of our lives at the very bottom
of a piece of paper you're gonna write
bursts that's your burst and you're just
gonna draw a long sort of snaking line
up at the top of the page and at the top
we'll just be now now we'll start from
birth and we'll go to now and what we're
gonna do is we're gonna take five
minutes and we're just gonna draw in on
our version of this just the key
milestones in our life so for instance
for me like this bottom rows getting me
here to high school then high school is
just a big frowny face then I start to
enter you know adulthood and you can
draw a little pictures we just try to
express the story of your life and and I
promise you that
you will you will be surprised I think
by the kind of kind of perspective it
brings so I just want to start by
drawing that so again it's very simply
just at the start at the bottom
writing birth and a snaking line up
until now and I'm gonna set a timer for
five minutes
in which you can you will do that and I
will give you little prompts along the
way to to help you keep your head on
that journey so for the next five
minutes you're just gonna draw on a
piece of paper yeah just draw the
snaking story of your life your major
life events alright timer is set now
you
you
you
you
maybe you're thinking about high school
at this moment maybe you've reached that
stage of your drawing I just read simple
description to different milestone
moments that stand out
you
you
you
you
maybe now you're hitting young adulthood
maybe some bad relationships are showing
up in your life journey here I've got my
share it's funny the things that stand
out the bad somehow stands out a little
bit easier than the good I think got
another two and a half minutes or so to
draw in here so but halfway through
say another
our selves sketching
you
when you're done
for you to just sort of look at it from
start all the way to now and I don't
know imagine it's a TV series just sort
of see the scope of of what happens here
on your journey
you
you
all right just another 15 seconds or so
and then I'll start talking again for
real
all right I know that's not the longest
time to do that so I apologize if you
feel rushed all of our exercises are
gonna be fairly quick because I am sort
of relying on an instinctive response
having some truths in it but I'd love
you to just look at look at this story
of your life that you've drawn and the
question I'd love to put to you is what
are you most proud of what are you most
proud of on here this was an interesting
question for for me to think about when
I first went through this exercise
because I I had assumed what I was proud
of stuff was Kickstarter was starting a
company it's like the the name brand
attached to my name and instead what I
discovered you know I I grew up on a
farm in the middle of nowhere and what I
found was that actually my what I was
proudest of was just moving to New York
City at a young age and that being like
a big risk that I took and and then
seeing that really changed how I thought
about myself because instead of say
Kickstarter being the entirety of my
identity that was like a secondary
function of actually what was more an
identity to find thing of say leaving of
taking it a big step like that I'm
curious if anyone would interested in
sharing what they are most proud of as
they look at this for their own lives
you know we're all generally strangers
here so you can be honest and open but
I'd love to hear someone talk about what
they feel good about as they look at
this what what stands out from your life
has sort of a defining a defining moment
or something you've done Karina you are
marking to talk yeah please go ahead
hi thank you
you hear me yeah yeah okay so yeah I
have a similar thing I moved to Iceland
from Poland
actually three years ago and the reason
to do that is to find a way to earn
money fast
I had the depths I had some interesting
business experience in life I've learned
a lot so I'm very proud that I paid this
depth sooner that I was expecting and I
changed the country what I was always
dreaming about so great thank you for
sharing that
Thank You Korina anyone else want to
share just what comes up from drawing
this I could go yes go ahead
um mine was similar to Yancey I thought
it would be like the big things that are
externally recognized for me the thing I
was most proud of was in grade 9 I got
left off the basketball team when I used
to be really good at basketball and I
was no longer in the top ten of my
school when I used to be at the top of
it I was just really proud the way and I
mapped it out here to see that's what I
really actually started to like come
into my own I'm out of that kind of
period of despair was when I started to
do my own initiatives and hobbies and I
didn't really put the tender until now I
just always looked at as a dark time
yeah you know interesting interesting
who else who else would like to share
that's wonderful yeah
Marion yeah it's funny is all on my side
because I found here that I started
hitchhiking seventeen and somehow I
never thought about this way but I
learned how to trust people and be open
for adventures so it's yeah that's
fantastic anyone else like to share
something someone the chat box Hannah
said I'd rather not video chat broadcast
today but I'm proud of working with
independent grassroots arts and
self-development groups
Esther yeah yeah
so what I found was interesting when I
looked at in retrospect I had cancer and
I didn't even remember to put it on the
list I mean it was lucky because I got
through quite easily but it's sort of
like those are not the things that
matter it's the things that you do not
the things that happened to you you know
the one thing that when I you know what
for me seeing that like my own maybe my
proudest thing was not Kickstarter it
was like this move you know if if
Kickstarter is my identity that's a very
specific kind of success that's defining
my identity that that also means other
people having success like that I could
take as an attack on my identity it sort
of has a selfish and very temporal
notion of the value you have and I think
this is part of what has us holding on
to you know relevance or things like
that that we that we feel like our core
to who we are because may or may be the
most visible way that we have
demonstrated value but really there's
probably something that started even
earlier and and to own that and to see
that and to see the strength in that you
know I think it's a it's a liberating
feeling it's a liberating feeling
because it allows it allows you to still
have agency and maybe these moments
where you have that professional acclaim
you can accept those as being things
you're a grateful for but they are they
are not defining of your story something
else's anyone else like to share yeah
Caroline yeah well what's interesting
because I was part of the bento group
yesterday and we did this exercise and
you said that you know this is the creme
you can keep working on and I I kind of
thought I don't think once you do it I
think you just do it and then when I
started doing it now there was
practically nothing that I had written
yesterday on today's list
I thought which really was really
interesting and similarly to what I
guess Esther was saying and I'd been
nominated for an Academy
and a lot of other kind of you know sort
of seemingly big things that people are
impressed by and that's never it doesn't
come up as anything that I'm I'm proud
of and just thought that was interesting
what he can ask what you think what what
does what does proud what is proud mean
what does it mean to be proud or not
proud of something can you can you say
what that emotion is I think for me it's
more about I think I'm proud of having
values that I respect and being able to
instill them in my kids and I'm proud
when I see those values the positive
things reflected in my children those
things make me proud things about you
know humanity people being nice to each
other when I see you know things like
that those things make me proud of
people and proud of myself so I think
those are the you know words more but
about values for me and then taking
chances I think as well
you don't feel proud anyway Thank You
Carolyn thank you anyone else like to
share also
oh yeah Dan go ahead I think it was I
have some mixed emotions about this but
I think it was when I decided to go to
China without knowing the language and
knowing the culture just a little bit
and realizing after a year there that I
had completely acclimated and that I was
communicating in Chinese and I was
thinking I was serving as a bridge
between different cultures and and it
was just this kind of leaning constantly
leaning into the unknown and and and
gaining strength and power from the self
discoveries that were coming from that
process yeah that's I I can feel the
truth in that yeah that's that's great I
mean that that leads me to ask a
question to all of us but just are we
doing things now
to be later proud of today you know if
we imagine it because on John that said
like not making the basketball team if
we imagine these you know failures and
those being these impetuses you know are
we in a place where that's happening in
our lives right now or are we coasting
or I mean probably a lot of us are just
hiding hiding from a lot of things in
the world but it's a good thing to keep
in mind you know not not that we want
those crucible moments to happen because
they're often quite difficult but there
is something to as you're saying Dan of
just sort of putting your place in a in
a environment of uncertainty maybe with
more willingness right now we're all in
that kind of unwillingly but I think
there's something to that if anyone else
like to share
happy happy to hear it I also happy to
keep us moving so you know Caroline mate
made mention that there was a bento
session yesterday so I've been doing
we've been doing something for the last
nine weeks on Sundays which is a same
journaling exercise every week we do
like the same five or six minutes
journaling and there's a different
experience around that and so now I want
to do the normal part of what the weekly
bento session is and this is where we
draw on a piece of paper we draw a blank
bento so just a for just simple
two-by-two four-quadrant just four boxes
I wouldn't write anything inside the
boxes yet because we're gonna use that
to brainstorm but the bottom left is
gonna be now me the bottom right is
going to be future me the top left is
now us and the top right is future us
and what we're gonna do is we're just
going to journal and we're going to into
our blank bento and and it's a very
simple process where you just ask what
should I do with my energy in the next
seven days
you're not thinking for all time you're
thinking a very concrete way of how
should they use my energy for the next
seven days and I'm we're gonna go
through an exercise before we begin so I
sort of teach you these voices more but
you're now me voice what does it want to
do in the next seven days it's going to
want to do
Aran's you know this is where you're
gonna write down like here's just this
stuff I have to take care of this week
which is great you're getting that out
of your mind like those are in critical
things to know your future me what I
tend to hear from my future me is more
of like you know maybe now me will want
attention maybe future means like hey
develop this longer-term relationship
learn this thing pursue this greater
goal don't don't worry so much about
getting something now my now us is
always reminding me of the people in my
life and making sure their needs are
central to my thinking and future us is
just imagining if if my actions have a
larger a larger impact on the world how
am i stepping into that responsibility
so we're gonna sort of brainstorm a
tease and and only what you're gonna get
is a kind of almost like a metaphysical
to-do list like a spiritual to-do list
in a way where you're gonna have your
errands and now me but you're gonna have
other parts of yourself represented as
well now that now to get started I'm
first gonna do a quasi meditative
experience I'm gonna close my eyes and
I'm gonna ask you to do the same and
sort of we're gonna move our heads and
what we're imagining as we all close our
eyes and first just looking straight
ahead is I picture that I'm standing in
front of a giant bento one of these
boxes I'm standing in front of them and
directly in front of me is now me and
now me as a mirror it's a mirror to me
on this day on June 1st 2020 and I look
into the now me mirror and I just take
stock of myself is my mind rested or
anxious
how does my body feel do I need to
stretch your exercise you know it's mine
now me am i agreeing a yellow or a red
at this moment so let's just start and
and just feel where we are today each of
us right in this moment start with your
head and just very slowly scan yourself
all the way down to your toes
you
all right now keeping your eyes closed
we're going to tilt our head up and now
we're imagining we're looking up into
that now us
and now us for you is the people that
you care the most about the people you
love that you have strong emotional
feelings for you your family your
closest friends your co-workers your
your childhood friends your pets I want
you to take all those people including
the animals and I want you to cram them
together on a sofa on a couch they're
all there together to really tight
squeeze everybody's laughing about the
absurdity of it but there you have in
that frame everyone that you love and
care about all together and now let's
take a Polaroid of those people and now
let's look across the photograph and
let's scan each of the faces and just
see the people and are now us
you
if you keep your head tilted up now turn
to the right and now we're looking into
the future looking twenty years into the
future we're looking at that same
Polaroid that you just took that same
now as Polaroid it's those same people
except in this picture twenty years from
now your kids are enormous they have
kids of their own even and you realize
that some of the people and your past
picture aren't there anymore they've
left and that there are new people in
this picture you've never seen before
but you know that they matter because
they're there as hard as it is to
imagine the people in this photo twenty
years from now they are depending on
decisions you will make this week what
you are doing this week will affect
their lives let's just look at their
faces as best we can imagine
finally let's look I level again but
still turning to the right now we're
looking at future me you're looking at
yourself twenty years from now your hair
is more salt than pepper your wrinkles
are deeper with a slight bend that you
didn't used to have but as you look at
your face you can feel the warmth and
love there the same way that you today
look back on your childhood self with
compassion looking at a young kid trying
to do their best
your future me looks at you right the
second the same way I see a person in a
hard situation trying to do their best
and they love you for it this person
loves you more than anyone and this
person is you this is the person you are
becoming day-by-day with the choices
that you make now it's return and
looking straight ahead again eyes closed
now we're looking back at now me and now
we're just gonna start to channel those
voices you know you can take your piece
of paper and you just drew the blank
bento on and what we're gonna do is
we're gonna Express with each of these
voices want us to do for the next seven
days what they say is important so we're
gonna start with now me what you right
now today what you want to need in the
next seven days just take one minute and
you're gonna write down whatever comes
to mind what does now me want to need i
just set a time or one minute
fifteen more seconds alright next let's
go to the bottom right - future me
future me you're imagining the person
you are twenty years from now the person
who is much wiser who has seen what
you're seeing before what words of
wisdom are they telling you what do they
say matters here's what matters here's
what doesn't matter what does your
future me say to you just take one
minute and write down whatever comes to
mind
fifteen more seconds all right now we're
looking at now us so now us is that
Polaroid all those faces now we're just
gonna ask ourselves what does our now us
Wanda need from us the next seven days
who should you reach out to who do you
want to think about who do you want to
co-create something with let's take one
minute and write down what speaks to you
fifteen seconds all right finally we're
going to do future s future outs you're
imagining the world a generation from
now it's hard to imagine that what we do
this second has like the the clear
butterfly effect of shaping that let's
let's imagine for a moment that that is
true and that someday someone will be
able to demonstrate that our actions are
in action in this moment had a material
impact on the world so knowing what you
want at a futurist knowing what you
think is important about the world what
does that say you should do in the next
seven days let's take one minute and
just write down what comes to mind
you
fifteen seconds all right there's no
right or wrong way to do this of course
you're writing down what comes out for
you just to give you a sense of how what
came out for me in this moment
my now me is a lot of errands
it's errands go go get my car fixed you
know not not very spiritual but stuff
that has to happen
my future me I had things like being on
the right side of important issues
questioning my silence when I'm silent
trying to be there for certain people my
now us I'm listing out friends that I
feel less in touch with at this moment
am i my future us i wrote down things
like try to build bridges don't preach
to the choir and like so what are the so
so you you come up with these sorts of
ideas and generally what I do after
writing down these things in my bento is
I I just make it to-do list I make an
actual to-do list where I integrate
these things you know what's interesting
if I think about some of these things
like being on the right side and I think
imagining the political moment like what
are the practical implications of this
it's interesting to try to conjugate
those things out weirdly I take away
from this that like maybe I need to be
spending time on Facebook instead of
Twitter is like a possible answer to
this maybe Twitter you're only preaching
to the choir maybe Facebook you're
actually having conversations with
people could be a different way of
thinking for instance but I use this
process every week as a way to just
shape my time and I I schedule my time
according to the things that come out in
this process and that way I feel like
all of my actions are reinforcing and
amplifying my
my key values if would anyone like to
share anything from this if you feel
compelled you don't have to I have one
more exercise to go through but if
anyone's feeling compelled in some way
would certainly dip wouldn't wanna hold
you back from from sharing what might be
on your mind if I guess Oh empted
exercises like this I get pretty
intimidated overwhelmed there's like an
element of like well if I don't include
it now it doesn't exist and holy crap I
gotta include it and I think you did
something that I haven't really seen
done before we're like you made us close
our eyes and like imagine it very
visually and like concretely and then
you like changed like the tilt of our
head such that it was like spatial and
then you gave like times to stuff like
it's a minute so you can't even like
think you just kind of have to go I just
thought the mechanics of how you did it
I was like holy shit this was like
pleasurable almost I just wanted to say
that pleasurable almost is a great like
that should be on a movie poster no I I
appreciate that you know these are
either just ways I have tricked my own
brain into working that I'm just sharing
and and the beauty of the group that's
been meeting for the last nine weeks is
that I we also get to learn from each
other how we think because there are
moments of like the meta narration of I
am trying to figure this out I think
about an X Y or Z way I think it's very
helpful to hear how other people think
it's it's we see more evidence of it
than we do getting to hear someone
explain themselves but I always learn a
lot from that I mean I was very
skeptical when you told us to do it I'm
like eyes is one of those woowoo feel
good about ourselves things but I think
a lot of it is like yeah when you were
like take a Polaroid of them like that
helped a lot because it was a thing to
think about my friends and so almost
like as much as it's the four boxes here
I felt it was what you did and the way
the words you use there that made a big
difference
great great
any other reflections meta or or you
know personal so I I have one last
exercise force to go through so in a
normal weekly bento at this point we
would we would do a couple things one
I'm realizing I'm a bad host one way
that we have always kept in touch with
people in the bento groups is that we
have a Google Doc that we all share each
week in which we will write down ways
that we want to be accountable create
connections with other people there's a
slack channel that we chat back and
forth with but it's just an open Google
Doc I just pasted it in the group so
that's a way that you can if you want to
ask me
follow-up question you can do that if
you just want to talk and meet other
people all of that is just like is there
for you so that's the low-budge way
we've kept in touch to date and and
there will also be if you're interested
there will be another one of these
called advanced bento ism on Wednesday
which will be a deep dive and to just
this week we're just going to dive into
future mean questions of future me and
there we'll do interactive workshops
where you will be with a group of other
people and you'll air a real problem and
those people will help you talk through
it using the bento as a framework and
using and reflecting your own values
back to you so one of the powerful
things is that just is in the process of
drawing our lives we say certain things
are true of us but whether we live up to
those is another matter
and so being in a situation where you
have another person saying hey hey
Esther but you know you say you're like
this doesn't that mean you should do be
more like this it's it's it's quite
startling to be held accountable to
yourself by another person it's a
powerful thing so if that's interesting
to you you're you're welcome to join and
I should realize I should post I'll put
that on the Google Doc how to get to
that but
lasted it was go ahead sorry we find the
Google Doc yeah sorry sorry I know I'm
all this mythical Google Doc I'm sorry I
this is bad this is bad I think I've
shared the wrong thing okay
sorry here's the Google Doc that that I
just shared and then I'll also share the
invite to the other one happening this
week and then there's just one last one
last exercise I'd love for us to do
together you know there is a this is a
week when the world is especially
probably a lot of you are feeling
similar kind of emotions I think a lot
of us are feeling which is fear and
anger and the kind of helplessness and
what's happening to the world and and
the the forces that are at work here are
larger than any of us but yet I don't
think that settling in to a feeling of
helplessness is right I don't think
there's I don't think that's true I
think that there's more responsibility
that we all share especially in a more
connected smaller world than we've had
before so I'd like to ask everyone as
one last exercise that we're going to
draw one more bento on our pieces of
paper so just saying four boxes now me
future me now us future us and here the
question is is is going to be different
the question is how can I be an ally how
can I be helpful how can I be helpful to
people who are in need and who are in
danger at this moment I'm specifically
thinking of black Americans who are
treated violently but what does it mean
what does it mean for you if you step
into that same now me that same future
me just ask them in a way that's honest
only writing to yourself how could I be
helpful how could I be helpful and so
I'd like to ask us to just go through
this as a last exercise and we'll start
just with now me and I'm gonna make
these 30 seconds that we'll go through
and for now me ask for for people who
are struggling right now for black
Americans who are who are in a very
dangerous position and and what is
already a dangerous Society for them how
can I be helpful so 30 seconds to answer
from now on me and will keep going so go
ahead now me
now let's ask future me that version of
you that so wise what did they tell you
how can you be helpful
all right now we'll do now us now us
what can I do how can I be helpful and
last future us thinking about the world
our kids will inherit what can we do for
them
you
you
Hey
all right that's a dramatic way to end
it sorry hi I lost you for a second okay
so I'd love to do a little share here I
know this is a tough topic but I just
love to share a couple of things I wrote
down and this is just me you know it's
trying to be honest with myself my my
now me I have it you know amplifying
voices for sure
I have helping draw a line imagining
like there's some line that we draw
about what's what's good and bad how can
I help draw that line my future me the
one thing that stood out was saying
don't see myself as being separate from
this by any stretch you know I can
imagine this is something happening
somewhere else but I don't I don't think
that's true so I think that's that's
maybe a mindset I need to change future
us I think about political change I
think about how I'm raising my child but
I'm curious anyone else like to share
what what came out or or what sort of
reactions that you have asking yourself
this question I don't know what to say
to my black friends so I say to them I
don't know what to say but I'm here for
you and let's talk and I've done that
and they mostly appreciate it
another is vote or donate or you know
get involved in changing the policies
that have not just led to I mean they've
led to the George Floyd situation and
the rights they've also led to so many
black people being unhealthy that they
are much more likely to catch
coronavirus and die from it partly
because of the jobs they have but also
because of the physical toll that racism
and poverty have placed on their bodies
in the first place so it's just like
don't be scared he'll fix the problem
yeah I would like to say something that
when I consider how I grew up I grew up
in South Dakota in a small town where
everyone was white in this town and
everyone went to church and everyone you
know it was seemed like it was all the
same and and to live now in a place
where it's so multi diverse I was
thinking I need to make more of an
effort to just talk up on the streets
when I'm there you know if I see someone
in need or helping it and to look into
their eyes when I'm passing them and
just acknowledge that so that it goes to
future us is that just we acknowledge
our humanists between us this got me
thinking about dismantling my own white
supremacy about being better read about
understanding on my own unconscious
aspects that's sort of feed into and
allow white supremacy to continue for me
it's for the future us
it all comes down to recognizing that
that chattel slavery wage slavery
capitalism imperialism white supremacy
these all go together and so it's to
start building a regenerative economy
based on the theories of planetary
boundaries and universal human needs all
being needs and then to stop supporting
our toxic imperial extractive inhuman
ecocidal system hi I lost I anyone else
anyone else like to share here before
we closed I'm sorry that I've had this
inopportune breakdown of connection um
anyone else like to share go for it
you know I like to share I just thought
that there's this very powerful human
feeling of pain that this reminded me
I'm that we I can relate to very deeply
at many points in my life and then at
the end I thought about how we're not
mourning and how like in a lot of
religious texts mourning is very
important after war or after loss and
how just that that there's anger and
there's confusion but they're just not
morning that that humans need some time
so those are my two feelings thank you
thank you for sharing I appreciate that
I appreciate that I'm on a I'm on a
phone so I can't see everyone else I'm
more limited inside here but you know I
love I love to close with just a couple
of thoughts one is to encourage you to
use both been toast that you made one
about being more helpful how can I be
helpful and also just about what it is
that you should be doing with your time
and what it is this larger spectrum of
yourself you know my belief is that we
focus on a very limited notion of
self-interest but actually we should
expand our our self-interest to include
our future selves and one another so I
hope that this can help you do that if
you want to go deeper you know day after
tomorrow Wednesday we'll be doing this
advanced been to ISM session and then
hopefully we'll be doing this here again
with Peter next Monday and then I do a
regular weekly Sunday session as well so
you know happy to keep this going and
and you can stay in touch through the
through the Google Doc and the slack
channel that are both listed through
there thank you all to keep here
ferb for so graciously inviting us to
host here with you
could I sneak in his question yeah sure
um when you were coming up with this
wizard how did you decide what there's
alike include past me or something about
the past because I know rum nation and
reflection kind of the positives and the
negatives of the past yeah part of my
day in my life
yeah the past is the past I've you the
past as being present in the present
that kind of there is like now is
standing on and less visible iceberg
that's enormous there are exercises that
we do go through and we'll go through to
explore the past more but I specifically
think about the bento is like a it's a
user interface it's about acting so
acting on the past is harder so the
focus of the boxes is on the present in
the future but it's there and we can use
the same model to dig into the past and
to even think about different sort of
chapters of the past so I think that's
part of what the drawing your life you
know hints at as well Emin I'm glad I'm
glad you connected with it all right
well thank you Peter
yes Thank You Nancy thank you for coming
and then when yes you were talking about
this the idea was to have a bento ism in
the stove's wisdom gym we have a bunch
of events here occurring at the stoah
it's like an ecology of practices to
build our sovereignty and self-care and
see in all different kind of innovative
ways so you can go to the store at sea
to check it out tonight at 6:00 p.m.
Eastern Time we have our buddy Daniel
thorn stone from the monastic Academy he
went on a 75 day silent meditation
he's coming came out of it now we're
gonna just question him if he's
enlightened or something like that find
out what's going on there there and then
Jordan Hall is coming into Stowe at
11:00 a.m. Eastern Time I have a
situational assessment about the
situation that we're in and then the
riots and whatnot
so the snow is based on a gift economy
we're viewing it as a gift to for all of
us to freely use and this time of need
if your spy to provide a gift to the
snowing just go to the website and go to
get the economy section at the bottom of
the page alright everyone thanks so much
all right thank you