welcome to future thinkers podcast this
is episode number 62 we invited Jourdan
Greenhalgh the co-founder of neuro
hacker back on the show to help us
understand something he's been working
on called deep code it's a framework
that explains how we learn things and
connect on a very deep level this
framework is important to understand for
creating a new civilization design as
Jordan believes our current civilization
is facing global collapse this
conversation comes in two parts so in
part one we give an overview of deep
code what it is how it works and why it
matters then we go on to talk about the
cycle of learning that can be applied to
anything we do and finally we talk about
how these capacities can help us gain
more sovereignty in today's world to get
the show notes for this episode go to
future thinkers org slash 62 the second
part of the interview can be found at
the same link once it goes live in about
a week this episode is brought to you by
qualia a premium nootropic supplement
that helps support mental performance
and brain health it's specifically
designed to promote focus support energy
mental clarity mood memory and
creativity UV and I have both used it in
the past we really like it and we
actually met the founders and
interviewed them on future thinkers you
can check out those interviews they're
one of our favorites at future thinkers
org slash Daniel and future thinkers org
slash jordan they've got a new formula
up called qualia mind it's got more
natural ingredients and you can get it
at future thinkers org slash brain hack
and you can get 10% off if you use the
code future all right let's get into the
show welcome to future thinkers org a
podcast about the evolution of
technology society and consciousness I'm
Mike Gilliland in I'm UV Ivanova if you
new to the show and you'd like a list of
our top episodes and resources go to
future thinkers that org slash start and
if you like our podcasts leave us a
rating in a review on iTunes and
elsewhere
it really helps others find the show and
we really appreciate it is it possible
we can do deep code for truck drivers we
could try well it's funny because
there's a certain let's put it this way
one of the groups who might be most
viscerally familiar with some of the
propositions of deep code are in fact
truck drivers because as we know the
self-driving car
disruption is going to be hitting trucks
relatively soon and so truck drivers are
going to find themselves on the other
side of a major disruption wave so part
of the deep code proposition might be
well a this is happening maybe be why
it's happening and see what it means for
you how you might be able to respond to
it I'll try to see if I can do it very
simply I'll begin with something we
actually maybe too simple well I'd like
to first propose is that we can think
about a particular thing that we humans
do called civilization as a kind of a
game in a very strong sense humans are
very simple at a basic level we don't
have that many distinct kinds of needs
maybe on the order of like twenty or
thirty distinct needs that we need to be
able to eat we need to be able to have
water we need to have safe shelter we
need to be able to find mates we have
more than say dogs because we need also
to have access to creative expression
and a sense of connection to something
that is greater than ourselves or so the
social psychologists who study these
things tell us but nonetheless they're
actually there's nothing on the list and
we can notice that what we try to do is
we try to go about and build different
kinds of institutions say like fast-food
restaurants and grocery stores or
collective gatherings where people cook
for each other pot logs that are ways
that we go about getting our needs met
and then of course are many many so we
could describe a given culture as a
collection of a whole lot of different
kinds of institutions and practices that
collectively try to get our needs met
I'm gonna say that we can we could think
about that as something like a game
meaning that there are roles that people
play there are ways of sensing or
measuring whether or not it's actually
being done well you know if you throw a
dinner party it's not necessarily the
same as say poker or basketball but
nonetheless there's a sense of did it
come together well or not and certainly
if nobody ate food you could say that it
was a failure and by contrast if
everybody decided to come back again you
could say maybe
success but most importantly it's kind
of invented you know we have a very
large amount of inheritances from
evolution that we humans didn't play any
meaningful role in doing ourselves right
we have our biology is received and a
large portion of our developmental path
is received but the specific cultural
artifacts within our choices that we've
made either right now like we're
choosing to communicate right now or
somebody in the past made certain
choices like somebody at the Xoom
corporation made the choice to create
this particular kind of software so now
this exists as a thing that we can
access so within the context of culture
as being a kind of a game meaning that
it's the thing that is constructed by
humans and is held together by humans
continuing to choose to interact in that
game
what did code has done is take a look at
the current set of cultures what I'm
gonna call the total civilization
framework the total set of cultures that
currently exist in the world and all the
different kinds of institutions and
practices that they have access to in
the context of the world as it currently
exists and as it is likely to become as
it goes forward and what we've noticed
is that our current civilization
framework not only isn't adequate to the
set of challenges that humanity is
facing but that in fact its own design
that the way that it works on some terms
is always going to collapse under its
own weight it's a phrase that Daniel
uses is that it is inexorably self
terminating which is not an li5 but it's
something along the lines of if you
light a candle the way that a candle
works is that it consumes its fuel so
you could know for sure that at some
point the candle is going to go out our
current civilization model has a lot of
characteristics like that meaning that
we can actually take a if you take a
very very close look at the underlying
like the deep structural elements of how
it actually operates you
say ah Sh I see it will always play out
in a certain way and as a consequence it
will actually collapse in some time it's
not clear how long but in some time it
will collapse as a bit of an aside it
also has there's an unfortunate
characteristic which is that the longer
you wait for it to collapse the more
significant the collapse will ultimately
be there's a point where you can
identify that it's sort of overripe and
it's time to begin moving on and
changing things but often times we don't
actually choose to elegantly innovate
new approaches we actually choose to
stick very strongly to old approaches
that are failing and when ends up
happening is the result is that we get a
short-term burst of what may feel like
success but what's actually happening is
they were eating our seed corn to use
that that idiom and then when it's up
happening is that when we hit rock
bottom we hit rock bottom hard and
that's why it ends up being a collapsed
things fall apart so there's a lot that
goes into that there's a whole bunch in
that level of analysis and he could
spent a substantial amount of time
looking at those kinds of things and
trying to get deeper and deeper clarity
to understand well why why would this be
the case and also where are we on that
trajectory and then of course you can
use those two ideas to make predictions
about what might happen over the next 5
10 15 20 30 years so then the second
major piece has been trying to use this
set of frameworks to design a new
civilization will has to be able to do
three things it has to be able to deal
with the kinds of problems that we will
be facing in the 21st century
it has to be able to do so in the
context of being in relationship with
the old civilization and it has to be
able to navigate that transition so the
vet ends up being what you might call
the design criteria of a viable future
civilization and then the third piece
deep cut has been doing is then
endeavoring to activate or actuate on
those design characteristics
okay well given this map of what's
happening and of what's likely to happen
and given this sense of what things are
necessary and possibly sufficient for a
viable solution what must we do and by
the way what is urgent that we do now
and then what are the actual projects
that we can engage in now that will move
things with the most leverage forward so
felt like that was pretty large
syllables but maybe that's li 22 where
does the term deep code come from
actually the a gentleman named Jim rut I
was collaborating with seven years ago
simply coined it he just named it as it
turns out it actually accidents of being
a very apt name because what we're
looking at is the you know the old if
you give a man a fish eats for a day if
you teach a man to fish he eats forever
or the relationship between giving and
teaching is a relation of depth that if
I give you the teaching I'm giving you
something that is deeper than giving you
the consequence of the practice if I if
I teach you how to fish I'm doing
something that is deeper than merely
giving you a fish well you can go deeper
still what I could do is I can
potentially teach you how to invent
fishing and I can go deeper still so the
recognition is that when you're dealing
with the kind of problem that we're
dealing with you have to get very good
at being able to go deep because you're
always going to be operating on the
basis of something something is going to
be the basis of how you're making sense
of what's going on and how you're making
choices in that context so if you're not
able to be conscious of that basis
you're not able to be aware of that
depth and then you're not able to enter
into that depth enough skillfulness to
be able to actually modify and operate
at that depth what you'll end up doing
is you'll end up operating well frankly
unconsciously you'll be operating with
blind spots you'll be making assumptions
did you don't even necessarily know that
you're making and in this case we're
actually talking about civilization
itself and what I mean by that is
effectively everything that human beings
have been doing as well as humans as
opposed to as primates since pre
agriculture for fifteen thousand years
possibly even farther back has to
actually be examined deeply and a lot of
the details about particular things that
were laid down choices that were made
possibly
seventy-five thousand years ago have to
actually be made brought to light
examines closely as to what those
choices actually imply and then you may
be unwound maybe you things designed to
be laid down at that level of death
or possibly kind of brushed off and
clarified and put back into a fabric
that then becomes the basis of the kind
of culture and civilization that we need
can you give us an example let's take
physics so what we typically do when
we're trying to do something useful is
we go deep enough to have created a
foundation upon which we can do the
thing that we're trying to do and then
we kind of try to leave that foundation
untouched unless it's not working and so
this is the entire essence of what
Thomas Kuhn was exploring when he was
looking at the structure of scientific
revolutions this is the guy who coined
the concepts of scientific paradigms is
that a scientific paradigm is a whole
bunch of different kinds of fundamental
assumptions and many of which ultimately
become unconscious meaning that we don't
even know that we've made them and are
the basis upon which we then go about
doing science so if you assume for
example that space and time are real and
objective independent of the things that
are in them and this is the Newtonian
model the Newtonian model has an
assumption that you can talk about
something called space and you could
talk about something called time even if
there is nothing else in the universe
there is still space and time and then
what happens is
that when you put something in the
universe you know the classic thing is
you imagine a sphere like a billiard
ball you imagine the sphere sort of
appearing and it appears in a space that
is somehow already pre-existing and it
appears at a time that is already
pre-existing and then this billiard ball
operates in that environment and so
Newtonian physics had that as an
assumption and when we take a look at
what general relativity did it didn't
operate in the context of those set of
assumptions what it did that examined
those assumptions themselves and so an
Einstein thought hmm what the hell
actually is time what actually is space
he brought into consciousness he brought
into conscious contemplation the nature
of the assumptions of the foundations of
the physics he was operating in he then
redesigned he reconsidered those
assumptions into a new concept which is
now the space-time manifold and where
you can't actually say space and time
without also already including mass now
again this is way outside the context of
five-year-olds but the idea is that
we're always operating on the basis of a
whole set of unconscious assumptions
that give us the tools that we need to
have to then think and do at the higher
level well what deep coat is done is
deep could have said ok what's notice
that quite often a lot of things that
are challenging now are challenging
because of the assumptions of the
frameworks and the unconscious
expectations that we're operating under
let's go deeper and this just keep going
deeper until we get to something that is
in fact deep enough for constructing an
actual comprehensive civilization it's
like there are layers on let's say a
sphere and as the sphere rolls down it
collects more layers you know as the
civilization progresses as evolution
progresses it collects more stuff and
then whatever is on the surface is what
we're aware of is the layer that we
function in but then there are all these
other foundational layers before it that
we don't understand that we take for
granted or that we assume that you know
top layers all there is and what you're
saying is that we have to dig down
deeper to understand what all the stuff
rests on because the stuff that is on
the outside right now is no longer
sustainable for itself it's going to
collapse onto itself
you've got me thinking about a few
things here that are really interesting
I've never thought of the concept of
what is space and time without matter in
it like what is an empty grid I've never
thought of that and the other thing that
really was interesting is the analogy
that you started with teach a man to
fish or give a man a fish teach a man to
fish teach a man to invent fishing and
you said it goes deeper than that using
that same analogy it'd be really
interesting to figure out what the next
layer is that you're talking about that
fits into that analogy well as it turns
out there's an answer to that this is
not well I thought I'd because when you
get down to these lowest levels it
actually gets very simple by definition
because most of complicatedness is all
the stuff where you get very low it gets
very simple so almost at the bottom not
quite at the bottom it when you get to
the very bottom it actually isn't it's
not the extremely simple but it's very
difficult to communicate but almost at
the bottom we actually can identify a
handful of basic capacities I'm gonna
see if I can walk you through these
basic capacities one is what I'm going
to call discernment and do I believe you
recall the effort as a kid of trying to
learn how to raise one eyebrow without
raising the other eyebrow or I can't
even do that now anything okay well
now's a good time Kenny can you maybe
yeah yeah good or you're not doing it oh
yeah you're doing it so this is a very
simple thing you can also do it by the
way with state juggling when you're
trying to learn how to juggle you're
entering into a space where you don't
have any idea what it would mean to be
doing the right thing when you're first
trying to learn how to raise one eyebrow
and not another eyebrow you'll find it
like you'll do all kinds of weird stuff
your face will be screwed up you'll be
making all kinds of weird faces you'll
raise both eyebrows you like squeeze
your nose because
you don't actually have a path that
knows how to do that you have a sense of
what it is you want to do you want to
raise one eyebrow which is nice but you
don't actually know how at all you're
enter into a complete space of
uncertainty and discernment is a
particular capacity of being able to
sense that which is more in the
direction and from that which is less in
the direction right and I can't actually
go any deeper than that it's the ability
to sense very subtly at first very very
suddenly that which is more in the
direction and that which is less so if
you use juggling as the example if
you've ever tried to learn how to juggle
there's a notion where you're just
beginning the process you're like
throwing the ball and then maybe you
begin to get ah oh there it is and like
a little tiny bit it's very vague it
can't be named or described it's more in
the sense of building of feeling and
constructing a whole set of deep
feelings that have a way of orienting so
the second capacity is something like
attunement but to do a 2 min I have to
do the third which is coherence so
coherence is the degree to which you
begin to be able to bring together a set
of different kinds of senses and actions
that belong together
so back to the notion of raising one
eyebrow and not another eyebrow there's
a whole bunch of different kinds of
things that all have to happen
simultaneously and in coherence you're
beginning to be able to grasp them as a
whole beginning to able to sort of
relate to them as a single coherent
phenomenon and to bring them into
relationship with each other where they
begin to actually operate as a smooth
whole can imagine that if you were to
imagine say for example a fishbowl that
has a whole bunch of floating around in
it and you're trying to get light to
shine through it to a degree which you
can go in and just very precisely move
all of the dirt out of the water at once
that actually being able to separate
dirt from water is a sense of
discernment that which is more than that
which is not and
degree to which you're actually being
able to pull all of it out and you're
bringing the fishbowl in to coherence
your per having present precisely all
that is necessary and precisely none
that is not necessary and you're
bringing it all into a kind of
relationship that causes it to come
together as a whole so now think about
like the fluidity of juggling where
there's a whole bunch of distinct
motions you have to be able to grab a
ball you have to be able to throw a ball
you have to be able to see it and have
the hand-eye coordination to be able to
move and catch it but you can't do these
discrete steps you have to actually move
into a stage where they're all happening
as a single unit that is all the very
tight relationship to each other.

Attunement now then is the relationship
between discernment and coherence where
you're able to increasingly become
capable of using discernment in the
context of a given coherence to be able
to achieve coherence.

An interesting
metaphor that a lot of people are
familiar with, if they're old enough, is
when you're tuning a radio, if you have
an old like an FM or AM radio, you
notice where - let's say - the signal is
being broadcast at 90 FM and your
radiators right now at 80 8.5 - you just
get noise - it's just static - and then 88.7,
88.9, somewhere around 88.9 something you
can start hearing music, but it's still a
lot of noise, and then when you get to 90
- in this case it would be 90 point
one, because I'm going up by twos - it just
snaps into clarity and you can hear the
music, and almost all the noise drops
away.

you're tuning you're actually
making the the antenna more discerning
in the context of the electromagnetic
frequency where it's now coherent the
antenna is coherent the antenna is tuned
to their frequency of 90.1 the signal is
being broadcast at the frequency of 90.1
the whole now is the relationship
between these two things and suddenly
the music jumps out so think about the
way that a child learns how to stand and
so it has just begun the process of
being able to move its legs it can crawl
but it can't quite stand well standing
requires things like being able to
control your leg muscles but also
requires things like being able to have
really sensitive awareness of
which direction your body is falling not
easy to be standing up on two feet
there's a lot of complexities I think
about how hard it's been to build a
robot that can stand on two feet it's a
lot of sensing that needs to be done and
then micro adjustments of those muscles
so you have to have a certain capacity
in having the muscles respond not too
much not too strong like lurching back
and forth but also a sensitive feedback
loop between your sensors of where
you're falling and your actuators of
controlling your balance so that
suddenly you're now standing up all
right so that's an example of moving
into a coherent motion of being able to
actually stand up is the process of
having these sensitive relationships
between sensing and acting that become
entrained with each other until they
have the space of coherence that now has
an enormous amount of clarity so that's
the next step which is clarity remember
we talked about how the radio signal
goes from static to suddenly you can
hear the music very easily when a system
enters into coherence it also enters
into the state of clarity which means
that whatever signal is trying to come
through can come through with a very
large amount of signal with a very small
amount of noise even if it has not much
energy that's a sort of a formal
definition back to our radio station you
know the radio antenna was broadcasting
at the same level of energy the amount
of electricity driving the radio signal
has been the same all along you can't
hear you can't hear you can't hear it
you enter into clarity and bam you can
hear perfectly the same thing happens in
literally any kind of learning
environment once you achieve coherence
then what happens is as you move into
clarity the thing that is endeavoring to
be learned the skill of raising your
eyebrow the skill of juggling the skill
of fishing suddenly becomes capable of
being received without a whole lot of
effort the signal of what is going on in
the world is suddenly you've become an
instrument they can receive that signal
it's all of its nuance and complexity
and be able to bring in it and perceive
it so then the last is embodiment which
is now that you can actually receive
that signal you now begin the process of
turning it into something that you can
easily access over and over again with
little less and less effort so you begin
to sort of hardwired
or construct a set of habits around the
set of skills that you've now carefully
turned into a coherent whole so you're
able to achieve a level of coherence
quickly so now you can't juggle and to
juggle is no longer a struggle to juggle
is now a capacity that you have
developed you've now learned to fish so
now
fishing is something that you can do and
by the way you can do it with less and
less and less energy and then in
relationship to other kinds of things it
becomes the basis for doing a whole new
set of things now it becomes a skill or
capacity and you can plug into another
cycle up so if you imagine the
development of a child a child first has
to be able to differentiate in its
visual field it has to build a certain
level of discernment to separate the
blooming buzzing confusion of all the
 that happens to be in the world
that as a newborn infant literally
there's no way of knowing then it has to
be able to separate say a pea a small
round sphere from a the background of a
plate well separately at the same time
it's learning how to be able to notice
that it has hands and then it's being
able to notice how to actually do things
with its fingers to get his fingers to
close with enough control that it can
actually grasp something with those
little fingers so now it's got two
separate capacity that just builds his
habits it's got the ability to see
something judge its distance from where
it is it's got ability to grasp
something so now it's gonna struggle and
work on the deeper skill set of being
able to see something and reach out and
grab it I know if you've ever raised a
child but that's a very interesting
thing to watch so then of course once it
has the ability to see something and
reach out and grab it then it's gonna
work on doing something with it bring it
to its mouth so you see the cycle and
each cycle participates in exactly the
same dynamics discernment attunement
coherence clarity insight inside is that
process of being able to actually have
that signal come all the way through and
then layering it into embodiment and
then that becomes available for the next
layer up so that cycle is the deepest
basis of any kind of capacity building
in any possible domain so whether you
are trying to learn how to create fire
or you're trying to learn how to do
physics or you're trying to learn how to
be in relationship with a person or
you're trying to learn how to parent or
your tribe
learn how to pee it doesn't matter those
are the fundamental basis of any ability
to go from where you are to a higher
level of capacity that was the one that
takes you from giving a man giving a
fish to teaching a fish to teaching how
to learn how to fish to the deep basis
of all possible kinds of learning in any
possible domain right can you repeat the
cycle again not sure it's discernment
attunement coherence clarity insight
embodiment I'd imagine this has been
written about extensively in the there
are books people could pick up to learn
so what is the subject that this is
encapsulated in side of how to learn
philosophy of Education and
developmental psychology so coming back
to round this off and bring it back to
what's practical for the truck driver
again what problems does this solve for
the truck driver how does this apply for
someone in their day-to-day lives
okay so there's going to be a couple of
distinct things the first is that
because this is so deep it turns out to
be relevant regardless of what's going
on so to the degree to which you've
actually developed a significant degree
of embodied capacity in these raw
capacities remember this is the deep
basis of learning itself you now
actually have the ability to learn in
any context so for example in a world
where things are moving and changing
rapidly where maybe the path of learning
how to be a plumber suddenly just
evaporates because we've made those into
robots and the path of learning how to
be a physicist evaporates because AI is
doing that well you know as things are
changing rapidly you actually need to be
able to have a deeper basis for
relationship with the environment that
you're operating it because that basis
is less subject to the sort of the
vicissitudes of superficial change these
particular characteristics because they
are in fact the deepest basis of
learning are invariant meaning that if
you build masterful skillfulness in this
cycle meaning you build mastery of
discern mastery of attunement mastery of
coherence mastery of clarity
mastery of insight mastery of embodiment
then you are fully prepared to respond
to any possible set of circumstances in
your environment meaning that if you
find yourself suddenly on Mars and
everybody's gone and you have no idea
what to do when you're by yourself you
have the raw toolkit from which to build
the tools to respond to what is
happening so it's the strongest basis
the strongest you can be the most
adaptive you can possibly be now as a
truck driver you're gonna find yourself
very soon in a circumstance with a set
of skills that you've built are
increasingly obsolete and this is true
by the way of course of almost everybody
that for a very long period of time
several centuries at least
we've operated on a educational
structure where we give people knowledge
and we give them very specific skills
but we do not give them the basis of a
learning so that they can be robots
ultimately you can add two plus two in
your head but you don't have any idea
what it means to have actually invented
arithmetic you can't actually understand
why two plus two equals four you could
just do it rook and that was a phase of
human civilization we're creating a very
large number of robots was useful and
important and I don't mean that
disparagingly I mean it in the very
specific sense that people would have
been trained to have certain kinds of
knowledge in certain rote skills that
are hard to do and require a lot of
skillfulness to execute on but have not
been trained in the deep basis that
would allow them to self teach anything
now of course we're entering into the
phase where those kinds of abilities
your skills and in particular your
knowledge aren't particularly
interesting anymore you can imagine that
being able to add large the added
multiply large numbers remember the idea
of a calculator literally used to be a
person an actual human being who was
trained in doing calculation quickly and
with precision and then we invented a
tool that could do that more quickly and
with more precision and so to be a
calculator no longer was a valuable way
of control
to the culture well this is happening
everywhere and it's going to be
happening at an accelerating pace and so
what you think you're going to do to
respond to that is you're going to leap
from one sinking Island to another
sinking island oh well I'll stop being a
truck driver and now I'm going to be a
software programmer you may have bought
yourself a little bit of time but well
guess what software programming is going
to go underwater too so as dr. and so is
fill in the blank I picked out for a
programmer on purpose because it's
obviously going to be one of the taller
islands but unless you happen to be
really really good at it the portion
that you're doing is going to be
automated by the people who are above
you on that stack because that's where a
lot of the automation is happening so
interestingly if I can just kind of
interject here we've been playing a lot
of music lately and I've downloaded a
few new applications I've been outside
of the music production scene for a long
time and suddenly I'm back into it and I
see all these new software applications
that allow for automatic arpeggiation of
scales and chords and very complicated
very advanced chord structures that can
be arranged for you automatically
so even these very high level artistic
creative structures are now just being
you know like you can have an improvised
the lead that is automatically beautiful
and in some sort of very complex jazz
structure and you can have that
generated for you with the push of a
button I mean that's one of those things
I would have thought would be kind of
last to go is the artistic expression
but it's actually easier to make that go
then I would imagine like you say
software programming right well that's
it so what is up happening is is that
things that are the deepest are the
things that are going to last and so if
you're trying to figure out where to go
go there so I can invert it the things
that are the deepest are also the things
that are the highest so if the flood is
coming and you're seeking high ground
this is the highest ground and so what I
can say also is that it is not just the
highest ground that we've found it
actually is the highest ground there is
nothing there is no way to go any higher
to be more safe it is the actual basis
upon which everything else derives so
that's one piece now another piece which
is very interesting
is because it is so foundational it also
is related to more kinds of things so
I've just been talking about it in the
context is call it useful skills or ways
of providing value so moving from being
a truck driver to being a software
programmer or a chef but these things
are at the bottom of everything so how
to be able to be in relationship with
yourself how to be able to be a good
friend how to be able to be a good
parent how to make choices around what
to eat all possible choice making in all
possible context are founded on these
kinds of capacities and so that only are
these kinds of capacities primeur really
useful in the context of how to do stuff
in caught that may be the economic
domain they are actually primarily
useful in all domains and so they are
the most useful things to have at the
basis of your fundamental portfolio of
things that you're good at and they just
address the last just to make sure we
have the right kind of context a deep
insight that is not very well shared is
that pace of change matters that if
things are changing slowly it's actually
okay to just have the surface level
adaptive skills or capacities associated
with the place that you're at if you
know being able to think of a simple
example if being able to grow yams is
adequate to feed you and your family and
the place that you're at is going to
have the same essential characteristics
for yam growing for a million years then
it's actually kind of okay to just sort
of have the rituals of yam growing
passed down from hand from person to
person without having to build a deeper
basis that would allow you to also be
able to grow wheat or to be able to fish
but if things are changing you have to
go deeper and the faster they're
changing the deeper you have to go and
so because we're in a space where
accelerating change is a primary
characteristic
we're also in a space where depth is a
primary characteristic right and like
you said this relates to all domains for
example both of us have done a lot of
meditation and it's the same kind of
process and a certain point you can't
really be taught you just have to figure
out how to deconstruct your own mind and
to keep deconstructing it until there's
nothing left to deconstruct and so you
know the whole process that you're
talking about relates to to everything
including things that are very
experienced and kind of very subjective
yes and now you just brought into my
mind
not sure how maybe the next major move
which is we've now been talking about
all of this from the point of view of a
single person but everything that we've
been talking about is perfectly exactly
relevant in the context of groups of
people and in fact going down also your
cells and organs relate to each other in
this way to make you so there's a
continuity going from quantum phenomena
all the way up to the universe but in
the particular case you as an individual
have relations of coherence with regard
to certain capacities to render them
into embodiment but say for example the
two of you as a group as a couple as a
partnership also have this this loop but
it's at the level of the relationship
the relationship itself has a certain
kind of agency has a certain kind of
discernment that neither of you holds
completely there's a wholeness to it
that is equivalent to the wholeness of
for example the relationships of your
muscles that'll able and maybe you to
juggle there's something about the way
the relationship builds its own
capacities to do things as a
relationship and a jazz band is the
classic example that there's something
about the jazz band that is that is
synergistic it is a merge that is more
than just the actual players there's
something about becoming togetherness in
a form of coherence that allows the jazz
band as a band to do something that is
not available in any of the distinct
individuals
and you have to play together right you
have to actually build discernment as a
whole you have to build a tune mint as a
whole you have to build coherence as a
whole and then of course you have built
embodiment as a whole which the layers
did you go out and do something white
played jazz well that's another deep
important thing because these plug
together in order for me to most fully
entrance relationship with you to the
degree to which I've built mastery of
discernment in myself I can then use
that master of discernment in myself in
the process of building skillfulness in
discernment as us this relates to what
you were talking about when we spoke the
first time I think where you talked
about how sovereignties fractal in a way
that you can have sovereignty as an
individual and then there's also a level
of sovereignty in a small group and then
in a larger group and then the society
in the nation its realization yep that's
right
so what we're describing can be
described as the the characteristics of
sovereignty so would you describe
sovereignty as a mastery of all these
different levels of discernment
achievements etc or is this kind of a
separate aspect of it it's actually a
little bit oblique so what I would say
is that in order to achieve sovereignty
one must use these particular capacities
in the domain that you're considering
suffrage is a measure of the
relationship between one's capacity and
the conditions that one is in so for
example when I have learned how to
juggle you might say that I have
sovereignty within a particular context
of juggling let's say for example I'm
trying to juggle wall riding a unicycle
I may not yet have sovereignty in that
domain sovereignty has to do with they
have a longitudinal ability of your
current state to respond to a set of
challenges such that you're continuing
ability to respond to those challenges
is on some level of steady state or up
gradient at which is to say that I can
doing it without losing my ability to
keep doing it so these two pieces fit
together they're not reducible to each
other so would you say that sovereignty
and mastery are kind of the same thing
or not really feel like they're so now
we're in a subtle state of discernment
so I'll actually apply it I feel like
there's a distinction but I feel like
the distinction is subtle so they are
close which is to say that for most
purposes you can probably use them
interchangeably but there is a
distinction and so it's important not to
think that they are in fact actually
interchangeable you think if I can get
up a little bit of better hint as to
where that distinction lies well I said
that these two these two stories are
oblique meaning that they're related to
a different set of things mastery
relates to an arc of skillfulness so I'm
going to give that in more detail when
you enter into a particular practice a
particular relationship to to reality
jugglin in the beginning you have no
skillfulness is you're really just at
the basis of raw uncertain discernment
as your discernment increases in your
Tumen increases you begin to enter into
coherence what happens is your
skillfulness increases your ability to
move energy through your instrument to
get signal is higher as your
skillfulness increases I'm gonna
describe a particular transformation I'm
gonna call it artfulness the movement
from skillfulness to artfulness has to
do with that transition into embodiment
meaning that you've reached an adequate
level of discernment attunement and
coherence and clarity that it's actually
becoming your ability to access this
level of insight has moved into a space
of kind of being easy and being enduring
under larger and larger challenges so
what I can say now is that your
sovereignty at artfulness your
sovereignty in this particular domain
has actually expanded your ability to do
is expand it and then mastery is when
you're actually now able to use this
capacity to build further capacity under
the
under higher harder domains so the art
for skillfulness to artfulness to
mastery really very much lives on this
learning loop sovereignty comes at it
obliquely it comes at it from the point
of view of in a given circumstance in a
given moment what is the relationship
between your capacity and the
environment that you're in so if you
have achieved mastery then also you will
be sovereign at the level of your
mastery so let's go back to juggling if
I've had chief mastery of juggling and
what I'm doing is juggling then I have
sovereignty in the domain of juggler if
I've achieved mastery of juggling but
what I'm doing now is trying to use to
juggle while riding a unicycle my
sovereignty in this moment is actually
quite low but so I have not achieved
mastery of the new domain I've only
achieved mastery of the sub domain of
juggling maybe juggling and riding a
unicycle so there's a relationship
between the two the sovereignty has to
do with the ability to maintain my
ability to respond to my environment in
the context that I'm in on an ongoing
basis and it will use my mastery my
skillfulness of which there's many
dimensions in that process right so to
simplify it it seems like mastery is
more about skillfulness and
understanding of domain whereas
sovereignty is more about your ability
to make choices in response to whatever
is happening yes
that's very nice
[Music]
Thank You Georgie so we will continue
this conversation in the next episode to
summarize for our listeners we talked
about what the deep code framework is we
talked about the cycle of learning which
can be applied to anything in life and
how it can be used to gain more
sovereignty in today's world for all the
shownotes mentions and resources go to
future thinkers org slash 62 the second
part of this interview can be found at
the same link once it goes live and to
check out our sponsor nero hacker go to
future thinkers org slash brain hack if
you're new to the show and you like a
list of our top episodes and resources
go to future thinkers org slash start if
you want to sponsor our show go to
future thinkers that org slash sponsor
if you like our podcasts leave us a
rating and a review on iTunes and
elsewhere it helps others find the show
and we really appreciate it
thanks for listening and we'll see you
in the next episode
[Applause]
[Music]