Peter okay no just for the record day
what what is the what is the intention
for the recording what is going to
happen with that it goes up on YouTube
my channel where all the other solution
reasons go but if it's ever decided that
something horrific was said and you
don't want it up and I we were
participants in what I do train get the
right to say that we can we can take it
down at some point but it goes up on
YouTube or or that the idea of also
having a split group eventually is that
one of them will hopefully recorded the
one I'm in and then the other one can
choose whether or not they record it and
put it out somewhere there on my channel
or their own but a solution raising is a
structured hour-long conversation we
spend 15 minutes talking about what we
currently do in this space today we're
talking about hobbies and then 15
minutes talking about what our ideal
future would look like in the in that
realm and then 30 minutes talking about
what we could do to enhance that area of
our lives or the world with 10,000
people and $100,000 this is probably the
most frivolous one that we've done and
yet I'm interested in what we what we
come up with because it's important I
mean having things that we we enjoy
doing as I promised Carrie I brought my
cross station just to show one of the
things that I'll be stuffed to show you
as well wasn't so if anyone would like
to start we spend roughly 15 minutes on
I'll let you go first you play I wasn't
necessarily going to go first but I
don't really have hobbies like all
throughout my life there's not like I
don't play sports I don't have a musical
instrument I've tried to learn guitar
I've tried to learn certain things I do
like following instructions not in the
world but in crafts and so this is what
I currently working on it's cross
stitching so it's so pretty um I guess
I'm following instructions like put this
color here and I enjoy doing it I
enjoyed doing a paint-by-numbers kit
years ago and so I bought canvas and
paints and then realized I don't
actually like painting I like following
the guideline and so that is there's
little things that I really like doing
though I love going for walks in nature
and I love swinging on swings and so and
singing with people around campfire and
so those are the end play more games
so I have some things that I do enjoy
doing with other people kind of only be
done with other people and then a lot of
things that I that bring me joy that I
do I do myself but I guess I just don't
consider them hobbies because they're
not big enough or something like that
but who else what else what hobbies do
you guys do how let you go at it on just
what's going around in my head is the is
the size whether that's relevant to the
notion of hobby like how much time you
spend on it and I'm sort of snod up in
there I mean just speaking personally my
main hobbies I guess in my life have
been golf but I never really play
anymore where I am it's kind of hard to
play especially as I don't have a car
but yeah I like cooking I cook every day
like the life I lead now kind of my
hobbies is what I just do every day
tinkering around the house and the
garden and stuff like that I mean it's
not work in the sense that you know I'm
on a clock I have to do it and I get
paid for it and I've got a boss and you
know what I mean is it so it's so in a
sense everything I do now is hobby like
so yeah I mean as is so often the case
with me I'm I'm kind of curious as to
the meaning of the word right I mean can
you have five your if people are no
longer required to work for a living
does the notion of hobby disappear
entirely or you know do you just have
more time for your hobbies and so what
is a hobby is a hobby just something
that you'd like to do is that is that
all it is something you do reasonably
habitually and that gives you pleasure
in some way I think that's about all
there is to it to be honest and so yeah
it's an interesting one for a solution
raising because I it's not something you
would immediately think would change
dramatically you know what I mean but
but but maybe maybe yeah so anyway I'll
stop there okay Rolf do you want to go
well poppies I mean I also have a sort
of very or not a very clear dividing
line between work and and and free time
because I I work from home i I run a
venue and so I mean I play ice hockey in
the winter I really enjoy that so so
sports very kind
would probably be a sort of hobby if I
were to imagine what I would be doing
when I have some spare time and and not
really any kind of commitments I will
often tinker with technical stuff like
right now I'm learning to play
synthesizers and I think that the
technology behind it is really
interesting so the sound technology and
the different sound scapes that you can
sculpt with it and and we're sort of
tinkering a little bit with tunes of
music together a few people and so
that's the kind of hobby and I also like
to write I have written some books and
also write some nonfiction things about
the visionary stuff and analyzing the
world situation and blog posts are
various kinds that just have been being
caught by some idea and want to get it
out there so it's all a bit you know
it's it's in the domain of things I
think it's fun to do and I don't do it
because I get paid but yeah okay well
there to thousands of nineteen I learned
how to crochet right so baskets be
making baskets and stuff so be making
baskets and I started making him shelves
for people so alleged stuff to do that
so I've made two loads of them and I've
give them away because I make things for
people who don't like so I just but as I
said the starter don't attend to this
group and throughout throughout the year
every Monday with kinds of metal and
it's been really good because it's like
therapy and I've come across all those
different people plus it sparked off
loads of idea it's also a like Ryan and
that but I'm a bit Scottie cuz I'm all
over the place like like right in I've
got loads of art stuff because when I
went to do creative arts in college and
we did sculpture animation script write
in and all sorts of other things and it
was brilliant and I was just like yeah
yeah I want to play house but um so yeah
so um as I said I've got a page called
bad Nana beans now where I've been doing
stuff
making things and absolutely love making
things and it turned into an idea for
something else has gone on but I'll talk
about that later right so that's me
really interests me up a little bit of
time left to talk about this section
because I just picked this as a topic it
wasn't you know what I mean something
burning my carpet what Eric shared and
what role it shared like what I'm here
to do is help people create their life
so they don't have that separation hobby
isn't work right like find the stuff
that you want to do that you don't need
to get paid for because that is payment
in and of itself yet we do need our we
need our needs met and meeting those two
together that that is possibly what I
mean when I say I don't have hobbies is
that I mean game B is my hobby creating
a better world is my hobby it's been my
hobby since I was a teenager but I was
so focused on it that I didn't do the
other things that brought me joy it
wasn't necessarily the sweet sweet
relaxing nature and now my whole life is
that like I'm like how would I
distinguish between hobby I do what I
want to do and it is creating something
in the world that is amazing
what do they consider a holiday and
wouldn't be considered something that
that anyone's willing to pay me for yet
anyway so interesting I like to
prescribe that's fun I liked I liked
playing that as well ironically it's the
UM the logo kind of for solution raising
because it was a game it's one of the
board games actually don't like because
I don't do very well and like the
anagrams and mixing them up it's like
bringing out Scrabble I'm always like
I'm gone but anyway it's somewhat ironic
that Scrabble is the picture for this
yeah I just noticed that I hadn't
noticed
yeah that's right funny because there's
so many combinations you know and you
need to think just to the word itself
again before we move on because actually
this notion of playing games with your
family whatever I think is quite a good
it's made though it's made the dividing
line clarify because a hobby is more
than that
our hobby is more than just something
that you do because I used to play card
games with my family all the time right
when I was kid but I wouldn't describe
that as a hobby a hobby is something
that you that you're looking to get
better at right you're looking to move
in the direction of mastery of I mean
you may never take it that seriously
that you're seriously after mastery but
but it is it is something you take it's
more serious than just a pastime right
it is it is something you dedicate a bit
more of your resources to than just just
a pastime so I think it is it yeah I
think it is worth exploring because I
think it is actually more important than
just you like to do it is it is
it's a part of your personal growth
right as part of your personal growth in
your development is the pursuing of your
hobbies and getting better at them
challenging yourself through them I
think there's an element of challenge
involved in hobbies which net not
necessarily in just playing games or
whatever this is a sprint meters to I
mean that I do painting sometimes you
know for instance this thing that behind
me here this is a painting I made and so
I wouldn't really call that a hobby
because it's very infrequent then I do
it when I really have an inspiration so
I mean the more sometimes I find it
difficult to to find the energy to
really do it but but when the paints
they the arts pieces that I have done I
have really I really enjoy having them I
have all of them in my house a few I've
given away but I wouldn't know if I
would call that a hobby because it can
be really challenging to do something
which is worthwhile a to realize an
artistic idea that somehow matters to
you I have a pain when I think that
frequency is not important to the notion
of hobby
actually well less less important than
the notion of doing it with you know
your heart and soul kind of thing but I
don't know what do you guys think this
frequency important you have to indulge
in regular assassination it's like never
I mean I've picked up a guitar once I
wanted not to be a hobby but it wasn't
into my guitar left so I don't know
where it is like frequency has something
to do with it right if you do something
once and never again however if it's
frequency like every
every few years I pick this up and do
something with it and that does feel
like and the idea that it's something
that you are endeavoring to get better
at for me that's not a requirement but
it's definitely I can see how people
would have that as a requirement like
that is a beautiful part of the hobby to
try and get better to try and find
people or maybe more into it and in situ
that is is a piece of it for sure also
pathway to community right because if
you if you are into it then other people
who are into it are gonna be you know
potential kindred spirits close friends
so there is that also there is a
community to map through damage some not
maybe not all I mean golf for ease hope
you can play golf on your own well take
long
no problem as I know and that golf in
particular I think Golf is a sport that
people enjoy or they don't and because
it's so focused on in society is a
business hobby right like it's like
something you have to do around the team
bring your business partners and do it
the people are like forced to do it when
they don't want to and then there's a
lot of people who can't even though they
would love to do it can't afford to do
it and so there is a bigger piece in the
in society of like is your hobby valued
right like is it something that other
people look up to or look down on and
doesn't matter because is it something
that just brings you joy right like I
don't think we should not have calls
because it's not but it should be for
people who want to do it it's a lot of
land that we use
yeah listen no this is relevant in the
defense of God it's not actually as
expensive very much an elite thing you
had to be very wealthy to play and be a
member of a club but that is that is no
longer the case last twenty years or so
it's really become a lot more financial
like I go for a walk around a golf
course every day and I weld the cove it
was on and they weren't open I walked on
the golf course their feet like this is
the golf course it should be but I get
why they're not but and that is a public
one and it's still 60 70 bucks to play
around like it's still not cheap it's
not you don't have to be a millionaire
but you can't do it on minimum wage
either without it being completely
like like the frisbee golf III just
looked up hoppy on the Internet
the King axis that it is an activity
that someone does for pleasure when they
are not working and another definition
here was an activity done regularly in
one's leisure time for pleasure and but
I think that there's so there's there's
hobby and there's also an adjacent thing
which is creative self-expression which
which I sort of related
they sort of criss cross somehow and and
that creative self-expression can be at
times it can be painful
like I've written some books that it was
really you know it was hard to birth
because I had to dive into things that
were definitely not pleasurable but
afterwards it was very big satisfaction
to have done it and so I think there's a
there's some gray hairs here and if we
are going to discuss what we would do if
we had 10,000 people and 100,000 dollars
in this domain I think that it might be
worthwhile just to get a little yeah
because if if it's more in the realm of
artistic expression self expression
that's one thing and if it's sort of
leisure activities it's a little bit
different I've just looked up the
etiology of it which can sometimes be
very interesting and this it's actually
quite funny so hobby is a small active
horse short for haben probably
originally a proper name for a horse the
modern sense of a favorite pursuit
object or topic is from 1816 a
shortening of hobby horse in this sense
blah blah blah earlier it meant a wooden
with work figure bobbles as a child
story a costume the connecting notion
being an activity that doesn't go
anywhere I'm always thinking like a
hobby you know things done by hobbits
[Laughter]
the origin of the word is somewhat
trivial right it's just something you do
for pleasure and it's not it has no
purpose beyond that it does seem that's
the origin of the word yeah I get all
beyond some
is called hobby it's spelt a choke BB
double I endemic and most me yarn comes
from there
that's called hobby it's quite good
place so now we can switch over into the
next section which we're not quite at
the ten thousand hundred thousand yet is
what would we like our look life to look
like in the area poppies or what would
be like the world's look like to maybe
support hobbies in individuals and in
society in the next five ten twenty
years and again they don't need to match
although I don't know why this one
wouldn't match particularly everyone
must play golf that's the only the only
thing that's I'd like to create more
makerspaces and we're cuz I there's a
lot of stuff I'd love to do like paper
mache and sculpture and stuff but I
haven't got the space or the room to do
anything like that and and obviously
with up cycled stuff like stuff that
doesn't get sold to charity shops
upcycle that and turn that into
something and you know and do do
projects and things like that so I'd
love and of them my idea will to be a
big room that you could just go and play
out in with whatever stuff was there and
people would just let you and there be
other people and be like an after-school
Club for adults that's what I'd like to
see because everything's geared toward
kids but what about when you get to a
certain age and you want to play out
there's nowhere to go that's that's what
I'd like right thanks Kari never else
want to share their vision of a future
hobby endeavor well I guess the perfect
future of a hobby would be what they had
in the Star Trek next generation
holodecks right I mean you can do
absolutely do you know what I mean like
the universe is your limit in there and
so you know you can do and learn
absolutely anything at all so I guess
that's but that's somewhat of a fantasy
right I guess in a more sort of game be
way if you could remove all the
jobs from society moving move the
property remove the rent-seeking you
know what I mean all all of that stuff
automate what's consensus but all the
boring repetitive hard dangerous
that can be automated is automated and
so now you know instead of the average
person working 50 hours a week the
average person's working say ten hours a
week
something like that right and and and so
now leisure time is actually pretty much
your whole life right I mean now you're
thinking and so yeah I mean I and beyond
that I think you know if people have
that kind of freedom and prosperity then
those things which people wish to engage
in as hobbies will be catered to by do
you not I mean it'll sort itself out I
really don't think there's any need for
any kind of external direction they're
just sort itself out and up but I liked
Kerry's idea of like open spaces that
you can easily make into whatever for a
short period of time and people do a
thing and then it can become another
thing really easily in that I think
that's a that's a really good idea well
I think that you know growing up I grew
up in a small community and one of the
things that I have there one of the
fondest memories is that like most
summer nights we would play soccer or
football in essen cold in Denmark we had
like these open lawns and we like there
were like six houses and there were a
lot of open lawns and you know in the
summer time we fed the families was
usually grill at home and and then
around 7 o'clock all the kids they were
like tu-tu-tu-tu-tu-tu and they will
find each other in these open space and
they would say play football until we
couldn't see anything anymore hmm
and and so I think that that one of the
things that I would really love and also
what I've I'm sort of endeavouring a
little bit to create here you know I
have a community project and that right
now we are that that we're hoping to get
permission to build a lot of houses and
to recreate something of that because
there is so much value in the in the
unstructured activities there from
intelligent community contexts and the
structured activities are very much
different there we have a lot of
structured activities and in schools and
extracurricular this and in in in
Denmark is like national hobby is to
create associations for hobbies kind of
thing so I mean there's so many spaces
where people explore there and I think
in the modern sort of welfare
where people have substantial free time
and also it's a market there's a lot of
that and also that's a mark of a culture
society that where there is time for
leisure personally I do not subscribe to
the theory that that will be possible to
bring everybody's work down two to ten
hours I think there are dynamics that
that prevent that but we could create a
society with with substantially short
time for everyone and and that would be
a cultured society and so personally I
would like to see the architecture of
our communities and our cities created
for the answer the emergence of
unstructured activities of different
kinds the frivolous topic I'm like right
so what I want is the exact world I'm
creating which is everyone has nearly
unlimited leisure time they're choosing
what to do with their time in the area
of work that they're choosing to do
because it's their passion and their
genius not because they're necessarily
getting paid for it but in the area of
hobbies specifically I would like to be
able to try new things without having to
put in a lot of resources so for
instance if I D like how many people
have bought a guitar and they never
played and sits there for the vast
majority like being able to share in
those resources to say hey I just want a
guitar for six months to know if it's my
thing before I invest it one and having
the ability to create community around
that is there someone who's willing to
sit with me to teach me guitar those
YouTube videos can we sit together in
community and try to play right even
when were when were brand-new giving the
the ability to the individual no matter
how skilled they are in the hobby or in
finding people to do the hobby he the
tools they would need to be able to live
their best leisure life right so whether
that's art whether that sport whether
that's unstructured looking at structure
the unstructured I think how can we like
the kids neat this time on the on the
courts if we're not lucky enough to live
an intentional community where that just
happens naturally and then let
let it emerge that what is needed for a
hoppy hobby is resort is is the
individual but also the resources needed
whether that's the maker spaces or the
stuff that goes into creating it and the
space right the soccer field if you're
playing soccer or a field a ball a space
to do that and to be able to coordinate
that so that you can say hey I want to
play I wanna play soccer tonight right I
don't know who else is game for that and
make it easy to do that even if you
don't know the people to coordinate that
in a way it makes it even easier for the
individual and then I would like a
timeline for myself like a calendar to
know where I'm doing these different
activities and how do I get there and it
does all of the executive functioning
then I think you have to cope with
football by the way you're out number
three so once it's true we're basically
Europe sometimes we hold on to the
American Way because we have Canadian
football and American football that is
you know can I just circle back to what
Rolf was saying about the emerge because
I know it was similar to what I said and
I completely agree with you making room
for to emerge right but they that
also leads to because stuff which
emerges which is good which other people
want to play what other people want to
do as well you know then that then that
spreads and you know if it's a new thing
at some point it gets codified or
instantiated in some way right and and
you know structures develop around it
leagues and competitions and meetings
and festivals and blah blah blah you
know equipment development and all of
this kind of stuff grows up around it so
it's the emergence is really really
important because this is what fuels new
structures and institutions and society
wide endeavors and practices you know
what I mean so that but there does also
need to be it can't be too generative
right if it's too generative nothing
ever sticks you know what I mean nothing
ever gets a foothold and sticks and so
there there there's there's a balance to
be so as always with everything right
there's a balance to be struck here
I think there's a there's a point in
this whole lecture thing there are two
points I would like to make here first
one is you know like there's this Eric
saying that a glad man is a man with a
huge pile of stuff on his desk and happy
man is a pile it's a man with a pile
it's too big for him to handle so so
there's this element of challenge having
a challenge brings satisfaction I think
that if you gave every people all the
opportunities they wanted they would
very quickly find a way to turn it into
a challenge because we need challenges
we need to overcome things because
that's in our nature and then there's
another aspect of that which is hey I
don't know how are you familiar with
spiral dynamics I am yeah yes okay so if
you consider this spiral for instance
the tribal meme now the tribal means
hobby is to conquer other tribes
basically and so there are this well
just I mean mean humorous about it but
but that's the core of there's this
dominant genes that want to spread and I
think it's in nature you know weed they
just spread certain things you know they
just spread people empires they spread
so there is this dynamic in the world
that things want to grow until they hit
a limit of something that can limit it
and I don't see this as a bad thing I
think it's just a natural thing like
like you know water running down a hill
like a water slide it's very forceful
and can be very dangerous if you are
standing in the path but it's not evil
it's just running downhill and and so
it's just with a lot of things I think
these nature things that evolution can
be tough you know are you either you you
fight and you struggle to survive if
you're in the savanna you know it's eat
or be eaten and what is very important
about that is while it is tough on the
individual it's good for the race and so
if you if you sort of make this
distinction you can say there are many
things that we as individual finds are
difficult and tough and hard but if you
take the helicopter and look at it you
will see that it benefits us as a race
as a country
countries that do not face adversity
they grow weak and so and we see it also
with cells cells skin cells for instance
that are stressed with different things
they are actually healthier then skills
skin cells that are unstressed because
they grow weak from not having to resist
these stress so I think this is an
element that is can be easily overlooked
when we are looking for paradise or some
kind of ideal society that an ideal
society only this utopia that's
everybody's happening doesn't exist if
you don't know if you remember the
Matrix movie you know they've if the
first generation of this matrix they
maybe everybody was happy and they just
went nuts so instead they created New
York and this is quite a funny but but
but I think there's a there's a layer of
wisdom to that you know give every
people everyone what they desire and
they will all go nuts
yeah I'm not so that's what anyone was
saying but the the the notion of utopia
gets a lot of bad just going to come
into the defense of the notion of utopia
because I think it gets a lot of lot of
bad-mouthing and you know of course the
notion of utopia where everybody's happy
all the time is absurd and naive I'm not
disagreeing with that at all but having
as an abstract notion be the always
getting better right as a direction
always heading in the direction of
figuring things out so that they're
better and smoother and more efficient
and more more inclusive and so on and so
on and so on right and heading in that
direction knowing that it's not a
destination it's an attractor right that
if you think of utopia as an attractor
and not as a destination then I think it
has real value both in the psyche and as
a driver for social development well so
I don't you broke this is your first
time at a solution Radian and I
mentioned this quite often but this is
this conversation structure is designed
very much in that utopia like that we
don't have to disagree we don't have to
agree on what's wrong with AAA we don't
have to agree on our utopian versions of
game B because they're different and
we're never arriving at
that's why very much like what is your
future and they don't need to match and
then the next section we're about to
move on to is what could we what is a
step forward we could agree on and we
don't even have to agree on that because
it's just about getting 10,000 people
together putting in ten dollars in
creating 100,000 so you could have
parallel ones right if one person wanted
to create football club and one person
wanted to create a golf club and that
was what that was Center Brown that
would you know I mean it'd be different
ten thousand people and like I
personally I'm okay with my life being
made super easy because I can because my
health challenges the environmental
challenges societal challenges are more
than enough challenge for me and so I
think that it's an individual choice to
say what is the level like I was always
like it's life needs to be simple and
easy and fun and it's and Bentley
pointed out what is his word I can never
remember in the moment enjoyable which
for me would be simple and easy and for
someone else would be a challenge right
enjoyable is different for different
people and having a challenge is part of
it we hopefully mostly have stopped
trying to conquer each other in the
nation-state way but we have sports
right I don't play sports but like the
rival ristmas on the field that people
really enjoy is part of our what will we
need people want to be able to do that
so giving them the space to do that but
you know transition to the next part
which is what could we do to help people
find more leisure more enjoyment out of
their life in the existing roads with
10,000 people at $100,000 what could we
create so that you have more leisure
time or you have more access to hobbies
in their leisure time well you know what
I've been working towards those avid a
craft pub idea where people could just
come in and play with stuff and so that
like if I add ten thousand people a
hundred thousand pounds that would be
open rolling by now and it'd be open and
everybody be be able to come in and
there wouldn't be no barriers to entry
and as I said that we stuff get made to
be stuff growing out of that I got asked
to write a day-in-the-life
long as they were watched a job because
I've got a day-in-the-life about seven
yeah just now about the be artists
coming in to be our therapists coming in
like you have a resident DJ to be a
resident artist it's come to be
workshops being held for their artists
there who maybe can't afford the huge
amount on stuff so they could maybe do
an exchange so people who maybe not an
arts and crafts could come in and have a
cup of tea and I oh what you're doing so
the remarks are like conversation within
the local community and the be you know
groups like the the pensioners who maybe
sit on their own at home they could come
for a cup of tea and feel safe and that
another go at stuff if they want is like
Jonathan e-66 and he could teach people
and pray to me and as I said if I had
that money out of it up and running by
now and you don't be invited could you
host 10,000 people you think you could
do it locally and it would be a pilot
so the people who were part of that
network will be able to see the pilot up
and running and stuff and obviously to
be stuff online and we could sort like
him host it so people could you know be
if he can't be there in person he can be
there and see what's going on online and
then if they wanted to do one in their
area then I'd go and help them set up
one because them if we made enough money
with the tea shop and that made yourself
sustainable turned into a sacred economy
and it worked and then any money that
came back into that would go and help
someone in their area set up one what
they wanted to do under their own term
so it wouldn't be me like saying oh
you'd have to do this that either no be
support for them so they can go and
create one and their so to be in their
network of all these little places that
people could go and as I said they'd be
global/local
I'm matching up to two and as I said the
people who couldn't be there could
actually I'd have it set up so people
could see and who's there and you know
me you know because intends online which
watch what everybody's doing just now
and stuff like that as well and then it
being it was also not just so they
crochet knitting sewing I know a lot of
filmmakers and photographers and if it
has a basement I'd have the basement set
up as like a little photography studio
because if you want to hide a studio
it's like 60 quid an hour sometimes and
if you you know just a budding
photographer who doesn't want to be
professional there's nowhere to go so
they've to be able to do that and also
films as well to be sort like film my
cousin over loads of documentary
filmmaking sort of one night they could
come in and show all or what they've
made and there may be inspired other
people to get involved because of the
equipment there and that's what the
money would go for the equipment as well
so so yeah I'd be as up he's a pig and
 if I had that I think I don't know
Eric might be able to remember we
actually came up with something similar
to that we were talking about having a
movie like a movi Club right the people
who make movies having the higher in the
the equipment and I think that having a
instead of a tool library which is good
if your hobby has involved power tools
and such is to have a library of stuff
right be able to use a guitar for six
months right be able to use get wool
right like when you're done your hobby
you know you know you're no longer gonna
do it because what well the thing gesh I
because I've got ties with the local
charity shops I was getting offered
violins guitars you know I mean so we
could take them do them up and the
people who wanted them they wouldn't
have taken over ER do this off and will
their choice so you can learn and are no
loads of music teachers you could come
in and give music lessons or you know I
mean and get musicians to come in a jam
session well all
oh look adonys I love it a wee nitin
session going on you know I mean it'd be
absolutely brilliant just that space and
if you want to come and do paper mushy
sculpture you could just come and do
that you know I mean so well yeah let's
not be happy that would be my ideal and
I said yeah I'm the way things are
moving I'm open to have one of these
places pretty soon a so we might not
need the ten thousand buddy yeah if
things are going here so that just yeah
10,000 people creating a website that
helps them in like come to their hobbies
so something like meet up but meet up
used to be free and now it's like 10
bucks to start something which is too
much of a barrier for some people and
then because of that there's a lot of
stuff that's not on there that could be
and it's not or it's orchestrated some
meetup makes money right it's not
orchestrated so that the person involved
has the best leisure time has the most
happiness and so creating something that
we wanted that is just coordinating the
individuals interests and space-like
thing if you need a physical space to do
your habían with other people right the
community the space and their resources
so that you can try something new you
can offer your hobby to someone else you
can find people who want to do it and
connected with things like that out the
world like when I asked about the ten
thousand how many people can one Cafe
actually host not necessarily at a time
but in a month right how many people are
using it and then that would be
information that would be available for
the next franchisable like st. John yeah
right to be like oh we want one in
Newark okay but just starting one
doesn't make sense do we have the
threshold of people that make it viable
right people who are willing to put in
50 bucks a month if they happen to have
that money and no problem and other
people who are like never gonna put any
money because they can't even afford tea
there and you know I mean like creating
it for the diversity of people involved
but openly and transparently yeah yeah
Oh totally just think about what ralph
was saying about how stressed cells are
often more healthy than ones that don't
get a working out yeah I was just
thinking my lung tissue must be super
healthy all the smoking I've done in my
life you're mute is you're muted Ralph I
can't really say oh you can easily
overstretch them it doesn't really work
like that yeah more than they have the
ability to recover this for this
principle to work but if you compare
unstressed to muddled distress sales the
model rest rest of the healthier all the
same you wanna build muscle you have to
stress them beyond their normal load but
not so much that you
you tear them sort of thing yeah yeah I
get it it's the same sort of notion yeah
yeah so well I think that you know
there's a saying that it's never too
late to have a good childhood and and I
think that this has a lot to do with
with the story we have about things and
to me I think about you know 80 90
percent of the barrier to doing things
that makes happy lies in the people's
mind and the stories they carry around
and there are some deep esoteric reasons
that are related to the history of the
earth and and and stuff which you know
deep and difficult to go into but I find
that you know oftentimes people they
dream about one thing and if they get
that they do something else because the
the the belief that people have about
what they want they do not align with
what they would actually choose in a
given situation so and I think that that
I would like to put my creatives effort
towards creating that which is actually
aligned with people's real needs and
they're they're they're their real
choices if they were given this
opportunity if I had ten thousand people
I would get them into groups of 1,000
and built game be hubs in ten locations
in the world and $100,000 wouldn't work
we would need much more money than that
[Laughter]
maybe we could get a website going for
the hundred thousand and outlined the
vision and see if we can attract some
from capital I think you know in many
ways the word is utopia you know if you
have a cosmic vision and you want to go
to a way to really get a chance to to
challenge the different difficult for us
and all that
earth is a paradise there's so much here
to do and you know it's really really
interesting all the opportunities and we
are facing a massive shift so I mean
whether a place is utopia or not it also
very much depends on your perspective if
you love to raise solutions I think it
seemed this is utopia
did you read those my hobby like I want
more people to get into solution raising
as a hobby
Rolf did you read the article that Ronin
linked yesterday I still have it open
okay yes it's fairly long but it's but
it's quite readable as well written it's
a it's it's it's yeah it's very readable
I mean I would much prefer to have ten
million dollars and a hundred people
actually I have an idea for how we can
raise a billions of dollars actually but
it takes a group of very dedicated
people intelligent and you know what I
would really love is for some dedicated
people that were really you know stand
shoulder to shoulder in a in an in a in
a sort of spacious sense realizing the
the grander purpose and and sort of
getting getting out of our way in the
sense that we all carry a lot of rules
from our upbringing and it is really
hard to shed that baggage and and and we
need to do deep work to do it to really
create something which not just a
replica of game a and and I am that's
also why I'm showing happy I'm enjoying
this community and I think that there's
there's a lot of space for you know
imagining and architecting new
structures that could potentially make a
big difference and then there's also
this sort of a bit of a fluttering
energy where you have people coming in
with very personal lights in this I mean
I remember that growing up I was my
parents they often hosted you know
groups where twenty people get together
and and vision about the future and they
would have all these fantastic visions
and when it came down to the point where
well everybody willing to act anybody
willing to invest something in this even
just a small amount like thousand
dollars or something that most people
were gone maybe there would be one or
two left
and it just taught me that you know most
people they come from a place where they
just decide to talk they're not really
interested in in in in creating and if
you want to create something you have to
find those one or two people and to get
them together because they can make a
change and so that's my what I want I
mean I would rather have hundred people
in ten billion dollars we can we can
have a little help make a make a big
difference I'd like to suggest that
maybe a thousand dollars is not a small
amount of money thousand dollars put
into something now if it was twenty
thousand dollars into something to
create a community that I get to live in
and will be of course that's not you
know a million dollars in some contexts
is nothing a billion dollars in some
context is nothing right I mean it's all
it's all entirely relative but yeah sure
absolutely to a very very very large
number people a thousand dollars is for
money well I mean just but it but even a
hundred dollars I mean a thousand
dollars is how much how much is that in
in in the Western countries it is maybe
two weeks pay or something like that for
a lot of people and I mean if people
cannot put up two weeks pay to realize
their dreams they're basically not
serious at all this is like what is it
60 percent of Americans cannot take
cannot stand a 1000 dollar emergency
right they do not have the what's you
name the buffer you know they don't have
$1,000 buffer a thousand dollars of not
coming in or you know can't work for a
month or whatever it is and yeah they
can't they can't handle it they're in
debt ask these people to pay twenty
dollars a month in in a as a membership
of some kind of organization they wants
you to change that and make it more just
society say no we can't afford that but
they don't have a problem buying
hundreds of thousands of dollars worth
of weapons and guns to and and and
and do all kinds of other things so I
mean I don't buy that it is an economic
problem and system is a mindset problem
and and and and where people are caught
up in all kinds of stories that speak to
them and and really wanted really wanted
to change things I'm seeing
honestly what is going on is it's not
what is happening it's interesting
because we're talking about leisure time
and we've switched over to talking about
game B but if we can create more leisure
time for people right time that they
don't have to be focused on making food
or working to buy food like their when
their Maslow's Bottom hierarchy of needs
is met they have more time for leisure
and they also have more time for
personal growth if they choose to use it
for that right that is part of what we
it's really hard to do that when your
needs aren't met at the base right
whereas to be able to have any kind of
time to meditate to have conversations
you need to have some of those needs met
and I do think that giving people access
to things that bring them happiness
bigger activities that bring them
happiness that are actually resonating
joy in them especially if that's with
other people is a way to feel swear to
say get them to do but get them to do
the personal work without doing the
personal work right it's hard not to
grow if you're interacting with people
on a regular basis um and yet it doesn't
happen so naturally when we're focused
on both the hierarchy of know the bottom
hierarchy and of needs and this idea in
society that like there are endeavors
you're allowed to do and endeavors
you're not allowed to do golf's ok you
know maybe doing Dungeons & Dragons is
considered less of a topic instead of
like what actually do you want to spend
your time doing if you don't need to
worry about your bottom needs what do
you want to spend your time doing and
how can we help you do that 10,000
people getting together and saying
here's what I like to do in my free time
here's what I love to do in my free time
and giving them more access to that if
they don't need access to that right if
they're people who are like I'm good I
have every every person every hobby all
the resources I need they're probably
not the starting 10,000 but 10,000
people getting together and saying
here's how I'd like to spend my free
time right whether we focus on sports or
art or whether it's just open because
humans who generally have multiple
hobbies in those arenas what we could
together to give people both just easier
access in their free time
the other solution raisins are about
giving you more more time right bringing
down your food needs or bringing down
the cost of your food bringing down the
cost of energy so you can have more time
to put into either leisure or
I've just had it I've just had a good
idea and this fits nicely with the scale
at ten thousand hundred thousand dollars
as well so if you could round up ten
thousand people each of them
contributing $10 to the creation of a
festival right where the ten thousand be
and so then you find a piece of land
somewhere and the ten thousand people
all bring right tents and stalls
and food and you know artwork and learn
how to papier-mache and whatever it is
right and and then and for a weekend or
a week or whatever it is I mean a
hundred thousand dollars sounds like a
reasonable amount of money given the
people going to be contributing a huge
amount independently of that right
they're going to be bringing themselves
and their stuff independently about a
hundred thousand dollars for the cleanup
the infrastructure the rental of the
land that kind of thing feels like ish
the right kind of right kind of ballpark
number so that could be that could be a
really nice community building exercise
and an opportunity people to involve
other people in the ten thousand you
know what I mean like a tourist could
get together and and come up with some
kind of thing which they're going to
perform at the festival and and and all
of those sorts of little linkages would
form within the ten thousand in the
pursuit of putting on this festival
you know a year hence something like
that I think that the greeting festival
is a good idea enough need to be so big
but I think one experience that I have
from from you know things like this
festivals and stuff
KUSI's enough like eighty percent of the
people or maybe ninety are singles and
they're really very usually looking for
a mate rather than all this this
creative stuff is like a sideshow to
their real agenda very often and it's
understandable but I'm just saying in
practice if you look at the motive
they're not co-creators of the festival
are they they paid their money to go to
it they're not also co-creators you know
like I'm just pointing to
this these creative endeavors are often
sort of perpendicular sideshow to deepen
eats which are related to connection to
love to feeling purpose and three and
sex and sex yeah actually what's to say
sex a hobby I was wondering we should
mention it I do spend some time in my
leisure time and I join with whom and
how I don't know whether to put sex
under the same umbrella but like because
they like there's so many dating sites
they're not designed with and for us and
seeing if something emerges that could
be done with 10,000 people wanting to be
an activity done regular in one's
letters time for pleasure I think sex
[Laughter]
people maybe you can get those needs met
right it isn't demanding it of someone
else but is creating a map from from the
base like good on that with swipe right
and left culture but everyone complains
about the office it will have its own
solution get 10,000 people together in a
big dark room to see what happens little
bit but there's a TV show where called
dating in the dark I think it's called
where two people get together and have
dinner and complete darkness and they
almost always end up really liking from
what I'm told they almost always end up
really like each other and then yeah
there was I watched a few and it was
funny cuz they're really getting to know
each other but there's people from
different rooms there was one when it
wasn't just dinner the add them so like
swapping partners and stuff and coming
in and different partners so they double
choice so it'd be like blind date but
it'd be in the
as well oh my god it was hilarious
you're not really psycho I never saw
them they were professing love with each
other within and the Serie C cleft eye
so they should they're like who know
nothing to stop you projecting I mean it
just means you project even more onto
this unknown person than you would do if
you could see them is yeah oh god what a
nightmare
what a rude awakening you must be
actually see and meet the actual person
do you wonder how whether those
relationships last
because like my guess is they last
better more than the swipe left right
call tricks we're just like shopping
like you don't look right in an instant
so like no and I think over it is not
what the actually designer is different
than that because everyone complains
about the current hookup culture but
we're not designing things that are any
different that are anyway we'll have it
like I said will have its own solution
raising we're getting down to the last
few minutes usually this time we can go
around that we have our conversation
after that doesn't go around and talk
about what you think is the most
powerful thing we could do in the area
of hobbies so leisure time enjoyment
that would be that we could do with
10,000 people on hundred thousand
dollars well I just say very few people
you can do with so many people it
doesn't mean you need to like the
festival would be one that could happen
right and a website it's it's it's like
how do we together get our leisure needs
right it doesn't mean 10,000 people are
getting together and having a hobby
themselves I thought actually one thing
that would be really cool would be make
a like a big game be Facebook kind of
thing or it's like a social media that
would be tailored to the game be
audience and that might be interesting
if you could get get some some
knowledgeable tech people behind it on
that case as well you would deal with
the tech with the secretary that case
yeah theoretically something will emerge
we're not necess and everyone's focused
on yes that problem social baby way but
how do we actually create it without all
the risk
that is what solution raising there's a
little people out there another working
on exactly that problem I feel it's not
mine to do that one I think the most
powerful thing I would like to see for
10,000 people and $100,000 is a free
Meetup
but more for both online and offline
meetup also doesn't focus on online and
now that everyone's on zoom' it's kind
of weird because you're like in
Vancouver but you're on zoom' it's like
well then why do I need you to be in
Vancouver like having it be just a
coordination of my time my interests
with people and space and resources that
we need and then a dashboard of what I'm
up to in the week and in the month and
what do I want to add so that I have
more leisure not more leisure time at
more happiness in my leisure time well
there's nothing that is really free
because we invest our time and our time
is valuable as well so yeah I mean this
is not what you know you know oftentimes
I prefer paying a little bit for
something knowing that I will waste less
time here because it's well thought out
rather than having something that's
apparently for free but I waste over
time because it's it's fully thought-out
or to Apple content or whatever I don't
want a horrible for a meet-up type thing
isn't it has to be as good as meetup or
I'm not using it right in hosta and
that's part of putting in money you're
putting in $10 so we have access to this
it's not free free but then we could
offer it to the rest of the world for
free so they can come on and find people
because it's all new in or enter
brotherís the more people are involved
in that site the better right the more
ideas and more connections the more
resources there are so you want more
people to come on board you're right
it's not free but it's um we can price
it at the point where it's break-even
not at the point where meetups making
money not at the point where and we can
figure out who pays for it and who
doesn't so what is the problem with
making money I mean I you know if
something doesn't make money it's it's
unhealthy I think I mean like any any
and you know in nature things are the
grow or they decay and if they grow that
means they're having a profit you know
they are managing to sub or suck up
resources and grow and I think that that
that that holding up as an ideal or good
thing that things doesn't make a profit
I think it's is unnatural it's it's it's
a misunderstanding just because the
principle of profit has been
misappropriated and abuse doesn't mean
that it is in itself unsound but I
meetups vision their purpose is to make
money not to make my life better so that
is a very different goal than having us
have the purpose of it having more
leisure time and what how much money do
we need to do that and yes we need to
put money in so it's good that's
different there are different goals and
so it's just under
when all the corporations main purpose
is for profit we can't trust them to do
it they're there to do which is
healthcare transportation anything else
because they're there first and foremost
to make money not to make my life better
they're only making my life better in as
much as they're making profit and I
would like that to be switched not turn
not completely no profit everything's
utopian everything's free completely but
if we have our purpose as the mission
right in this case hobbies in connection
and bring more leisure time that's gonna
be a completely different focus you
can't ignore money and not have any of
it but focusing on the purpose gives you
just more power together I think to an
extent this is also an American thing
you know I mean I mean in in in Europe
and then Michael particularly you know
we have a lot of inches we're definitely
money is not the most important thing
you need to make money to have a sound
business but people don't do it to make
money I know a lot of people who have
businesses because they love to give a
good service they love have happy
clients they're focused on delivering
value and earning money those two things
do not exclude each other I think that
in America you have sometimes a tendency
to have a very harsh system over there
and very little solidarity and very
little safety net and so the the the the
the polarities they gave very hard over
in America often you the contrast is
very hard but I think there's also a
byproduct of your system more than aids
it's sort of a scale I think it's when
when organizations reach a certain size
and that you know the the day to day
minute-to-minute communication exchange
of ideas that goes on within the core
team of people once that breaks apart
because the organization I think that's
that's the point at which the numbers
the accountants the share price all of
this kind of stuff starts to take over
and and and the the earnest pursuit of
doing whatever it is you were doing as
well as you could and making it make
good living doing so that somehow gets
lost at some point and I and I do think
it's a question of scale and I do think
it's almost inevitable because as you
get larger if you don't in if you don't
follow these accounting and business and
financial practices then you get
swallowed up by the big boys who are
doing that you know what I mean and so
you you kind of are thought once you can
reach a certain size you're forced into
that game and certain size you can't
play that gaming I think this is really
really interesting if because this also
points to a solution to a totally
different problem which might be
breaking things up in smaller units by
law and and indirectly generating a lot
of good because I think you're right
very big countries they tend to get
immersed in certain power dynamics that
are definitely not healthy which I don't
like for other reasons but we can't get
into that because of breaking things up
just to break them up when I'm like what
the socialist monopoly but that's a
whole that's just my viewpoint doesn't
in that story having um having so I'm
carrying if you shared what you think is
the most powerful thing we could do with
I mean I know you did the very beginning
but at the end 10,000 people and
$100,000 what do you think is the most
powerful well our board as you kind of
doing it would have the ten thousand so
that's what's gonna happen and things
have started form into place so yeah I'm
really excited and if it comes across
you know once it comes into being I'll
be even more excited because then I love
something to show yes you know I mean
and then so it's like then I'll be able
to sort of like say right okay then and
then take it from there and yeah watch
this space a thank you so I'm going to
wrap up the solution raising portion of
this so that we we can continue on
talking afterwards I will meet next week
for the solution racing at the same time
will be a new topic maybe we'll do
relationships and sex or of like how do
we get those in our lives with 10,000
people 100,000 dollars again you're not
dating like what could that look like if
it wasn't hookup culture or it wasn't
and I'm excited to see what so see
actually end that