so we are in CI is the California
Institute for integral studies and the
reason we're here is that you guys did a
really interesting podcast about
Peterson and yeah I think we've we've
been looking at what Peterson in
particular has got to teach the left or
progressives because there's a lot of
reactivity to Peterson but there's also
I think we we all share some sense that
there are things that progressives need
to learn from Peterson as well and I
think you guys did a really good job in
your podcast of trying to explain what
that was yeah what do you hope to get
you've said yes to this interview what
do you guys hope to get from it well I
think Jesse and I have been trying to
find other friends that we can talk to
about these issues who don't have a sort
of canned response either yay or nay but
who were trying to hold that space of
inquiry and that's why we recorded our
podcast a couple weeks ago because me
and Jesse and our other friend Adam Adam
Robert we were the three that seemed to
be most interested in unpacking what
Peterson has to offer and most I think
feeling that the left needs a bit of
kick in the butt to get things back on
track yeah I would say when Adam and
Matt invited me to do that podcast we
were all someone who similar to the two
of you I believe was starting to track
Peterson and not just Jordan Peterson
what he was saying but also the ripples
he was having a culture the absolute
phenomenon and explosion of attention
that was happening around him in the
media and started kind of watching him
reading him with an open mind my
experience was an open mind like oh I
resonate with that I love always
bringing in Carl Jung and Joseph
Campbell and archetypal dimensions to
his thinking like how he's kind of
kicking the left a little bit and
calling them on some of their
problematic thinking and then watching
this kind of phenomenon from the left or
the far left where people just with
extraordinary levels of
anger and fear and distrust and kind of
the the difference in that experience of
my own and some of our experiences of
Peterson and then watching a lot of
friends who are on the far left
having radically different experience
and perception of who he is and what
he's bringing and was really just
curious about that and it it seems like
similar to some of the stuff you've been
doing with rebel wisdom as a I mean your
training is a psychologist we do a lot
of work with with psychology as well
when there's a huge reactivity to
something there's always something
interesting going on behind it and it
sort of makes you inquire it's like okay
what is what are people reacting to yes
whether you love them or hate them it's
like equal proportion of intensity and
whenever that's there it's what's kind
of called a complex complex is a is a
psychological and I think Jung would say
it like it can be a autonomous and
autonomous complex is it's not part of
the ego it's so deep-rooted and it's my
opinion it's a collective complex in the
collective unconscious it's like
everyone on the right thinks everyone on
the left is a Stalinist and I real
everyone on the right thinks everyone
everyone the left thinks everyone the
right is a Nazi and there's this
polarization happening where people like
like Peterson who are trying to carve
out I would say not non-political but a
kind of a position that's lateral to
politics that's more in the
psychological domain to ask people to
look at themselves as individuals to
question the extent to which they're
projecting their shadow onto the other
which until we can resolve issues on
that level it's gonna be very difficult
to resolve these political disagreements
and so that's one of the main reasons
that I've found myself so interested in
what Peterson is saying he's shifting
the level of the conversation or trying
to at least yeah this is this is the key
point for me this is why I made because
I first found out about him in June last
year and already there was a little bit
of pushback but I'd kind of delves into
the maps of meaning lectures I was like
wow this is there's an epic theory of
everything in here and I could already
tell that people were not seeing that
because they were reacting to the
political stuff so much that I was like
okay
there's a lot of people that I whose
opinions I really value and people I
spend time with who are just completely
blocked by the political and I think you
put your your finger on it that it's not
the right level to criticize him really
and I I partly and we kind of also
criticized him slightly it's like I wish
he would stay away to some degree from
the political stuff because I think what
he's actually offering is far deeper
than that and far more important than
being seen through that political lens
yeah actually what really struck me when
I was listening to your podcast as well
was I think I personally very much went
the way of so I can restart that so what
really struck me when listening to your
podcast was its kind of really genuine
attempt to identify the walls that have
been built up on the Left I kind of find
a way to see from within the left how
how can you kind of disintegrate those
walls walk in the left own and what can
it learn I think I very much
after reading Wilbur's piece Trump in
the first truth world then he talks
about there's two different options
either the left does that and kind of
owns it stuff or we move beyond to
something else and I was like I was like
I don't think the left can do it I want
to move beyond and it was really
refreshing to think you know I hang on
actually maybe there are ways so that's
kind of something I wanted to pose to
you guys what what do you think are some
of the things that need to happen for
those walls to start breaking down hmm
well I mean one of my critiques of
Peterson is that in a in an age when
there's all this resurgent nationalism
and white nationalism and the right is
in power in this country and in the UK
why is Peterson spending so much time
worrying about what the left is gonna do
and the authoritarianism of the left and
I get that on University campuses that
is a problem but the universities aren't
really holding the levers of power
politically the universities don't have
the largest military in the history of
the world Donald Trump does and so but
then I started thinking more well the
Left lost to Donald Trump something is
deeply wrong if if the Democratic Party
who's supposed to be
representing the values of the left
can't be a reality-tv buffoon right not
that Trump is stupid he's a mastermind
at the new media environment that we
live in and so the reason that I think
the left needs to be in dialogue with
someone like it arson is because the
left is not owning its own shadow
and the issue of identity politics is
one that I feel is important in some for
some reasons there are oppressed
populations that need their voice to be
heard but I feel like the the Democratic
Party has shifted the conversation or
tried to entirely in that direction and
left the issue of the nature of the
economy that we're embedded with them
and even Peterson will admit that the
end of levels of inequality we're facing
are dangerously extreme and it's
destabilizing our society and
traditionally it's been the left that
helps to figure out ways to resolve that
and so how do we redistribute that
wealth in a way that's not authoritarian
and oppressive and top-down that's the
kind of question that I think the left
needs to be asking and it probably can't
happen within the Democratic Party
because that's it's a corporate
corporately owned party the Republicans
and the Democrats in this country both
play for the same team as far as I'm
concerned I will say I think that's a
common question I get if I'm speaking
about Jordan Peterson is from these
folks in the intellectual dark web is
people will say why all this critiquing
of the left
I can't we see this rise of fascism this
values of totalitarianism on the right
and that's a really big question is the
danger and the threat from the right is
so immediate is it not more important to
address that and you know critiquing the
left could be a more long-term goal and
agenda but to your point I heard someone
bring us up to Wilbur in a podcast they
did recently and he was saying the
importance of addressing the
dysfunctionality of the left is that we
need a strong healthy left to fight back
against the extreme and the rising of
the far-right without you know with the
corrosiveness that you're seeing on both
the left and the right you
need a strong left like you said like we
wouldn't have Trump if there had been
more of a cohesive healthy you know
democratic or left candidate and party
and so what we're seeing and that's one
of my struggles in my frustration is the
knee-jerk reaction airy response to
Trump people can get so focused on Trump
and so much emotion gets at play and a
part of me is just constantly interested
in bringing it back away from the
symptom and to the underlying condition
it's like what was the soil from which
the phenomenon of Trump you know was
able to place roots and grow and
actualize and materialize there's
something that was already there and it
has something to do with this radical
polarization and unless we on the Left
continue to think about it and do some
self reflective self inquiry about how
did this happen how can we still wrap
our heads around this you know Russia
collusion all that as well but like how
on the Left can we address our part in
the exacerbating and accelerating
polarization that is quite dangerous and
it's what you said earlier about the
shadow of the left I mean that was what
I kind of put into the glitch in the
matrix was and it's my firm conclusion
that Trump is kind of a creation of the
shadow of liberalism this idea of that
the inclusivity that is not actually
inclusive there's very sort of subtle
we're completely open to everyone and
everything from everywhere as long as
they think like us and then this subtle
judging of especially in America where
it's just so polarized there's sort of
subtle assumption that everyone who's
not on the on the coast is racist and
bigoted and even if it's not explicitly
said they pick it up you have a media
and that is of all things that fueled
Trump it seems to me that that fueled
Trump this kind of the hidden shadow of
liberalism judging others for not being
as liberal as then it's sort of the
subtle catch-22 tribalism in some way
yes and it's dangerous if we don't
address it because we have in America
these elections and midterm elections in
November and then we have obviously 2020
I hear more and more people saying to me
holy
 like his Trump gonna win get
reelected and there's a lot of
conversation a part of me is like if the
left doesn't get this message doesn't
understand its shadow
don't worry Hillary's gonna run again
it'll work yeah but it's important
that's where I feel it's important to
speak about the left and the
dysfunctionality as well as address
Trump seems to sent them even crazier
now he's kind of a lightning rod for for
the shadow for that kind of anger and it
just seems to be driving even further as
far looking from the outside yes I mean
two years of Trump have been an
unmitigated disaster and yet in so many
ways he's just a slightly more extreme
version of what the American presidency
has been for decades militaristic you
know pushing other countries around not
caring about the poor immigration has
been you know we weren't putting kids
and cages suffer from their parents as
much as Trump was but like isn't one kid
in a cage already kind of or 15 like
what's the number where it becomes Nazi
versus it's just something that Obama
did and we'll give him a pass for that
mm-hmm so you know all these things that
Trump is being blamed for are just
slightly more extreme versions of what
Obama did what bush did of what Clinton
did so why all of a sudden is that
everything being blamed blamed on Trump
and I will say kind of to a conversation
before this war what I think one of the
problems in today's world is a lack of
capacity to think in complex ways things
are so complex it's complex systems
right and that's why I think the
intellectual dark web is we're talking
about is an important space it's a space
to allow long-form conversations for
people to think out loud and slowly
start to tease apart very complex issues
and we are in dangerous territory when
either on the right or the left we
reduce and simplify and get polarized
because we stop thinking we stop seeing
the complexity and we just say
Republicans are this Democrats or this
and I think in our culture we need more
spaciousness to have these conversations
to think together and as you know being
someone on the left firmly on the left
it's it's unnerving to talk about some
of this and start to get react responded
to reacted to as if we're being read
peeled and going right which is just not
happening it's it's an interesting
phenomena as we're talking I'm kind of
sitting inquiring as to whether there's
such a religiosity on the left and the
right to be fair and you know that's
that's for me where the difficulty comes
in going through the political area
because as soon as you go into a
political realm you're in the
polarization almost by definition and
it's stuck there and I also find when I
have these conversations online with
people they go very differently than
they do in person yeah and I think
that's that's for me is is one of the
important things about moving beyond the
ideas realm into the embodied human
realm because effectively that gives the
opportunity for people to meet as humans
I've had some vicious horrible
conversations online with people that
just seem to build on themselves and I
meet those same people in real life and
it's like hey man I'm sorry let's have a
conversation
yeah it's true I've experienced that to
having sharing meals with conservatives
and like maybe initially we're like whoa
you believe that and like evolution it's
not a thing like and then after a few
minutes because we're there with each
other in person and we we don't want to
dehumanize one another we discover our
humanity and our points of convergence
and really I don't think the vast
majority of of Americans I can't speak
for the UK I don't I don't know the
society as well but the vast majority of
Americans across the political spectrum
if they could sit down and break bread
together and just talk to one another as
human beings would discover how much
they have in common
I'd also say that I mean I grew up on
the left I grew up my parents went to
CND marches and sandy was campaign for
nuclear disarmament in the UK and so so
be part of the Labour Party and I know
this for myself that on the Left we have
this sort of sense of judging people by
their views and it feels like I'm not
sure that the same thing is true on the
right I mean you see quite a few people
commenting I'm far more concerned like I
have a mix of left and right views and
I'm far more kin
turned about talking about my right-wing
views with left-wing people than I am my
left-wing views with right when people
and there is a sense of the left kind of
I think either Brett or Eric talked
about this that who did you talk to
there's a kind of sense of don't talk to
someone over there you'll get cooties
the left that's insulated and you said
religious there is a religiosity of the
left that I'm not sure you see quite as
much on the right I I think pretty to be
honest but a lot of people on the right
I'm more used to having conversations
with people outside their bubble whereas
a lot of people on the Left managed to
exist within that bubble I think the
political psychologist Jonathan Hite who
I've been really enjoying you wrote a
book called the righteous mind why and
how good people are divided by politics
and religion but something he said is
that at least in America and again I
don't know the UK as well but most you
know there's a strong liberal bent for
the higher education systems and
universities so if you're raised in a
liberal environment you learn from the
liberal viewpoint then you go to
university you learn from more liberal
professors and teachers and then you go
on this is what happened to me and a lot
of my friends so we actually never
learned we never really read
conservative thinkers or philosophers
didn't get the like the more
conservative viewpoints while
conservatives you know they would learn
from conservative thinkers and
philosophers or whatnot and then they
would go to university or school and
they would get exposed to more liberal
perspectives so there's an argument that
actually conservatives understand
liberals better than liberals understand
conservatives and that kind of speaks to
some of the advantages that they have in
interaction and some of that
close-minded more echo-chamber on the
left and you can see it with Trump and
how Trump got elected and how wrong we
got that on the left just a radical
disconnect from and I think that should
be a signal to those on the left that we
got we were like our maps were way off
like the water we swim in it's like this
is because as you were saying before why
are we concentrating on the left or whys
Peterson concentrating on the left when
actually the right have the power and I
think my answer to that is that most of
us on the Left do not realize the extent
to which we have created the cultural
answer
and actually the pathology of the left
is now generally the pathology of the
culture and so and I think the response
of the right the authorized of
authoritarianism is mostly a response to
the corruption of that leftist
environment and it's very difficult if
you grow up on the Left where you kind
of you believe that the right is the one
that has all the power and that there
that you're kind of the underdogs to
realize that actually no you're not the
underdogs anymore control Hollywood you
control most of the media control yes
which green I would say the blue church
went from being the underdogs to being
the mainstream not the counterculture
anymore but the main culture a lot of
people are resistant to that because
they're like no no we're still we're
still fighting there's still homophobia
the still racism but still we're still
the underdogs fighting against this
oppressive system and then there's this
desire to find more and more oppression
even when maybe maybe it's it doesn't
exist
there's there's two different levels of
power culturally the left has been
dominant for decades but right at the
same time that that ascendancy happened
for the left in the cultural domain
they're conservatives really took over
politics to the extents of you know
Reagan and Thatcher in the 80s and it
was so bad that like Bill Clinton was
running as a Democrat and then that use
but he was actually more of a Republican
so the Democratic Party has shifted to
the right in the last few decades so
politically the Conservatives have
consolidated power at the federal level
but locally in local politics and state
politics the Democrats have been losing
elections left and right it's the
situation is way worse at these more
local levels of government than it is in
the federal government even right now so
there's yeah culturally the left has
been ascendant but with mass media and
now with this new media landscape over
the last I don't know when you want to
market Trump is the first president to
win because of his because of Twitter
because of social media he doesn't need
to go through those old channels that
frame who he is in a certain way and
what was it the day before the election
I think the New York Times the paper of
record at least until a few years ago
was saying that Hillary had a 90% chance
of winning yeah most of them had 85% 90%
for why
the disconnect has become yeah but in
this new media environment the left it's
a level playing field now but it but
that's what's so interesting about you
know while we're still thinking we're
the underdogs we have to fight against
homophobia and oppression there's so
much why patriarchy at play which is
true you have a lot of other people
thinking the same thing like now the you
know the ruling power is this liberal
bent of rooting out oppression and
identity politics so we have to fight
that massive wave with our underdog
attitude and I was having a conversation
with a couple friends over the 4th of
July I was on the East Coast for a
wedding with some family and some
friends and we're talking about 4th of
July and my friend was like you know
it's crazy looking on Instagram Facebook
I'm seeing and this is in the United
States obviously they're saying I'm
seeing friends at attention you see our
friends some of them are just posting
like wearing black and like totally
boycotting 4th of July it's seen as like
such a Republican you know white power
you know unconscious privilege
celebration of white supremacy
colonialism or something a genocide and
there's so much truth to that and then
my friend was saying but then I'll see
other liberal friends you know post you
know with an American flag and there's
like this disconnect we just had this
interesting conversation about how on
the Left people can be so uncomfortable
claiming any kind of patriotism it's
like we've ceded all patriotism to the
right and we see it we're reacting to
the right who are reacting to us and so
they see us is more and more ungrateful
and kritis always criticizing what's not
good about this how that wasn't right so
then they grab more flags and you know
sing louder and then we see that and
then it polarizes us away but I'm kind
of like I feel like I'm nothing we need
to reclaim and remember that just the
gratitude and the appreciation for this
country and the good things and it's
it's not in any attempt to dismiss the
true genocide the true oppression the
true
patriarchy and white supremacy and race
that does play into this phenomenon that
is America but it feels like that's what
we split and we give things like
authority like loyalty and like sanctity
which are three of the five kind of
moral taste buds as Jonathan hi talks
about it and we just seed it to the
right and the
just stick with harm and fairness and
equality this point you two made about
the religiosity of the left yeah the
right is obviously religious but they
know they're religious the left denies
that it's religious
so it's this different animal and in
some sense it's it's more sinister
because there's a split where for the
left generally people don't have some
traditional form of religious practice
or community so politics starts to take
on that sort of religious fervor you
know so but it's not acknowledged as
such and that becomes ripe for all sorts
of psychological projection and
possession states and a judgment of
others who don't agree with you
which is a fascinating who was it that
said if you if you get rid of God you
start believing in anything
was it something G K Chesterton maybe
like the god-shaped hole that if we as
soon as we get rid of religion we find
something to replace it and on the left
at the moment like diversity equity all
of these things which are useful values
and this is this is why it's such a
complicated thing to unpick it's like
it's not that those values are wrong
those values are right but if you make
them your lodestar if you make them
you're kind of as Peterson would say
you're your ideal it leads to madness
because it cannot be they have to be
they're valuable things to include but
if you don't make your kind of your
archetype or your your ideal individual
sovereignty or empowering the end of
whatever it might be if you make kind of
equity as and we need to have the same
number of these people in this positions
your end goal the kind of social
engineering that you have to get to to
achieve that starts becoming insane as I
think Eric Weinstein said you cannot
build a cosmology on oppression it leads
to madness and I think that's true
makes me think there are yeah there are
very much two layers of the
counterculture against the kind of
dominance of the let's say maybe the
postmodern left in culture so one of
them the political response is is not
the full resolution I think which is
like more the alt-right side sometimes
of kind of you know
showing it up and being aggressive at it
there's another level going on as well
which is what David was just talking
about which is the the lack of any kind
of spiritual meaning I think that's
where Peterson's two levels really play
out because absolutely crucial to re
vivify the world and create meaning and
fill that God shaped hole in some way
but that is a different level to a
counterculture on the political side and
for me it's that the lower level you
know you talked earlier about what's
behind it for me that is the thing
driving so much of it so it's I mean to
be interesting to hear your guys
thoughts on you know you you move in
these circles a lot and have a lot of
friends who who are you know very
passionate about progressive causes do
you feel that they can or want to fill
back dole shaped hole with something
other than political ideology
I mean I'll say absolutely and I think I
love your point about the left not being
aware of its religiosity but I would say
absolutely I've grown up and I've been
really involved in social justice issues
racial justice gender justice involved
with philanthropy and activism on a lot
of different levels actually and that's
how I was raised so I've really been in
this space my whole life and this is the
first time I've actually been
encountering other viewpoints that would
be either more Center more conservative
and I'm actually really it's feeling
really fruitful it's really refreshing
it's really stimulating my thinking it's
hard to see other people not join me in
that and get kind of weirded out what I
freaked out by it which then makes me
even more intrigued but to your point I
and I think this is where kind of
Wilberg can come in I think this is
where Peterson comes in I think this is
where Richard tarnish comes in and CIS
is when you have the kind of scientific
materialism and you have more of a
secular society I experienced the left
is generally not always but generally
more secular and so that God shaped
whole is that when you lose a primal
human impulse or that dimension of human
experience connected to cosmology
mythology meaning making sense making
and you know religiosity
encounter with the numinous tour the
sancti you know sanctity there's
problems with that and post modernity is
a big part of that that Peterson often
rails against but you have I would agree
like a deeper guttural intensity with
which they would hold on to concepts of
social justice around diversity
inclusivity
and you know equity like justice and
it's not that those things are not so
important it's just that when there's
other things missing there's maybe extra
energy and attention and tightness or
dogmatic thinking that can come with
that you know I mean sociologists would
in like after World War Two they talk
about what has come to be called the
secularization thesis that as technology
and the capitalist market spread around
the world religion would decline
precipitously because people wouldn't
need that source of a big dad in the sky
to take care of them because their
material needs would be met that hasn't
happened at all
that's that thesis has now been tossed
out the window and they talk about post
secularity instead in the sociology
departments because religion hasn't gone
away religion is a more powerful force
globally today than it's ever been
before and you know Muslims will be
scrolling through their Twitter feed
before they go pray and it's sort the
the idea that technology and connection
would eliminate religion is false right
exactly and so would you some extra
thing that we could shave off and
replace but the surrogates for religion
I think are often worse than religion so
we're in a situation now where
liberalism which is part of this whole
secularization thesis it's failed and
globalization
has failed we're not one big happy
family you know it wasn't enough that we
would all have our own shelf at the
supermarket to buy our particular kind
of food that we like you know and that
we each got to celebrate our own version
of Christmas and that attempt to
globalize diversity it was like it was
as though it was asking everyone
you can still like wear your costumes
and pray to your pretend God as long as
at the end of the day you accept science
and capitalism as the true sort of
unifier of all people's right and so
this whole this whole approach that our
governments have been working for like
liberalism in a broader sense that even
conservatives would adopt as like the
liberal marketplace the free exchange of
ideas and commerce free trade right
there's a reaction to that
that's brexit that's Trump being elected
here people don't feel like one big
happy family and if you believe in
climate change or not that's part of the
cause of this mass migration that's
gonna be worsening like it's just
getting started and look at the chaos
that's being unleashed this is yeah this
is really the interesting the most
interesting area for me which is what
the rise the Petersons phenomena
signifiers it's like and when I saw
Peterson last June I was I was like okay
this is the message this is the right
message for right now so that that kind
of rise to fame that he's had since has
been of no surprise because if you strip
out all of that meaning from society you
you create this huge void and Peterson
as far as I can tell has one of the most
complete understandings of what that
void looks like of what the the Jungian
idea the the deep archetypes the deep
religious truths that we are embedded in
and and it's fascinating to see what if
this conversation is just getting
started I hope that it is I think you
mentioned tart
Richard honest before he had the most
impact on me I think I read passion of
the Western mind at university and just
thought wow this this guy's really laid
out where we're at and where we're going
and I think this is a really exciting
conversation to get started the
Petersons seems to be pulling out I mean
he's in debates with Sam Harris at the
moment and Sam Harris is kind of like if
you want to say avatar he's kind of the
avatar for this materialist secular
worldview and Peterson is the avatar for
this new a real rising religious
worldview or spiritual worldview so it's
a really fascinating discussion and
there
that concept right of the the pre trans
fallacy so the idea that someone you
could have one person over here talking
about let's say Christianity and
religion and they could be very dogmatic
and fundamentalist in their thinking
they could be very you know missing a
whole lot and some would say okay we're
going to dismiss them then you have
another person over here maybe more akin
to Peterson who's talking about
Christianity religion the Christ
archetype you name it but they would
have moved through like integrated and
read and learned about science and about
so many other fields and they arrived
back in this place around storytelling
myth making and religion but from a
totally different place but someone
standing over here might see them both
is the same bit let's toss them both out
they're both these loony primitive
people have still connected the
superstitious mythological thinking but
I think Peterson is really holding that
of like let's return to religion which
you know from the Dalai Lama to call you
young people say you know if you're in
the West you need to grapple and
integrate this judeo-christian worldview
in paradigm and how do we reclaim that
but from a new level that synthesizes
and integrates science and and all these
different dimensions and I think that's
one of the things I love about Ken
Wilber jean gebser
the Swiss cook historian cultural
historian where they're talking about
different stages of development and
evolution I know there can be a lot of
pushback to Wilber some of these
integral models but that's what's really
helpful for me and understanding
Peterson and making sense of this moment
is like there are truths at every stage
of development and in each worldview
there are different truths they might be
partial truths but anytime any stage
thinks they have the whole truth that's
where there's a problem I think on the
left secular liberalism can believe they
have the truth because they're all about
inclusivity diversity equity now at that
world centric pluralistic stage of
consciousness that's its primary truth
and the other stages don't care about
that it's not on their radar even but
the second they start getting righteous
and thinking everyone needs to and
whoever doesn't join us immediately are
deplorable and racist a misogynist then
they're actually like
King from one level but are actually in
a very dogmatic primal level that's
really no different than other
fundamentalists I think that's a it's a
key point I think it was in a recent
podcast with Wilbur I think that's where
it was a the question of are how many of
the people who are green in integral
terms and the kind of progressive really
are or are they amber or red with a
progressive cloak on it you know that's
a real interesting thing we all have all
these levels within us when we get
scared or maybe most days we're
operating at green but we feel
threatened and we regress down to the
red or the amber you know so it's not
like we're not all of the we all have
all these colors within us and the other
the other thing that came up when you
were speaking is just the importance
again of collective shadow work an
individual shadow work because if my
background is is very much in the in a
psychedelic community as well and I
helped organize a conference and I think
the last two conferences I've given
variations on the same talk which called
the psychedelic shadow which is hey guys
we need to own our shadows because this
isn't all about Jamie we'll put it
really well there's a status in
catharsis and peterson is really
bringing catharsis up like down from the
depths you know and traditionally
communities like the psychedelic
community and probably the new agey
communities as well and you know
progressive communities you know lots of
them they tend to go for the ecstasy and
the kind of the what's the utopia what's
the perfect thing and forget the the
dark shadow work and I think that's part
of what's happening with the Petersons
phenomena as well is that finally it's
like finally we get both and they can
meet in the middle
for me the whole New Age movement was
one massive spiritual bypass and it
seems like it like in any individual the
bypass can only go on for so long before
you have to get down and dirty with your
shadow yeah in some sense we need to
recover the original psychedelic mystery
called the Allison Ian mysteries and in
ancient Greece where from what we can
tell the evidence would suggest that
there was a brew called the Chi kyon
which was it could have been my surgical
forgot fungus that's my hunch that seems
to be the leading theory but the the way
that they would ritually ingest this was
they
reenact the myth of Persephone and go
into the underworld and experience that
cathartic death rebirth experience it
wasn't this escapism that a lot of
psychedelic culture can now tend towards
but we don't have a ritual container
that's culturally sanctioned when elders
were initiated and using it exactly yeah
so my hope is that I feel like
psychedelics just went mainstream a
couple weeks ago when Michael Pollan
published his book how to change your
mind my hope is that as these things
come back into the culture that it won't
be swallowed up by the medical and the
medical industrial complex but that the
culture at large will find ways of
institutionalizing this in a way and in
a ritualized way that's not just a
sterilized kind of you're sick here's
medicine because Pollan Michael Pollan
talks about the betterment of well
people and that psychedelics need to be
it you know included in our culture even
if you're not sick all right so I'm
hopeful about that and incidentally
psychedelics are one place where Sam
Harris and Peterson and seemed to meet I
haven't seen the two of them talk about
that yet but I know they both talk
positively about psychedelics as a
potential source of individual and maybe
collective renewal so that's an area
that I'm interested to see get discussed
more within the intellectual dark web
circles just just briefly you know
what's in it just came to me as you're
saying that a good model for that is is
a good ayahuasca ceremony because it
integrates the pre-modern unashamedly
it's like we are going about as
pre-modern as you can go and we're gonna
have a whole bunch of there's a lot of
sanctity around the ceremony it's it's
you know it has that Ellison Ian mystery
quality and you're not allowed to talk
about it most places because it's not
illegal so it has the you know the
secrecy and there's something ritually
very powerful about that especially the
sanctity because it's what you didn't
get perhaps in the 60s is that kind of
wild kind of abandoned yeah yeah
in the illu scene II and mr. Wright's
are interesting because you weren't
allowed to talk about what happened in
the ceremony and yet they were open to
everyone even slaves so radically
democratic and radically secret at the
same time and by the time of Plato and
soccer
he's like the mystery had been profaned
a little bit the youth of Athens were
mixing the Chi ki on themselves and
having parties and like wandering the
streets causing up havoc but I I will
say just to bring it back to that to
your point about the shadow and Peterson
bringing that right because he's he is
often talking about the suffering and
malevolence in the world and the
malevolence within each of us Carl
Jung's concept that the shadow and the
most dangerous thing is somebody who
hasn't who is not aware of their own
shadow or their own malevolence or
capacity for evil and that's someone
who's radically unintegrated and then
you can't really trust them and say you
know I I work in the prison system doing
men's work it's around emotional
intelligence and healing work working
with trauma and with men who have you
know done profound levels of harm and
violence and we talked about that how
you can't actually trust somebody who
doesn't know their own capacity for that
and so I think about the on a cultural
level what's happening and I wonder like
you know what we talked about the me to
move in our feminism or you talk about
conversations around race and something
I've heard you speak about maybe in that
interview or that documentary about
Peterson the glitch in the matrix is how
when you hear the term masculinity the
first thing you think of is toxicity we
would never think of toxic feminine and
so I'm really interested in reclaiming
like empowered healthy integrated forms
of masculinity and I think in the
conversations on the left it's a
slippery slope down into anyone who's
straight white and male doesn't have a
voice and I'm aware that all four of us
as far as I know I don't know if you're
straight but we're white men and I'm
sure people could look at this
conversation and immediately think okay
forward men are gonna talk about these
issues like I'm not interested or you
know I would hope they'd have an open
mind to hear what we're saying but in
these circles if you try and say
something people will be so quick I've
seen it firsthand people back cry me a
river' like white men you've had all the
power to time for you to sit down and
shut up and listen there's not much
space and any any attempt to speak to
that is seen as just fragility or
reactionary mansplaining but in the work
that I do in the
system it's like one of the core
concepts is that hurt people hurt people
and healed people heal people so for
someone who's experienced tremendous
oppression violence abuse sexual abuse
physical abuse broken homes you know
living on the streets they end up
hurting people killing people and then
they have to do some deep inner work to
understand how they got there and a lot
of time it's like it's normalizing say
when you've been hurt and you don't
integrate that you just put that out on
to other people you hurt others because
you're really wounded and cleaved inside
this is a really key and very difficult
point because there's this kind of myth
on the left of the virtuous oppressed
but this assumption that the oppressed
must be virtuous and it's it's almost
invariably not true
and the the why it's so intractable my
mum had my mom and my dad had a very
interesting divergence on this my they
were both sort of left-wing Guardian
reading which is kind of the left the
left paper in in the UK and my dad kind
of maintained a lot of the sort of
classic cliched left-wing views up until
up until he died pretty much my mum had
a very different experience because she
was teaching in a school in Southampton
a very sort of rundown school and doing
her best and what she found was a lot of
the parents didn't want their kids to
succeed or at least felt very challenged
by their kids succeeding because it
challenged their own sense of the system
stacked against them and so incredibly
difficult situation could have been to
kind of be trying to kind of help these
kids and get them to succeed but when
they'd get the parents in some not all
I'm sure would would actually either
subconsciously or consciously be like
well my kid would never go to university
universities not for the likes of us and
realizing that wow this is so much more
difficult because people actually then
buy into their own narrative about
themselves and narrative about the way
the world is and she found that
incredibly difficult to deal with but it
but it kind of I mean she's she's still
very much on the left it didn't sort of
radicalize her in that way but she had a
much more nuanced understanding about
what the difficulty of the situations
were and I guess we we work with
we'd work with men's work and we work
with kind of helping people shift their
beliefs and that seems to me the only
thing that would work to shift some of
these social problems is really deep
kind of work in terms of shifting what
people's expectations about themselves
are their beliefs about their life it's
it's a real it's much deeper than the
left assumed like if you give people
money or you give people more
opportunities then they'll take them
it's like no people don't believe that
they would be able to take these
opportunities it's so much more deep a
lot of these situations it's
internalized oppression it's more
complex yeah yeah I mean III I think
that's really true and I think it's
important to hold that piece because you
know patriarchy is a really difficult
and complex thing but it's like women
I've seen women they cut like patriarchy
is a state of mind right it's a sum on
some level isn't it about a Liat radical
isolation and alienation and
disconnection and acting in violent ways
to try and get needs met out of a
primitive scarce I mean I'm kind of
being loose with how I'm talking about
it but I've heard I've heard women talk
about yeah women can be patriarchal they
can be extremely you know violent or
aggressive with losing track of the
other no relationality a compassionate
interaction with the other in workplaces
so most of their problems come from
other women other women bosses and I
think there's been surveys that a lot of
women would prefer to have a male Boston
a female boss interesting it's not to
say that there hasn't been tremendous
violence and I think it's important as
we have these conversations I'm trying
to remember to read to talk about and
rename like the reality of men's vicious
and violent oppression of women of white
people's oppression of people of color
the radical inequality and injustice
that still exists today and any attempt
on the left one of the critiques
I heard Jamie wheal talking about what
Peterson is like he uses these kind of
he calls at biological reductionism but
these examples and you know the Pharaohs
in Egypt there was inequality of wealth
and you know there was you know in
nature there's inequality and so this
kind of quickness to call out and he do
good or aspirations on the Left who are
trying to level some playing
and bring some equality and to just call
that out as you know some sliding slope
to genocide too but really named that
there is incredible privilege that the
four of us have in this room that so
many people do not and I'm really
interested in how do we learn more about
that how do we address that how do we
really become allies to women how to
really become allies to people of color
because there is such real suffering and
how do we slow down these conversations
and tease it apart and be able to name
well right now on the left this
conversation is sliding into a way where
I feel like as a white man I'm getting
completely dismissed and I'm and there's
no space for my thoughts on this and
then it becomes you know the the
perpetrated become the perpetrator or
the oppressed it can be oppressor I seen
as Weinstein is good on this where he
talks about either there's two ways that
the social justice narrative plays out
some social social justice activists
want to reverse the oppression and
others want to achieve some form of
equality of opportunity at least and
he's very for good reason worried about
the ones who will reverse the oppression
and it's easy when the mob mentality
breaks out that that's just you know do
you point out the enemy and they are the
new you know go to be slaughtered you
know because that as you're saying if
someone's saying well you cannot speak
do not speak that's that's a reverse
yeah that's that's that's that's not an
equality that's a reverse of this like
now we're on top you're you're below and
it's like hang on this is surely this
isn't the society we're looking to
create I saw a conference I was on
Facebook and a friend was there and it
was in like Joshua Tree and it was a
conference and there was all about I
think gender reconciliation or women and
they had said in the description this
will be only for women's because no man
is allowed to touch the stage for like
three days but men we want men there and
to be listening but no men are allowed
to touch the stage
I mean implied is because men have been
the ones on the stage with all the
microphones but it just it totally
rubbed me the wrong way I'm like you're
saying that feels like a total reversal
and obviously it doesn't feel good for
women or people of color to have been
denied access to the microphones in the
stage
but to then flip it and say we don't
want anyone to touch the stage you just
listen to us
it doesn't seem you wants enough for
helpful yeah it's not a particularly
empowered place to come from either it's
the victim perpetrator cycle and then
also just makes me think of something I
learned in kindergarten which is two
wrongs don't make a right and it's just
very very simply boils down to something
like that
I just wanted to pick up on one thing I
fit I felt some discomfort when you were
talking about the patriarchy as in that
men were oppressing women through
history I mean we thought about this a
lot it's like what what is the
patriarchy so there's obviously some
sense of us all cutting ourselves off
from a sort of direct form of knowing
we've got this kind of very rational
male way of looking at the world but I
I'm not because I I think men have often
sort of see it have generally seen
themselves as providers they've seen
themselves they've shut themselves off
from a part of themselves to go out to
work there's a disposability of men like
all of these things seem to be true at
the same time like I don't and I think
there's a danger of it getting into a
conspiracy theory version of the
patriarchy when we just see it as as one
one yeah one sec suppressing another and
I I think it's really interesting that's
why I think the term patriarchy is so
difficult to kind of to use because
people have different opinions always
and I do think that it that it obscures
the disposability of men it obscures
that the fact that men pretty much self
sacrificed themselves to go out and work
in some pretty horrific it if you're not
the patriarchy patriarchy kind of sucks
even if you're a man no if you're not
the eldest son who inherits all the land
if you're one of the little brothers
patriarchy it kind of sucks
thanks for pretty much everyone yeah
it's true I appreciate that pushback I
think it's for me that discomfort I have
is trying to find this point of like
pushing back on the unhealthy way we use
words like patriarchy then also wanting
to like remind myself I guess of my own
privileged ways if I walk down the
street if I go for a job interview there
may be certain privileges that just
support me and the way they don't
support other people and so it's trying
to like name you know
some of the injustice and that the real
brokenness of some of the systems trying
to support folks who are at the bottom
how to rise up but I also hear you
saying you know it's a good point that
it's problematic to simplify and say
just men against women just white people
and folks of color black people it's
problematic to simplify and it's holding
that subtlety of there are these forces
there are these things that kind of
undeniable as soon as it becomes an
ideology as soon as it becomes a kind of
fixed idea then we're then we're in
trouble it's like hold holding I return
to the point you were talking about
before I think that the the sign of a
mature mine is being able to hold things
that are equally true but contradictory
at the same time and it's a difficult
thing to do because I think I think this
may be links into the fact that we use
language we assign concepts to things
and we are kind of as Vic and Stein
talked about with bewitched by language
we automatically gravitate to a sing
your understanding of everything rather
than being able to hold the fact that
many things are true at the same yeah
and I mean we've we've done a lot of
hating on the intellect internationality
but Ralph Waldo Emerson said once
thinking is the hardest task in the
world thinking is the hardest task in
the world and I find whenever I tend to
get emotional in a political discussion
I kind of regress into an ideological
complex and I speak from a position
that's not really mine I'm sort of it's
the position that I've been steeped to
believe is the good one and I'm not
thinking anymore and so as much as we
might want to critique hyper rationality
and materialism and scientific
reductionism and everything whatever
we're moving into is not going to be
irrational right you know it's gonna
integrate the mind and the intellect and
everything we value in our capacity to
think and the intellectual darkweb so
much of what it's allowing back into the
culture is this slowing down this
opening up of a space of possibility to
think through the options and to say
yeah we have values that are deeply
emotionally rude
that we want to protect and and speak to
but how do we you know we could share
the same values but have different ways
of operationalizing them realizing them
in the world and we could learn a lot
from one another
about how to operationalize like even if
we all think the quality about of
opportunity is a great thing how do we
achieve that the left might have a very
different way of doing it than the right
maybe we need to beta-test a bit and
work with each other to see what works
from each side and then you know
assemble that into something that can
deal with the complexities of the world
that we're living in hmm so yeah just a
little plug for thinking yeah want to
bring back to something you said before
about the father archetype because I
think that there's a big picture I think
that speaks to the charge at Peterson is
bringing more than anything else and
possibly speaks to a deeper resolution
of what he's bringing as well because I
think I really feel that what he's
bringing is this is this kind of
structure this father archetype but a
lot of the the deep history of Western
culture probably up until and including
the 60s because Young is a big part of
it as well like it he's he's channeling
this deep story of Western culture and
by definition there is a big sort of
patriarchal element to that to that
story
and I think there probably is a deeper
resolution of if he's if he's bringing
back the divine masculine and I think we
have lost a lot of the divine masculine
in in the last 30 years there is a sort
of well anything goes do whatever you
want
which doesn't actually speak we need
structure we need discipline we need
self responsibility and this is that his
body's bringing back but I do think that
he there is probably a deeper resolution
to the energy that he's bringing and
that is the feminine as well there is
some sort of divine feminine energy that
needs to be brought back and what if the
crisis that we're seeing at the moment
is and I believe it is a kind of male
crisis of having shut ourselves off from
intuition having shut ourselves off from
sort of more direct ways of knowing it's
the ultra rationalist materialist
secular paradigm of rationality that
seems to be breaking down and which
which is a very exciting time if if if
there's a chance for something new to be
born from it
and I know that Ritter tarnis in
particular was talked about this as a as
a kind of shift in consciousness that's
likely to happen when he kind of gave
some predictions for it's kind of it's
kind of it feels like this is the time
that the tarnis and other people have
been talking about probably since the
60s that this rationality space is going
to break down and then something new
will need to be born and I think part of
that is reopening to the direct
intuitive feminine for want of a better
word ways of knowing I mean this this
touches on a number of things one is
right men also suffer under a patriarchy
this mental Mentalist intellectual
disenchanted world view of alienation
and isolation that that's the endless
hunger that drives us to you know try
and control violently and and and take
all for ourselves but also we're talking
about jean gebser and like the the
breakdown between stages and levels of
consciousness and the end of this mental
stage and into this next but I think
it's absolutely true we're trying to
find as a culture what's healthy
masculine what's the healthy father
energy what's healthy feminine what's
healthy mother or female energy or the
mother energy and I I was reading this
article by Michael Aaron caimans and he
was saying how Peterson is this
lightning rod because he's carrying this
father you know massive energy but it's
he was saying that young saw it in the
50s or the 60s I guess the 50s when the
Catholic Church officially made it
Catholic doctrine the assumption of the
Virgin Mary and he said that's it that's
finally the realizing of the feminine of
the Divine Feminine it kind of
institutionally being recognized he also
saw the emergence of World War one and
World War two is Wootton or Dionysus
energy this repressed kind of feminine
chaos Dionysian archetypal energy that
God who'd been repressed for thousands
of years under Christianity emerging but
it was also chaotic and violent how
emerged but then through the 60s and up
until now the last hundred years
starting in the 30s I guess it's been
this reassertion of the Divine Feminine
or the
mother energy but that somehow it might
also be slippery and turning into that
devouring mother more pathological and
so it's this kind of awkward thing where
especially as men if we're trying to say
oh now it's the devouring mother and
calling out that the unhealthy
pathological aspect there's no term of
toxic femininity yet but of course how
weird is it that there's toxic
masculinity but there's no toxic
femininity now yeah young is an
interesting figure in this sense he's
certainly the wise old man but all of
the analysts most of the analysts around
him were women
you know Tony Wolfe and Marilla Levon
France and so he's catalyzing this sense
of empowerment of the women around him
and the assumption of Mary was something
he pointed to was that Lisa the
beginning of the rise of the feminine
and he critiqued Christianity and the
Trinity in particular for having these
three dudes at the seat of power of the
universe and he thought that 3 is an
unstable number we need the quarter
natee and the fourth he identified with
the feminine and that our culture is our
judeo-christian culture in the West is
seeking some more stable psychological
orientation that was the feeling
function the feeling function exactly
and there's one issue I want to it's a
bone I want to been wanting to pick with
Peterson for a while which is this very
literalist identification of in
mythology of the feminine with chaos in
the masculine order I'm not um you know
mythology expert or anything but if you
think about Athena or any Queen
archetype these aren't chaotic goddesses
and on the on the male side if you think
of Dionysus
you mentioned the trickster like there
are plenty of examples of male deities
and female deities that break that easy
identification of masculine with order
and feminine with chaos just wanted to
point that out it's interesting about I
was literally thinking about that point
right before you said it and it's maybe
another way to see it was I'm thinking
as soon as you said Yong Yong was a big
fan of the Gnostics who I'm a big fan of
and there is in their mythos there is a
sense of the feminine not as chaos so
much as undifferentiated and then they
have they have Sofia and Cristo
and Christos the role Christos plays is
similar to the role of the Green Man in
Celtic mythology it's kind of puts every
species in its niche and creates order
in the not chaos so much as the
undifferentiated and that for me is part
of what's going on with Peterson and
just with the you know the the shift
away from postmodern hyper relativism is
that the natural response to that is to
play some order in it and to put things
in to their niches so to speak and part
of that is hierarchy as part of that is
breaking things down and saying okay we
need to accept this and this from
biology we need to look at this and this
and it's still ongoing that's the thing
so it is user work chaotic it's still a
bit chaotic because these are very
complex things and I feel like it's the
yeah it's two things coming together but
hopefully it gets to somewhere where
there's a deeper resolution sacred
marriage I mean that's how that's how
Richard harness talks about it in the
epilogue the passion of the Western mind
is that you know clearly the masculine
rational consciousness has been driving
the Western ego and Western culture to
this point and all the while alienating
itself from the feminine mm-hm
and we just can't continue moving
forward in that way for so many reasons
culturally ecologically often the earth
or Gaia's identified as the feminine and
you know some feminists have a problem
with that and I get that but there's a
need to reintegrate the human being
especially in its in its hyper masculine
eyes d'huez turn form with the broader
community of life on this planet and if
if that's not the need for a sacred
marriage like I don't know what it is
and the crisis that we're facing right
now is I don't know what whether to call
it one crisis or multiple crises
it's a meta crisis that is social
political economic ecological
gender-based racial but it's all part
it's the diesels they seem like symptoms
of some wonder lying archetypal what's
going on so you're
point about some deep you know I don't
know what to call it spiritual religious
meaning based problem I mean well
obviously you know Wilbur would say you
know or Deb's sir we're moving beyond
and through in a natural it's important
sometimes Peterson feels reactionary I
post modernity and all this stuff
scientific materialism is a prolly huge
mistake and we need to kind of go
backwards I'm not going to be saying we
have to go backwards but it's a mistake
as opposed to Wilbur he says no that's a
natural stage it's like a adolescent
child you know you go through you're
right but we can't we have to go through
it there's no way out but through and so
how do we reclaim a profound relatedness
and relationality to the cosmos to the
planet to each other to the divine you
know when you talk about the meta-crisis
it's like fractally showing up in every
field in every way
you