[Music]
[Music]
great challenge of this age which he saw
common from a mile away and articulated
which is the machine the part the threat
of the threat of materialism and
materialism and machine are basically
synonyms yeah the reason why materialism
and machines are synonyms is because
materialist science establishes theories
based on the fact that it's theories are
are help us in in all things predictable
in other words if if we cannot use a
scientific theory to help us predict
something then it is of no use it has so
predictability and scientific modern
scientific theory materialist science
are therefore an identity if you see
what I'm saying so for example you know
if if if the the the the theory that
smoking is a is a is a known cause of
cancer basically means that if you're a
heavy smoker it is a good predictor that
you that that you have a high
probability of you know developing
cancer lung cancer and that's so in
other words there's a all scientific
theories are really about predictability
and causation and there without basic
causation or causation would be another
way of own causation or exactly now if
you can establish predictability then
you can render it onto a machine and in
other words predictability and mechanism
are synonyms as well so we're
establishing these identities here as
well as cogsa causation for that matter
causation is a difficult term it's a
term I deliberately avoid because of my
philosophical encounter with the
critique of cars through David Hume
years ago and David Hume
there's a I mean they're people who
revisit debut maybe he has a complex
treatment of causation but he basically
says be damn careful he says causation
is a really difficult thing he says you
know if I you know if I take this class
now I just flicked that with my finger
four times and it made a ring it made a
ding and I'll keep licking my finger and
it'll ding ding ding ding ding ding ding
that's very predictable mm-hmm yeah
maybe David Hume says that does not mean
that every single time you flick your
finger it'll ding therefore there's a
there's a separation there's a causal
separation between my flicking of the
finger on that and the ding it my
flicking of the finger does not cause
the ding it doesn't he's what he's
critiquing causation here I'm simply
saying that that there's a you know you
can establish a sequence and you can
maybe establish probabilities based on a
thousand or ten thousand or a million
tests but basically you if you couldn't
say it for a million times that I
flicked my finger it dinged but it so in
other words you're making these
sequential observations I make my finger
anything I flip my finger today I did it
a thousand times and it ain't but it
doesn't mean that my finger causes the
glass to ding so causation is is is a
reduction of some kind of you're saying
or it just produces the complexity and
and and tries to make something reify
something that that we can't necessarily
reify or something like that well
basically um was a an apparent an
empiricist which means that he he he he
he he he wanted to get away from all
these notions of a priori and
metaphysics and he wanted us to become
extremely empirical and he's saying what
we read our observing here is not
causation we're observing a sequence in
which the flicking of the finger happens
and then the ding happens we cannot
establish causation that we do not have
the empirical power to do so that's what
he's saying we that we don't have the we
don't have empirical access to causation
so in other words causation gets chucked
out the window for empiricists that
doesn't mean doesn't mean that it didn't
have that now I mean the reason why I
got really interested now I was taught
several times in university about this
and took it very seriously and it
basically it it it's it's a liberator
because you stop thinking you stop
thinking about first of all it's a
critique of blame you know Renee's right
as you begin to you begin this this
causation things but you begin to
recognize that it's extremely
problematic and in fact there may well
be correlations between certain behavior
and other behavior that follows but to
establish a causal link is basically
impossible so you what you what you do
is you abandon that project so what are
you putting in its place let's say in a
more concrete situation like a court of
law or something good question it's a
it's a it's a it basically basically if
the the Damien's inside constituted a
crisis in intellectual culture in the
Western world and and some people think
that we have not recovered from it like
there's some people think that can't
like Kant said that David Humes critique
of Khan's Asian this is a famous famous
statement in western intellectual it
woke him from his dogmatic slumbers
that's that's a very famous Kantian that
you meant that particular insight and
then it got him going okay it quickened
quickened his mind and and so Kant gives
you a lot of credit for getting going
and and so cants whole notion of
transcendental logic is a product is is
inspired I think by Humes skeptical
notion of causation so we don't know
anything it's it's another it's another
it's a great insight into telling us
that we don't know but but
we do nonetheless posit all kinds of
things and we posit a whole array of
possible knowing and it's usually based
on predictability so we and so
so if we can predict something based on
a thousand tests or 10,000 tests or a
million tests then we're into something
which is relatively secure in our realm
of possible knowing okay I see yeah and
not only that is if we're predicting
then we're reducing our sense of knowing
to the to a machine
yeah and in other words science is none
other than a machine mm-hmm the entire
project of science so it's it's sort of
it's sort of the it's sort of the best
we can get in terms of knowing but it's
not an absolute that what am I getting
that right you say it's the best we can
get it's the best we can get a
scientific no yes I mean I mean it's
it's an approximate approximate truth
but it's not an absolute knowing well I
mean the human imagination is another
form of knowing this is this is the
whole thing they're all they're all
kinds of categories of knowing but in
terms of really knowing about the world
about the material world then then we we
do soak your testing and throughput
through establishing brought various
forms of predictability based on tests
but we don't we don't say this cause of
this you know and and we I mean we we do
say it in other words it's not that it's
not that the word causation has been
completely chucked out and vendor kegel
and insight you know and it it just
really means that we changed the meaning
of it yeah it doesn't really mean that
sort of it doesn't have that that deep
integral you know even though it's a
convenient it's a convenient notion but
but not not a fully true notion or
something so exactly something like that
it's it's a and it's a very important
thing to know because one day a we think
you're highly pretty cool and then it
does what you predict doesn't happen and
so and your mind is way more flexible if
you know this little tiny bit of
information otherwise you're very
confused and it's very common it's very
common in image in science and medical
science especially they have these you
know highly predictable results which
don't don't turn out and the reason this
is all kinds of variables reserved
there's all kinds of stuff I work
this is a I mean this is one of the
reasons why I'm so skeptical of things
like anthropogenic climate change there
there's a million burials and they in
the end they're going on like it they
like they know what to talk about yeah
so anyway you cancel I heard something
about even if considering the
environment as a system I think that was
um David Kelly is is kind of trying to
predict it as really wildly you know
speculative or well exactly so so in
other words modern science is important
only it put well here's another way put
it modern science is real only to the
extent to the extent that it perceives
the Machine of reality the the the the
the it only to the extent that it that
it that it grass the dimension of
reality which is mechanistic and and if
you're gonna draw but but to draw the
conclusion that reality is completely
mechanistic is false
mmm-hmm and therefore science is
incomplete science does not provide a
full I think bird I mean I haven't
listened holla birds I don't understand
bits of it but he seems to grant machine
a little bit more cred upload it is
hugely powerful Steiner says we a signer
says in fact we are mostly machine yeah
but but he says the other the part of us
that which is not machine is
all-important so we need to we need to
pay very close attention to that and II
he is very worried that we will be we
will allow ourselves to be subsumed by
the machine he thinks the machine is
actually self conscious spirit this is
where Steiner becomes this is where
Steiner becomes controversial in today's
age you know and this is why very few
people you know you're not gonna get an
academic in a university seriously
calling himself a Stein Arian because he
talks about spirits he's talks about
this he spends all his time talking
about spirits yeah and so the the the
great spirit of the Machine is one
particular there's one unifying spirit
of the machine and the name of that
spirit is arimin for for for Steiner
mmm-hmm
it's an old old name I don't know what
its history is lots of people have
interpreted Steiner in a mythological
way it can be it can be interpreted
mythologically but the more you spend
time in it the more you realize he's not
Thai he's not speaking much she's really
speaking about spirits it's not yes so
this arimin is a it's a it's a difficult
thing to explain because for one we are
extremely dependent on aramid and he is
of enormous benefit to us but he in many
ways equates arimin with today's day and
age with evil you know basically and
he's basically says that we it is kind
of this even though it is the great
spirit of benefit is a great spirit of
beneficence provided that we have the
right attitude towards it the right
approach towards it towards him I think
he refers an InMail it's a hate it's a
he for whatever reason and another
machine
he's we're talking about yeah arimin is
is a would appear it seems like in Tom
Schneider I think so yeah and I mean
this is where things get weird Thunder
so like your reason your reason in Blake
or something isn't it your I think your
oars in and make is simply the the
spirit of reason yours and if I
understood Frey correctly yours in you
know the Faculty of reason in humanities
pretty it's pretty weak faculty is it
never isn't there some kind of machine
god or machine spirit and in Blake that
talked about I could be wrong about
could be it could be okay this probably
doesn't talk about him a lot but there
are many many there are many many names
of different characters in in Blake the
two most important for at least for fry
Arlo's and ork I've listened to a lot of
what you have in your essays it's my
perception that you talked a lot about
about orc orc is like the flow for
no I interpreted that as there's a lot
of work in flow and flow normally has to
do with it has to do with rising sending
audiology there's this great sense of
purpose everybody's getting together you
know we gotta save the environment and
got weather the Greek word Kairos which
means like it means a turning point and
it also means the crisis and it also
means time so it's like the Greeks have
two words for time Chronos which is
linear time and Kairos which means it
means three things it means time it
means a crisis and it means opportunity
and turning point so it was that I think
was the theologian Paul Tillich II he
talked about these crises and turning
points in in society which are which are
crisis is an opportunity simultaneously
yeah which is related to but the time or
the Geist or the you know whatever you
want to call it the spirit of the time
or them yes / - the time is probably
what Orcas uh-huh yeah the time and
everybody is interested in everybody's
onboard Lohse is basically the
individual who has this drive to achieve
something in a manner he's listening to
what ork and he's paying attention to
yours and he's paying attention to all
of them there's a bunch of other
different characters to the names of
which you can't remember but he is a
he's kind of a loner any and he's he's
keep carving out his own vision on his
own and nose is more important than work
it's kind of kind of what your reader
sins about what a work is also important
work is very important and so there's
there's these great waves of exciting
spirits for the signs if you will which
possess us and take take take and we're
caught up in these debates and stuff and
they sort of enliven us but nonetheless
they always they always pass yeah the
vision of the individual who's simply
complete you know bit by bit honing a
whatever it is he's he or she is doing
is that's the work of loss and the loss
is in play in Blake blacks
so we and so there's a kind of a machine
it's like I mentioned it looks so you
asked me about the spirit of the machine
and I don't know who the spirit of the
machine is in Blake that's that's a
great good question
we should go and find out anyway the the
spirit of the machine is almost like it
almost like replaces the slave but at
the same time is a great risk of
enslaving us that's all right yeah
and so to replace the slave is and to
all replaced all dimensions of
enslavement in us toil you know under
what we consider to be just toil is a
wonderful liberation but we need to have
the right attitude towards this spirit
in order to to to Oh to overcome being
enslaved and and it does everything you
can it has it is amazingly intelligent
well amazingly intelligent time
enslaving us right so so I've been maybe
maybe an important thing is to
distinguish between human intelligence
and machine intelligence at this point
well this is where a fry this is where
Steiner really gets interesting and this
like humanism it expands it's it's
really difficult but at the same time a
very simple argument he says there's
another spirit which he calls Lucifer so
Lucifer is a fascinating spirit and of
course we in our sort of lame lay
Western culture think of Lucifer's just
the devil but Lucifer's account for
persona is not is not that way Lucifer
is first of all was necessary for humans
to have freedom so Lucifer's the spirit
of free choice that's one thing
Lucifer's and new suffer I understand to
be the spirit of ideology and its many
ways to the orc that we just spoke up
and Blake that's very interesting
yeah and and any and Steiner says that
arimin and Lucifer the spirit of the
Machine and this
and the spirit of Audiology I have a
kind of a devil pact and so what happens
is that our technical world changes and
it stirs up a an ideological at like you
know there's a kind of restoring there's
a relationship between you can never
really fully link or link up the
relationship between them for example I
believe right now one of the reasons why
this identity politics is going mad is
simply because there's a lot of fear
about employment in the future and about
by finding place and so people are
creating this bizarre identity place but
the reason why we're fine we're having
trouble finding a place is because of
the power of technology technology is
replacing all of our work and therefore
we don't we don't have a sense of
belonging connected to our work anymore
so technology created this great
liberation at the same time we're deeply
worried about it so we created there's
counter ideologies and then what what
happens is there's this devil pact where
when one is when one is asleep and and
run out of run out of steam the other
one is going mad the ideology you know
biological part of us is going yet and
then detect a lot technical projects
over so the internet is it is an amazing
confusing you know whirlwind chaotic
whirlwind in our lives and there's this
ideological response to it and you go
back in time go back to 1950s and when
the car was that what became this great
new technical thing well all of a sudden
all these new roads had build these
highways traffic you know pollution and
this is missus aromatic aromatic chaos
at work and then you have these other
ideological responses like the hippies
that's a big ideological reaction so you
have this devil pact and there they
never agree and and humans are forever
lost in this devil impact between
ideologies and the Machine this is fine
know what how do you how do you get out
of that what's the way out
yeah Steiner Steiner Steiners a
Trinitarian and his third chief
[Music]
uh first is what he calls the Christ
beam now Christ being gotta be careful
about this here now because you know the
Buddha being and Zarathustra and all of
these these are all very much in cahoots
with the Christ being in other words
they're all on the same team it's not
like you know if this is not Steiners
not in this he's not in this great
comparison and including the you know
the aristotelian were there at the Arab
world the his he talked has in North not
to say about the Arab influence on the
Western on the West it's most
fascinating it's kind of for me right it
constitutes a reconciliation in my mind
with Islam what he has to say what he
has to say about the Arabs because he
they tried they split for four hundred
years they were trying to take over
Europe and they failed right so they
were constantly invading but that
constituted a very important cultural
influence and we may be and they brought
her settle back into the into the
hairstyle is usually important yeah and
the more the presence of the Moors in
Spain and way more advanced than we were
at the time and all the sky and stoner
has let's say about over but anyway so
the christ being stands in the middle in
between these Lucifer is this larger and
larger than life one here's Steiners
definition of what Lucifer means he says
he says if you were to take the most
beautiful works of art the absolute most
sublime works of art yeah and you were
to have one show before you and then
another appear before you a little while
later and then this carried on forever
mm-hmm this is the spirit of Lucifer in
other words Lucifer is bound up with the
Arts is it's kind of it's coming I think
of it's like gay culture like totally
Lucifer right you got to spend time on
in Steiner to understand what he means
by Lucifer Lucifer is a necessary spirit
it brings us freedom the ermine is a
necessary spirit that brings
technical life brings us yeah freedom
from slavery and other things so it's
not some kind of stupid banal anti anti
good versus evil or anti ecology or any
no no no no no absolutely not and he so
the Christ spirit stands in between and
he he made a fate you should look it up
look up when we finished the interview
look up at Google Google Image Steiner
loose for an airman sculpture something
like that and it'll show up basically
there's the Lucifer's larger than life
you look as high as his hand up he's
like he's holding it toward her I forget
and I was like he's holding a torch or
something he's he's larger than life
he's he's like Stalin or something he's
like enormous yeah and a Nariman is
almost like a fetus in down and this and
and he's buried he's underground he's
hidden doesn't want to beat doesn't want
to be known doesn't want to be
recognized so the Lucifer is this self
inflating exaggerated sense of self and
the airman even though at the moment
he's probably the most powerful force is
part of his power is to never take
credit to be invisible to never to never
be exposed of it down underground and so
what what the Christ is doing is
reaching up its compassion for both
basically reaching up so as to to gently
bring Lucifer down and reaching down to
Airmen to bring them up so there's a a
necessary it's a it's a very tender what
is what
Steiners saying about this is it is an
extremely tender approach of they both
have to be loved in a manner in which
they cannot control you know it's very
beautiful yeah yeah and it's fats it's
fantastic Dioner credits his
clairvoyance eats not learning how to
read be until use about 12 yeah and the
reason it's kind of well I mean I've
been thinking about this lot lately
reading is I mean I think about I've
been trying to tie in Gerard with
Steiner so human language is
is something that humans own but it is
also something distinctly and and we are
gradually spiritualizing it but it's
also something distinctly non-spiritual
it's it's you can't get more materialist
it's not for nothing that you know or
Gerard calls it the the single victim
mechanism it's it's really a machine and
they're making him the making of
language was this cyclical machine and
so there's something about it which is
this raw totally godless thing and and
and and we are in this process of making
it God what's not us to say about this
Christ phenomenon mediating Fishburne
Airmen is absolutely fascinating in the
more you it sexy it's kind of an in some
respects it's an infinite journey into
this because the the the meaning of the
word Christ is you never stop learning
about and and it's a it's it's the
reason why this is so enormous ly
difficult is because it is the it's
actually well it's this is related to
you believe it's in your idea and birds
idea to that we have to create God it's
it's actually enormous ly difficult for
the spiritual world to reconcile with
the material and and and and star has
not say about this there's in other
words there's like a war in the in the
heavens and and and we we are players
but it's not all isn't definitely not
all our fault you know but but we are
definitely players and the better and
the better we do the better it is the
better we perform the better that you
know it has enormous implications in in
the entire spiritual world and our task
is to spiritualize materialism right now
that's our task and it's a quite
understand any and he says it's an
enormous ly difficult one and he is his
true what he has to say
so all bullets now the reason why
Christianity's I'm working cuz it all
blows down so he talks about this all
the time
Steiner seems to be and this is based on
his clairvoyance II in other words
there's such a thing as going back and
finding out exactly what happened this
exists this reality exists so as some of
them can say so what happened to
Nietzsche in his in the estate in some
I'm on this day you know something
happened what happened and someone can
actually a clairvoyant if he has the
powers can go back and and and find out
I mean every every single detail
according to Steiner is actually
recorded in the spiritual world and you
can you can access this it's not excuse
you know that this is what's so this
stuff is this is crazy this is too crazy
for the average so he can he can find
stuff out right I mean it's pretty it's
pretty nuts he says he says well he knew
Nietzsche he met he knew him person
mm-hmm that's another story he didn't he
says the last two books of Nietzsche and
I'm digressing here now but the last two
books of Nietzsche now his mom was
getting people then are entirely the
works of arimin mmm-hmm a homo was the
name of one and the other is fourth name
yeah actually home was a weird book yeah
anyway so for me to talk about I'm still
reticent I'm still sort of I have this
more of a materialist obsession using
Gerard to access to really get to really
bring the Metis ISM era or the
understanding of a meta system and the
understanding is singing about single
victim mechanism right deep down into
materialism so that we can understand
that it is this insight that gives us
the power to be materialists in other
words materialism is the gift it's a
spirit given to us by Christianity
that's that's my Girardi and argument
and and but that's an extremely it's an
absolutely great it's a crazy
responsibility which is all too easy to
fail you know and we are failing it it's
it's a and in other words we need we
need extra help in in managing this this
great way of a materialism mm-hmm and
the best extra help we can get is this
attachment that Gerard has so on my
tendency is to leave Snyder behind leave
that as my little esoteric project what
I get when I go on about Sherrod it is
related to what Steiner Steiner says his
term for the Christian event the the
mistrial and death and resurrection of
Jesus is a he calls it the mystery at
Golgotha or the mystery of Gog Gotha
that's he always uses that term he's not
very poetic he has these terms of use
and he just uses them all the time
there's a very key point about our age
the reason why the cross no longer has
any cultural import with us the reason
why it's fading rapidly as something
that has any resonance is because we no
longer lead that's the reason and the
reason why the Blessed Virgin icon no
longer carries weight with us is because
we eradicate a child mortality so these
two these two are actually very closely
linked Christianity includes its its own
death or something something like that
there's something like that yeah
something I got going on and and at the
same time these are arguably arguably a
weak word I would be I'd like to find a
stronger word these are convincingly
these two events are convincingly the
greatest achievements of humanity the
eradication of child mortality and and
prior to that the stopping or the
banning or the villain of the term would
be for of lynching of and of collective
murder and
these these a these are humanity's
greatest achievements to them your
formulation our Gerard is that what the
conclusion you've come up to come up
that there are humanity's greatest
achievements yeah oh that's mine
my conclusion yeah yeah no well that's
what I mean I mean he doesn't say
anything about child mortality I've
gotten but it's it's Jordan Pederson who
inspired me to think about child
mortality much more deeply in his in the
biblical lecture in brings urgent iconic
talks about it yeah and then I realized
just what that seems to be an amazing
thought it just makes total sense right
yeah yeah these are this and and at the
same time these they these two
achievements kill the religious impulse
mm-hmm and and then we are at risk of we
so we're caught in this cycle of
forgetting why how and why we we did
this and and how how how we stopped at
lynching and how we eradicated child
mortality these are the ultimate
questions and and and it's it's kind of
a you know the they they there's a sense
in which solving a great problem creates
a great creates another great problem so
you when you the minute you stop
lynching is the minute you have you have
released yourself from you have nuclear
bomb suddenly maybe I don't know yeah
yeah or the minute you stop the minute
you run out of ketchup mentality is a
minute is the minute that population
became a huge issue overpopulation right
there's it's the exact same problem and
so an area are now completely you know
cotton throes of population problems but
let's not you know and this in at the
you know at the same time to go back in
time and wish to not eradicate all these
kids just they it's not is inconceivable
right so so basically that to me is is
real argument about it's kind of it's
like the new it's the new crux it's the
new cross that we have to bear we
Westerners have to bury we have to
reflect on those two things and we if we
don't then we will never understand
ourselves with those are the two most
important things to reflect upon the
stopping of lynching and the eradication
of child mortality and then we will
return to to those symbols I I mean not
that I believe that those symbols will
be important again in 50 or on a year's
time and not that I think it's important
either but that we you know we have to
arrive at a deeper level of
understanding so that we can a deeper
under level of understanding of those
symbols yeah yeah something like that
hmm and so this is kind of the crisis
we're at the this is the questions of
Western identity right there in a
nutshell and so the other words there's
like a dyad the cross and the end the
Virgin the person icon they constitute a
diet and this is the West it is the West
moving period and it's it's responsible
for the development of machines and you
know they're in all these cures and it's
responsible for all kinds of wonderful
things that we have and all kinds of
horrible things that we have thinking
about I've been thinking about the
symbol of the cross the Christian cross
and contrasting with the symbol of you
know symbol of let's say of tourism
which is very it's a secret symbol right
and it looks like a cross except it's
it's a man and women and in sexual union
and that's the symbol right so it's it's
so that you have the symbol of ultimate
sort of pain and suffering and then you
have this other symbol of ultimate kind
of Union and Christianity will always be
there but we're moving maybe into an age
of the those two kind of being together
in some sense it's it's a very vague
speculative you know kind of thought but
it's it's it's sexuality in the larger
sense it's not sexuality in terms of
just pleasure at sexuality in terms of
form and emptiness coming together and
then disappearing you know I totally
believe that sexuality is a spirit a
form of spiritual enlightenment but what
only for some
that's the problem price but sexuality
is a is a cruel excluder there are those
who have the enormous fortune of in
engaging in the great Universal
transcendence of sexuality but they are
a minority and that's that's that's my
that's my problem with with the the the
not that sexuality should be celebrated
and that those who have it and those who
have that communion and they they should
be trumpeting it from the hill tilt
opsin and they should be helping other
people to to acquire it and that's an
encouraging people but nonetheless the
the number burrs are the numbers of
harsh exclusion from that world are
crazy right well not even that not even
exclusion from that world it's more like
it's more like people who are in the
even the people who are not harshly
excluded from that world are very
unaware of what they're doing in a sense
I mean they're unaware of how to use
their energy in the end up becoming very
exhausted and in front of the TV and you
know all that was a terrible overwhelmed
by by family life and and and just
losing themselves and well you're
talking about the world where they're
they don't have sexuality probably
proper sake good sexuality and but you
know if you're really gonna push that as
universal then you're gonna have to
condone things like prostitution and
stuff like that I mean you know forty
percent is population because according
to evolution of biology never has not
passed down their genes going back over
time three-quarters of them are men
one-quarter of them are women so in
other words sixty percent of men yeah
every generation going back over time
twenty percent of women that's those
numbers are just crazy
there's just nuts now some of these are
happy almost homosexually active they're
they're fine with it
but that's that's actually a small
minority
the rest they get used to it and they
probably learned that a fairly young age
that they're losers in that that world
you know there's some capital they and
and they accept their lot and they live
pathetically at least on that lie on
that level or maybe they don't live
pathetic lives maybe they just you know
they they caught it out of that they cut
it out of themselves and they do other
things or they've become perverted in
different ways you know they become
deviance but but but that world is I
don't think that's what I was getting at
but anyway I don't know if my issue is
that such a large number it's almost
like a diet it's like it's like half the
population and so they might pass on
their genes 60% of the population that
doesn't mean they have healthy sexual
thoughts most of them don't
they're terrible sexual are love and so
sexuality is like I mean it's great that
we it's kind of like you know you should
strive to be the best hockey player or
you know a strawberry you famous singers
you know there's a few out there who
succeed and that's wonderful but in the
end most people don't I wasn't
particularly saying it was an ideal I'm
talking about it as a symbol for let's
say that the male and the female coming
together on some larger sort of causing
the level rather than just people's
plumbing or you know whatever they're
doing in the bedroom or what I totally
do need sexual therapy everywhere I mean
you know they do need to understand
sexuality more that that has to be a
project in the future without you know
without it being some exploitative game
you know but here's my larger view this
I totally agree what you just said and I
have an idea of how that actually works
and in other words how the universal
male and female make love and and how
that's the the task at hand and it
really has doesn't have much to do with
sex it has more to do does the actual
physical plumbing like you say it has
more to do with what people do with
their minds and and their
their trades and their daily and daily
lives every minute of their daily life
they especially the the so-called loser
male it seems to me it seemed his death
there's a con of a there's a dimension
of desperation in the male he you know
become you know palea talks about this
most clearly she says men have this
desperate obsession with us identity
which women don't have and it's related
to psychometrics mm-hm and and and and
so they they're all there's it's very
common for men to be desperate and to
spend their whole lives focusing on
something and there's it seems to me
that down under the the on the substrata
driving that is sexual there's a kind of
a this this search for recognition or
this search for some kind of
consummation and he doesn't for the most
part he utterly fails to consummate in a
physically sexual way with woman but he
does succeed to hone something with his
life with his obsession and this
millennial process in men basically is
what civilization is and so civilization
is basically men loving women you know
and women receiving the benefits of
civilization they you know they walk
this they walk the streets of the city
they go to the market they yeah they you
know drive cars around or whatever and
they go to the theater it's all all of
us created by men they read books they
read what you know reading writing and
and then of course feminism has this
twist that it was you know that women
were kept from this process they're
they're totally wrong they are
absolutely and completely wrong that if
we're left up to women they would have
created none of that because if they
don't have that obsessive drive the they
don't have the combination of obsession
and desperation they don't have the
chemicals right they don't they don't
have to toss intense testosterone yeah
at all so that that so civilization
is man making love to a woman
and and and and well that's what people
I think that's what I was speaking of
yeah I'm kind of addressing yeah I
wasn't really saying that you know that
that should be some sort of religious
symbol for everybody and we should
worship sex or something that's actually
we're already doing that right the you
know I think we're doing it and failing
to do it we're failing miserably with
you know pornography in that guy's thing
well I mean it's it's it's such a cliche
I mean the you look at the the most
charismatic movie stars and you put them
together in movies and it's not real I
mean so you can tell it very rarely you
can see that couples really in a place
where they should be you can just tell
those two men they got they got
something going and but a lot of couples
men they just look miserable gonna
dragging the guy along and something
terrible and and there seems to be some
kind of a learning process going on
there so that's fine in other words
they're in hell to learn something you
know and I see that it's good everybody
you know everybody has to suffer in
order learns the latter's better so
that's that's kind of and that's me
that's not a certain shadow sexuality
it's a feature of sexual you know the
hard dark suffering learning from sexual
you know that's fine that's good with
that but in terms and it's the same
thing so I really very attracted
civilization as as man loving woman and
you know it's gonna have to it's gonna
be a while before and women we only need
to celebrate they really need to
celebrate men in that regard instead of
interpreting it as some kind of
exclusion of women this is a terrible
terrible mistake
yeah well justice resentful attitude is
so so so miserable so I think that that
that symbol of man loving woman yeah in
terms of it being the
human experience and it's also it also I
was thinking it is the cross in the
sense to as well I don't know how to say
that the I've been working really hard
this past year I'm trying to understand
what he just said
and I have a whole other take so the
virgin virgin icon is an image of a
young woman with a baby in her arms and
she has a snake a turkey under her feet
and she is protecting the babe from the
snake
now what Jordan Pederson says about it
was totally completely fascinating
because she more often than not loses in
the battle with the snake so the snake
wins and I think you know this is the
number it could be a wrong number but
the number is 80% 80% child mortality
rates prior to the 20th century maybe
that's wrong but so she mostly lost in
her battle with the snake and and
therefore she learned in an
overwhelmingly overwhelmingly
in an overwhelming way she learned
exactly what it means to lose what is
most dear to her mm-hmm I'm digressing
actually talking about list I was going
to talk about something else but anyone
any she and in that process she learns
how to sin because that's what female
sin is understanding what is most dear
to another give you something but
anything at all and removing it from
them not allowing them to possess it
whether it's psychological or physical
or anything and this is a female sin
like male female sin is something much
more basic it's it's closer to you know
rape pillage and plunder or something
like that it's it's more it's it's it's
no less serious but it it it's it's it's
not nearly as
subtle doesn't have that anywhere near
the subtlety and so so in other words
but well this is what I wanted to say
this definition of female sin is
extremely beautiful because it is
instantly forgivable because of
recognizing its source oh that's amazing
mmm that's the source that's incredible
recognising its source can you can you
as a child how high child mortality you
know going back going back forever
oh and so and this is her this is the
the baggage so why would she want why
would she want to to sin because of that
I'm not well it's it's it's been it's
been it's learned deeply learned
behavior culturally inherited it's it's
hurt and she wants to hurt back is that
well I mean yeah if there's a you know I
mean everybody since right who who hell
knows why we got them sin I mean that's
what I mean that that's the in other
words the source of it is so utterly
clear and so so understandable it's just
so it's so overwhelmingly it's such an
overwhelmingly powerful source you can't
deal with your grief your grief is
overwhelming you completely understand
what it is and then you for whatever
reason have designs on another to to to
inflict similar to a similar pain upon
another and that that there it is right
there that's the source now the male
source male source is here here's this
is this is this is a crazy theory so so
I want to develop this this week by the
way I'm really excited about this male
source of sin okay here we go
well not only that so this is the
version icon is the ultimate symbol of
female right what's the ultimate symbol
of male it's not the cross no it's a
phallic it's oh no it isn't no that's
good yeah you got me at the minaret or
the you know a totem or something like
that okay you might have you might be oh
I haven't thought
off about the Fallas actually he got me
thinking there I had to give that more
thought I was thinking about all these
coats of arms it being so male male
ultimate males isn't is not the phallus
it's not a sexual symbol it's a it's a
it's sovereignty it's the ability to to
to be strong in a sovereign way to be to
protect and basically sovereignty is
totally a projection of female of the
female projection of men it's a product
of female projection of men women are
attracted to men who partake mostly of
sovereignty their mote that's that's
basically that it's the height of female
attraction to men is it falls into that
category
he's either it could be something very
basic like he's big he's strong he's
violent these these would be this would
be a more primitive older form but then
as he as he develops forms of status you
know he's intelligent he's a great
television technically adept in all of
these these are things that are very
much to do with sovereignty and that's
what attracts women the most and the it
is a very exclusive criterion of
Attraction in other words that most most
men don't actually don't really fit into
that most men aren't very good at
fitting into that hierarchy and so it's
it's pretty exclusive so the my view is
that the ultimate symbol of the male
principle is also the version I can okay
because really her attraction or
attraction has to do with the survival
of that baby and so the male the male
she chooses is of ultimate importance
for the survival of that baby so the
survival of the baby is the man is a
prayer is the the big strong bond is a
female projection of the survival of
that baby is the is the female
projection of man in its relation to the
survival of the baby so it's all its
based and the cross is basically
something that has to do with crazy
imitative
behavior which really has to do with
sexual frustration has to do with the
the whole whole bunch a whole crowd who
are excluded from this is so this great
theory that sexual marginal marginal
person or the this twentieth-century
popular theory that sexual consummation
is is a is a great antidote to violence
is a three it convincing theory it's
just that most lots of people are
excluded from it so so and and so I
think the cross is really a it's kind of
like there's I see now I this is only it
this this there is only a few days old
it's only this past week I see human
especially the Western diet as sexuality
the Virgin mmm-hmm which includes the
men who are engaged in that sexuality
and then the other
I mean flavors in other or the abolition
of slavery is another biggie in in in
recent recent centuries which it's
amazing how how on how badly analyzed
how badly presented understanding of
that it's amazing how poorly we
understand these things slavery the
eradication of child mortality and yeah
the the stopping of lynching it's just
just knocked me over how we we we don't
we kind of don't think of it as all that
important or something
we're so forgetful and in part I think
part of the reason is we're engaged in a
deliberate if we really thought about
them will be forced to acknowledge the
deeper cultural source but we we have an
ideological blind spot which tells us we
cannot acknowledge that cultural source
there's a there's a profound ideological
driving us to deny that the cultural
source of our Western experience in
other words well how do how do we a
stopped lynching how how did we abolish
slavery if you ask those basic questions
deeply you would you would arrive at you
draw the Christianity you arrived at
Christianity and and people have a mind
a mental block to that and that's why
they don't go there well what's the
cause of this mental block that's like
why do people I mean I have my Bibble
and feelings towards Christianity as
well I just meant what why I mean I am a
Christian but I mean it's not like I
think we all became Christians than the
world be all right so much Christianity
around - well if it weren't for the
Midwest western United States Bible Belt
and all their madness Christianity in in
the West I'll be totally dead its car
under the final engine of Christianity I
suppose you could talk about I felt like
I when I went to st. Paul's Cathedral in
London I was I was looking at dead
Christianity because there was no there
was nothing there it was just nothing
there it was very interesting to me it's
like you know I if I go in if I go in a
little Catholic Church up the street
from bi there's still something there
and so there's this great need for a
counter a counter or forced to jar us
out of this this total this utter lack
of open ability to step two to access
any clairvoyant see this is basically a
Steiners argument for the necessity of a
Christian intervention it's a kind of
it's a fascinating thing and he's saying
that the 20th century would see a
gradual return this one this century and
beyond there will be a think an increase
in clairvoyance E and this is very
exciting but nonetheless there's is
there's this terrible counter force at
work which is Airmen ISM which which is
at great risk of simply throwing that
open so yeah that's basically what
Schneider is all about he says we have
to create a sanctity and and we have to
create a culture around the the return
of clairvoyance II
[Music]
[Music]
near sky skin build me a computer
[Music]
connected
[Music]
and logic that's invincible the bathing
hearts under control meadow alphabets
a fetus from chicken wire ate all my
desire
make the world
[Music]
single soul
[Music]
beautiful machine
we'll be together
[Music]
sure
[Music]
and
[Music]
[Applause]
make me believe the miracle of reason
make me believe great ocean and himself
[Music]
organizing systems
[Music]
I collect stamps with I'll never awake
with remorse again my beautiful machine
[Music]
in true
[Music]