[Music]
so Jamie we've been putting out quite a
lot of stuff recently even in the the
conversation that we have with you
Daniel and Jordan which a lot of people
really responded to talking about
concepts like game be talking about
concepts like coherence and these these
phrases of certainly sort of seemed to
be taking on a bit of a life of their
own in certain places people talking
about them online and this is great like
there seems to be an upswell of interest
in in this area which is fantastic what
I've found quite concerning and I wasn't
really expecting it maybe I was a little
bit naive but how easily that even these
concepts can be weaponized and can be
used for effectively game a rival hrus
ego-driven dynamics that maybe didn't
surprise you as much as it surprised me
no I mean I've been completely surprised
and shocked with the virulence and
pervasiveness of the very thing you're
describing and specifically I mean
Daniel and Jordan and I had a an offline
conversation where I was like holy
you know getting a little bit of sort of
sympathy for like Jordan Peterson and
you know and this sort of IDW kind of
thing which is if you're not explicitly
for a side you are and you're sort of
iconoclastic lee somewhere in the center
even if your concepts may be
controversial or you know not centrist
but just neither pole you are subject to
capture and weaponization by the other
side because you're not simply because
you're not endorsing the opposition and
this idea of coherence that we've been
discussing you know again just to ground
things in you know there's nothing new
Under the Sun and if people want to go
back and do their own research and see
lineages of research and thinking on
this stuff one of the closest that I'm
aware of the two terms one is group flow
which Keith soya at the University of
North Carolina Chapel Hill has written
and researched about extensively and
that that's the idea of and his book is
called group genius if anybody wants to
go and check that out and the other is
Victor Turner at the University of
Chicago the anthropologist who coined
the term communitas which is literally
we go from atomized rational individuals
into some some shared collective and
obviously in the contemplative
traditions and religious traditions that
the Quakers and shakers have the term
they call it a gathered meeting when
people drop into communitas you can see
this and i think ken wilber way back
when made a great distinction between
when we move from the rational norm
which for us in the post enlightenment
west is basically the atomized rational
individual so when we move into
communitas there's a question of is that
a progression or a regression and
Wilbur's turn was the pre trans fallacy
right don't mistake regression right
into a pre conventional communitas cult
by any other name right for a post
conventional progression into what we
might have been to gain be coherence and
the ability to mount the language of
this stuff and actually use it to
generate that stuff is massively
problematic so so that the commune of
the conversation that we've been having
is is what is happening in the realm of
cultic tendencies because if we have
those experiences where we drop our
separateness and we merge with the whole
right that can create Nuremberg rallies
right that creates in fact gosh what is
her name
Molly it'll come to me Molly Crockett
who was at Oxford and I think she's now
migrated over to Yale
she gave a fascinating presentation in
Davos around the neuro chemistry of
group bonding in these situations and
people who that the downtrodden right
these are these are the brexit errs and
the Mogga crew who have experienced
degradation and social standing status
economic drive you know the whole sort
of diseases of despair crew they
actually experience depleted dopamine
and depleted serotonin because of the
stresses and the loss of state is kind
of you know Jordan Peterson's Lobster
and serotonin shed right that kind of
neck of the woods a little bit more
tightly argued
and and when they get to these rallies
when they get to these meetings they
experience mad spikes in those things
plus huge amounts of oxytocin and
oxytocin you know in the sort of popular
literature you know you read blogs and
social media it's like it's the cuddle
drug it's the love hormone and the
trustor man it's what bonds you know
mother to baby and baby in a mother and
lovers and yeh but it's actually also
the ethnocentric tribal us in them
hormone and so when we have huge spikes
in that stuff and we have dissolution of
boundaries and we have identification
with tribe and vilification of other we
end up in some you know really
treacherous territory and and my sense
is is that you know back to your saying
it was I expecting this no there's a
short answer I wasn't expecting that in
fact the first signal I got of it was
watching whenever Brett Weinstein's
great pieces on identity politics and I
think was a newt that was posted on
YouTube and he was describing very
thoughtfully he's like hey sjw's you
know be careful if you play the identity
politics card like you may feel
absolutely just in your grievances you
may feel absolutely right in your
challenge of power all of those kind of
things but if you prime the pump for
people to start identifying around
out-group and other and wronged nests or
righteousness that is a very deep
structural code of evolutionary biology
and you're actually going to add fuel to
the fire of the alright the fortunes and
HN so be careful that's a dangerous
dangerous card to play and and that in
and of itself was I thought you know
classic Brett you know iconoclastic
thoughtful measured evidence-based but
then I started reading the comments
which I know you're not supposed to 208
to you but I did and I was horrified I
mean you had some of the most virulent
racist Arian nation I mean and women to
this wasn't just sort of you know
20-something gamer insel guys it's
saying see justification look nothing
nothing of worth was ever built in
Africa by Africans this is all Western
civilization buh-buh-buh-buh-buh and I
just
oh dear God they were reading that
watching that getting the signal out of
it getting the argument the thesis of it
and absolutely weaponizing it so we are
absolutely seeing that as a kind of a
high level example but then there's also
the thing that shocked me after the
writing of stealing fire a couple of
years ago which was all about peak
States and how there's this kind of
revolution of harnessing them accessing
them for greater insight information you
know healing and collaboration so far so
good
but in a couple of years since the book
has come out I've been shocked by seeing
how many communities harnessing those
things are just putting it straight in
the ditch and buggering it up in all the
ways that have happened in the past with
seemingly no awareness of the list of
known issues and the disasters of the
past so talking of the list of known
issues you've put together an ethical
cult checklist off the back of this off
the back of what you've been saying yeah
well what I realized was that you know
basically this began you know 20 years
ago for me in graduate school where I
just was fascinated with millenarian and
utopian communities and movements
through the centuries so 17th 18th 19th
century the enlightens in New York and
then all the way to the 50s and 60s and
the kind of booming of the Boomer
counterculture because as a gen Xer
right growing up in the aftermath of the
Reagan Thatcher years right it was a
wasteland for progressive
transformational consciousness culture
you name it right very different
landscape than now and the only
reference points we had were to go back
to the beats in the late 50s the
counterculture of the 60s and say okay
this was the last place you know this
this thread was before it went
underground so I felt a little bit it
was a little bit like our generation was
almost like you know Zeppelin and the
Beatles and you know and Pink Floyd and
those guys with the British rock
invasion where they went and you know
studied assiduously Robert Johnson and
Mississippi Delta blues and Muddy Waters
and Howlin wolf and Chicago Blue
they kind of they they fetishized it
we're American pop culture it kind of
moved on and forgotten it all and then
the Brits were like that's just that is
gold
you know let's really go back and look
at it and bring it back to life
and reinterpret it so we kind of had to
because it was just such a such a bleak
landscape for our generation
my sense is is what's happening with the
millennial generation is that you know
and some of this is you know some of
this is just classic family dynamics
kind of stuff but you know there's
nothing more boring or more you know
whether you've contempt than what your
parents did when they were your age and
so my sense is is that the offspring you
know not the Boomers but the Echo
Boomers the Millennials right are a law
and massive and rising generation all
sorts of cultural influences but they
are remarkably unaware of the lessons
learned of the hippie generation and the
counterculture and so my sense was is
that you know again going back to the
the dynamics talked about a stealing
fire which was ex Tarsus like peak
experiences they tend to go hand in
glove with catharsis deep healing and
breakthroughs and the moment you have
that dialectic you know standing up on
the mountaintop weep and be broken open
pick yourself back up again well we
don't do this in isolation right so we
end up in communits house all right yeah
well that's the social part so it's the
three legged stool acts ptosis catharsis
communitas and whether that communitas
becomes pre rational code right or post
rational emergent coherence is entirely
up to us and the bit that has been
shocking me beyond the weaponization and
the troll stuff online there's actual
the actual communities of practice in
the world right now that a repeating
chapter and verse the most spectacular
errors of the 60s and 70s and so you
know if we pen back and just set the
stage for a sec before jumping into the
checklist the idea that peak experience
isn't healing create tightly cohered
tightly bonded gatherings of people is
sort of table stakes that's
since the Neolithic era you know with
drumming chanting gathering around the
fire singing our songs grieving our dead
you know mating and mating and praying
you know the whole bit right I mean as
long as we've been human we have done
these things together and so it's not
necessarily a bad thing and if you
really you know you
atomo logically if you take the
description of the word cult cultists it
comes from Latin and it just means to
worship so we've been doing that forever
and you know you know scholars of
religion look at mystery cults right
back in the ages for the last thousands
of years and there's the cult of a lusus
in ancient Greece
there's the cult of Kali in India there
was the cult of Christ
you know before Emperor Constantine had
has come to Jesus moment and made it a
state sanctioned religion so a
traditional cult right which was just a
way a community of practice and gathered
around peak experience and healing
together right is absolutely completely
pro-social positive part of the
anthropological record and a thing we do
and the directive there it was you
subjugated yourself right you you you've
dropped your separate identity to join
with the lineage there were those who
have come before you for centuries the
housings of years for time immemorial in
many cases hey you said subjugate to
that lineage in the 60s right we got
culty cults we got those folks that said
subjugate yourself to me I'm a ronin I
am I am a samurai without a temple I am
a self-appointed God man or god woman
this is where we get Charles Manson this
is where we get Jim Jones this is even
where we got Adi DAF who is more
challenging and problematic because he
actually did also like people up
I think Manson is fair to say was just a
 psychopath right but Adi da was
a bent realizer you know and those are
comes osho too you know those are more
sort of crazy wisdom magi with issues
where the other two were just whack nuts
but nonetheless right that's the general
neck of the
and that's kind of that's the trigger
when we think of the word cult so in
some respects want to reclaim the term
and the next question is what do we do
now right because you know we can't go
back to ancient traditional stuff those
those lineages are all broken and we
wouldn't submit to that level of
compliance the cult II cults speak for
themselves and clearly don't wanna
repeat those experiments but what is the
realm for ethical cults
what is the realm for a place where you
no longer subjugate the self at all in
fact you actually valorize and support
individual serenity but at the same time
create space for collective coherence
and that arguably is our project these
days right how do we harness ecstasy you
know and healthy catharsis for vibrant
right self authoring and I collectively
cohered communitas and so to the point
about you know and that's nice and that
seems interesting and let's go do that
right but to my point about you know
Churchill had that great quote he who
knows only his own generation remains
forever a child and I think we've got
some decidedly childish efforts going on
right now as people grab onto the
lightning rods of peak experience isn't
you know you can take the Burning Man
community the transformational community
the psychedelic Renaissance and the
ayahuasca scene and you name it people
playing with matches right and I always
think of a little bit like that that
Disney film Fantasia that classic right
where Mickey is The Sorcerer's
Apprentice right and the magician the
actual mage the one who knows magic
leaves and Mickey's like well
anything that looks good
I'm gonna put on that point you hat with
the stars on it I'm gonna grab the wand
and I'm gonna use magic to do all the
dirty work I don't feel like doing and
then obviously hell to pay
right Faustian bargain 101 you know just
just with with the Disney Mickey is
attached and so I think we're seeing a
lot of that we're seeing a lot of false
light we're seeing a lot of people
taking the claim that they're not
actually ready for a condition for
and that in conjunction with not knowing
the prior generations is creating a
resurgence of bucket number two cult
occultic tendencies so now yeah we can
for sure
articulate perhaps a checklist for folks
because the ideas is any communities of
practice we're diving into and I think
you've got a list of some that you've
been tracking and paying attention to we
are at risk of giving away our
sovereignity
in service of the power and the potency
of some of these experiences and as we
give up our sovereignty we often lose
our discernment our just common sense
and judgment and we can end up in places
you know that are not safe not positive
wildly problematic and can take years to
recover from if at all so hopefully this
is just a little bit if we're taking a
stand right for individual serenity part
of that is cognitive literacy I actually
understand what's going on on on route
to cognitive liberty therefore no one
can can claim space between my ears
without my consent and so hopefully this
checklist is just a little bit of an
inoculation that you know folks can use
and the idea here is like hey we can't
mandate any other right I mean
particularly the nature of peak
experiences that they are fundamentally
antinomian right they do not subject to
hierarchical top-down control and that
is both their greatest promise and the
greatest challenge because the greatest
promise is hey this is how we subvert
the dominant paradigm yeah the other
butBut the narcissistic reactionary one
is you're not the boss of me okay and so
how do we strike that balance so my
sense is is that ideally we would have a
code of conduct for ethical culture
right and it's obviously opt-in and
elective but so is the UN right and it
could be that idea saying hey if you
want to follow these best practices and
isn't this is just a rough first draft I
mean who knows we can come up with a
thousand others and they will hydrate
every time but let's just use this as a
test-case and say hey I'm like the UN
you can up not to be in the UN you can
be North Korea or Iran if you want to be
in the UN you agree to free and fair
elections you agree to open markets you
agree to civil liberties in the
protection of humanitarian rights the
Geneva Convention etc and in exchange
you get access to all of our data all of
our research IMF and the World Bank the
League of Nations notion you get you get
access to all the network effects of
being in good standing you know and
another option would be sort of you know
standard & poor's or Moody's ratings for
companies you can do whatever the hell
you want as a CEO as we work has just
been exploring um but you will run the
risk of having your bond rating
downgraded from triple-a to junk and
it's not that junk means you don't get
to play you still have a right to exist
but it just means that only the
foolhardy or the incredibly savvy slash
cynical investor will opt to play so
there is a signal in the marketplace and
in this case the marketplace of idea is
the marketplace of culture that lets
other folks know approximately what
they're getting into right so that said
some of the options I mean this was just
and this was just 20 years of you know
research academically seeing the
patterns and seeing the premises and
then also noticing what gave me the
willies basically and trying you
watching certain communities and and
they break down into three things which
is you know here's the cult occult
checklist like this is the things not to
do and if you are finding yourself in a
community where a lot of these flags or
alarm bells are going off just an
encouragement slow your roll
think twice seek outside opinion check
your gut check your heart and know
you're not crazy and in a reality
distortion field hopefully this is a
sort of a clearer signal you can perhaps
index oh I think that's probably a mixed
metaphor but there we go so so the first
one I'll just lay out the three and then
we can unpack them in detail there's
three subsets to each so the first one
is does the leader grow
the One Ring of Power and this is
probably the most central and
non-negotiable one so if we use you know
the the Lord of the Rings as the example
and you know obviously the One Ring is
the one that the hobbits gackt carrier
and the Gollum had it is incredibly
potent it conveys godlike power and the
whole story and the brilliance of
Tolkien is the depth and layers to how
he lays that wrestling with power and
virtue and evil and you know Boromir is
one of the men I mean Eragon is the only
uncorruptible man haibara Mears is there
but he wanted to be king he has
aspirations and there's that great scene
where that they're climbing up the
snow-capped peak and and Frodo drops the
ring and Boromir picks it up and as he
picks it up and he's going to give it
back to Frodo but he kind of hesitates
any sense that starts hearing the the
ring race and they sort of all gets
freaky deaky and he and you can see and
he's struggling with but I could do so
much good with this right and he is
being bent towards grabbing the ring the
same happens with Saruman Saruman the
white Frank originally the baddest-ass
and more potent than Gandalf but Saruman
is eventually like this is inevitable
look how much we can do bound together
with me we can change the world so even
as he is being bent by power he is still
aspirationally ascribing to virtue and I
don't I think it's gone off I don't know
who this Gandolfo Dumbledore but one of
those guys has to say that no Dark
Wizard did not begin seeking truth and I
think that's a really critical one to
note because it's easy it's easy to
dismiss culty cults and the gurus with
feet of clay as charlatans they were
pretenders they were fakes so when
inevitably it goes off the rails and was
like ah ha ha see we told you so the
whole thing was a sham and I think
that's a really flattened not very
nuanced interpretation and if you take a
lead on Oh show me many people are
familiar probably most familiar these
days because of that Netflix documentary
wild wild country with OSHA which
actually weirdly didn't go into him much
at all if I was I would
frustrated by the lack of insight into
him and his actual teachings versus the
scandals of the commune and that kind of
thing but for those that don't know ah
dee dah
he was arguably one of the most potent
realizes of the of that era particularly
the kind of 70's and left a lineage of I
mean many many bright lights in the you
know more recent you know spirituality
space touched him at some point and you
can't dismiss those guys as easily
they were prodigious talents and they
had absolutely non ordinary skills and
the ability to shift state in themselves
and others and create potency so it's
not enough that it's not enough to
dismiss them the question is did they at
some point grab the one ring what does
that mean in to grab the one ring what
what it means I think is basically
there's a Union psychologist brilliant
guy named Robert Johnson and he has a
great phrase for this which is our
golden shadows right and the idea of
it's not just our shadowy shadows the
dark stuff we disown and can't fess up -
there's our golden shadow as well which
is I can't be that great but Tony
Robbins can right I can't be that great
but Brad Pitt you know or Kylie Jenner
right have the capabilities have the
virtues the things I value but not me
and quite often when we end up with
charismatic gurus they will light people
up on stage or wherever they are and
people will puke them this seems to be a
reflex of tribal primates right we will
puke our golden shadow onto the human
who connects the circuit and lights us
up it's like little ducklings getting
imprinted about the first face they see
right and if you bring people into high
self true self the first face they see
is often the sage on the stage now
though what grabbing the one ring is the
equivalent of accepting that gold
writers saying I am strong enough to
hold it yes I deserve it I am that and
no matter how tempting that is it's only
a matter of time before that gold will
drop that person to their knees and
there is a dynamic where you know what
you could call the sort of the Lucifer
principle right where and this goes
back to prodigious talents how is it
that so many totally gifted teachers
actually end up going going to the dark
side and it can be that if you know you
can be 99% translucent radiant and if
you've got 1% shadow still left
you're now shining so brightly right
that the Lucifer principle kicks in
which is you know dare thee to look upon
me and spot my imperfection
I am radiant I am dazzling and you may
human about cowed cannot see my humanity
or my fallow ability anymore
and as a result right now I'm calling
all kinds of juice I'm engaged in
psychosexual spiritual technologies
whatever I'm doing to juice this high
and now that metastasizes so I could be
99% done on the way to God consciousness
and that 1% speck can pull I can
suddenly become a Sith Lord and there
have been researches on F MRIs on power
these days and you know power power
literally corrupting I mean Lord Acton
101 all right
absolute power corrupts absolutely and
in the psycho-spiritual tantric spaces
that many of these folks are playing
with they can do that in overdrive and
so you can have somebody who is
absolutely love light goodness and many
of the stories start out for the first
years and decades even of just its
sunshine and rainbows man this is the
next this is the next evolution of
humanity and then bends and I think
that's potentially some of the darkness
so the advocacy is either don't grab the
ring have the fellowship and or as
opposed to the Luciferian principle the
grabbing and the claim is to embody the
more Christic archetype which is my
humanity is is connected to my divinity
they are not separable and and it is the
combination of those two that leads to
something really durable and and
worthwhile so then the next one is the
idea of creating in and out groups so
anytime there is a separation of who we
are versus the rest that is massively
problematic and and the third is the
weaponizing of peak experiences and
healing so we can kind of go back and
kind of on
pack these one-by-one yeah because
you've got some really good solid
examples within all of these kind of
headings yeah yeah so you know just just
to kind of go back I mean the first one
is is there's a lot of meat on that bone
and so it's kind of worth it one of the
first things to notice is in the
grabbing of the one ring we talked about
the accepting of kind of the golden
shadow of the followers versus
constantly giving it back saying no you
are that - right own it don't don't give
it to me don't give it away all right
hold it and but and live into that all
right the first one which is a dead
giveaway is a mythologized
origin story of the founder this is
either prodigious birth the childhood
signs of talent whatever it is is that
they are somehow have been set apart
from way back when for greatness
it can also another variation is the
profound conversion experience and this
has become a trope in info marketing you
know I was making tons of money I was
doing such and such and then a car
accident or something and I woke up in
my hospital bed and I realized you know
now my mission in life is to sell
to other people right that is the
current perversion of it but it exists
you know the ancient you what ancient
yeah I suppose ancient is the you know
Saul on the road to Damascus right I
once was lost but now I'm found was
blind but now I see I was a heroin
junkie crackhead dealer and now I'm here
to bring you the good news whatever that
is right so there's some highly stylized
mythologized
origin story that sets that person apart
as if they were marked for destiny and
greatness
the next is absolutist claims of
attainment so I am 100% awake and
lightened fill in the blank whatever
their descriptive categories are and the
key there and this this is you know that
Lucifer principle was another
articulation of this if that's true then
everything that happens in relationship
to me is now no longer mutual or
interests subjective because I'm perfect
and this is an absolute attainment it
happened back when it's usually rolled
into my mythologized origin story I am
not subject to human to human critique
so if you've got a problem with me all
right that must be your shadow
it must be your projection it's your
 not mine I've got no or and
this is the final one cuz like now wait
a second what you did you Chuck somebody
into a fire man I had a terry patent
actually described as he said he said
ahh dee da chucked me into a bonfire in
a fit of seeming rage but it woke me the
 up
and I'm forever grateful and you're like
dear God right you look at that from
Health and Human Services if you know
who are any other kind of grounded
perspective you're like that is abuse
but within that frame and even within
his interior experience what right
so you have this claim of I'm not
subject to some interest objective
critique I'm no longer human in the way
you're human everything that you're
experiencing is your shadow and
projections or this is crazy wisdom I
might be acting batshit I'll grant you
that but I'm doing it for your
liberation and that leaves people
absolutely gone and rudderless from any
kind of recalibration and any kind of
mutuality and then the final one which
often comes especially when people adopt
Eastern habits and customs in
hierarchies is ritualized separation
ritualized separation of the leader the
founder whatever that person is from the
rest and and that can lead to you know
and that will show up as things like
satsang you know Bush is basically
translated is sitting experiencing the
grace of the master which is totally
 in a Western context right no but
people will use that all the time or
there's a difference in robes and dress
you know if you've ever seen somebody
who looks like they're at Burning Man on
a Wednesday you know where during bindis
and white flowing robes and like
that you know all of those sign things
any kind of name change you know
self-appointed and obviously my name is
now super super unknown to something or
other and I am bliss and holy have you
know holy all coming things those those
descriptions are all you know clumsy
efforts of separation and exceptionalism
and it can even happen in a sort of
secular sense it can happen with
handlers it can happen with green rooms
it can happen with you only have contact
with me when I'm on stage and otherwise
I disappear and I get whisked off when
there's
protection around me or if you really
want personal contact you got to sign up
for my super duper platinum you know 100
grand a year special package alright so
any of those it can be secular
it is often and it's least imaginative
versions you know apes more esoteric and
lineage traditions but any of that kind
of separation and so those are there's a
really things to look out for which is
if you hear a overly polished
mythologized origin story if you
experience them it's explicitly stating
or even implying or allowing others to
name them as fully and explicitly and
irreducibly awake or attained or
something big flags and if you see any
of the signs and signifiers that trap in
the costuming of the structuring of the
ritual ritualized and tightly
constrained presentations to community
all big flags all be fine so so the next
one is the in groups and verses out
groups now this one is tricky because
there are lots of communities that
really do feel like they've got a world
saving purpose that's a big part of you
know purpose you know
I mean Silicon Valley's great joke on
the HBO show was every single pitch at
TechCrunch ended with and we're going to
make the world a better place you know
which might have flown five years ago
not so much now but
in-groups and out-groups and messianic
sense of purpose messianic purpose is
often used to suppress my individual
needs so particularly the simplest
example is volunteer labor right oh you
must not care about saving all the
whales you must not care about saving
the earth if you're not willing to work
for nothing work work for cheap etc
exericse crazy long hours lousy
conditions because if we've always
holding up this amazingly overwhelmingly
higher purpose than your petty needs are
just that and so there's often a
suppression of where we are right and it
can often require and often supports
neglecting other base level needs it
could be
relationships children economic
stability you know a thousand life
balance a thousand things because this
is always so much nobler and I can't
critique that a noble purpose so I have
to suppress my own experiences the next
would be a specialized language the more
you end up and you know every community
from the
Armie you know to business consulting
has acronyms has short hands it's a way
we compress information to use it
quickly but when you have abstract non
falsifiable pseudo spiritual terms
either using esoteric terms particularly
again defaulting to Eastern traditions
quite often or pseudo scientific terms
this is the quantum feel this is our
pineal gland or on or mixed total
jumbles I'm entering the Akashic field
via quantum theory and my opinion your
gland and my theta waves when you see
you people mixing and matching shoddy
neuroscience with poorly understood
lineage traditions with New Age concepts
into this jumbled gobbledygook that
nobody family members colleagues form a
family you know like pollen dust and
what what the you're talking about
and that creates a further separation
between you and the rest of the world
and you know and then finally some sense
of that this is this is we are on the
verge or the edge of something brand-new
there is nothing that has come before us
that is quite the same as this
we are unique and distinct and also
therefore not subject to the calibration
or the the dampening or critiques of
past precedents yes they all did that
thought that said these things did these
things we however the blank slate the
true tabula rasa and as a result we
don't have there isn't there are no
governors there's no there are no
governors we are literally writing our
own story forward and then the final one
is just the idea of the weaponizing peak
experience and healing and and the first
is quite often these communities grow
together via tightly controlled access
to those peak experiences so someone
might you know they're looky-loo they
get recruited they get invited they drop
by they have some amazing state changing
state shifting experience it could be
breathwork
it could be radical encounter group
dialogue
it could be a tantric psychosexual
experience it could be a psychedelic
experience you name it they have
something that literally
blows their mind but you only get access
to that thing to that experience via the
leader when they choose right and they
get to shape the meaning making around
it and typically side efforts are
strongly discouraged and if they are and
either they you know if they are
tolerated they're usually the
meaning-making
what's going on is very scripted like
you to go out and shag or you guys go
and have that psychedelic experience so
you can go and access the world we've
described right but iconoclastic
heretical experience isn't like well we
went and conducted that experiment got
totally different results and here's
what I think now that that will get shut
down in a hurry and the next step on
deconditioning because obviously peak
experiences and profound healing
experiences erode our boundaries right
and typically these communities
massively over privilege emotional
catharsis versus cognition and
discernment now part of that is natural
there's a healthy counterbalance to our
high per cognitive hyper linguistic
neurotic constantly self-aware default
mode Network agitated monkey mind modern
selves got it and most of us are super
disembodied and not enough in our hearts
and all those kind of things so there is
a absolutely legit corrective argument
but when it's when it's pillar to post
when they say don't think or you're
thinking again that's bad you've got to
get back down in your heart and feel
that's good when there's a complete
vilification of logic reason discernment
right that becomes massively problematic
and then that sets us up for the final
whammy of them all which is key
decisions and commitments whether that
is emotional testimony is sharing
disclosing information vulnerable
compromising information whether that's
allegiance to the group whether that's
atonement for transgressions whether
that's financial and commitments I'm
signing over my entire trust fund I
don't know how I got here I just happen
to be a rudderless rich kid my gosh they
love me so much and now I've just had
this boundary dissolving experience
and I capitulate because the truth of
the experience I'm having that cathartic
ecstatic breakthrough breakdown whatever
it might be they now couple to all those
other truth claims see this proves that
we are special and different
this proves that our master or teacher
is attained this validates and
vindicates everything else we've been
saying at a time when your boundaries
are completely permeable you have no
judgment of your own and we are
deliberately moving you and manipulating
and this by the way does not require
over calls this is chapter and verse in
from marketing 101 let's blow the smoke
cannons let's get everybody up there
weak beliefs saying how much this thing
is exchange their life and know wouldn't
you know it we're gonna upsell the
out of you on our premium program right
 now
so that we see these psycho technologies
deployed across the spectrum and just a
couple of things to point out one is
false positives and false negatives so
the false positives if you go through
this checklist you're like well wait a
second I mean I kind of think maybe my
community does some of those especially
the world saving purpose and specialized
language you know and even even the idea
of kind of in-groups and out-groups like
we are a crack team we're doing a hard
thing so you might go through this list
and see false positives for an otherwise
healthy organization or community and
the only way to check is just see how
many of the other flags especially the
one ring of power and especially the
manipulating people in suggestible
States and conflating truth power sermon
you know authority with the
vulnerability and pliability of people
in those states you know there is the
false
I said false positives the other is the
false negatives you can come around many
of these communities especially in the
earlier years and it's shiny happy
people it's going off it's the best
 party you've ever seen people
are filled with love they're hugging
they're playing their joyful so in the
by their fruits you shall know them and
you look in you're like man this is an
abundant garden this looks amazing
right it's it's because of their use and
abuse of these super powerful secular
technologies not in spite of them
they're getting that early liftoff so
the key there is to really understand
again descent Minh
caveat emptor we really have to pay
attention we really have to play the
long game and we really have to
triangulate between these different
touch points to make informed and
empowered decisions about not only who
we follow but if we are in a position of
leadership ourselves what kind of
communities do we create and can we see
the known issues can we see the potholes
and the train wrecks and the skid marks
where those who have come before us have
gone off the road and can we steer a
straighter path to get more of us to our
collective destination recently Jamie
led a workshop with rebel wisdom in
London called ethical cult building
collective sense making in an age of
existential risk to see the films from
the workshop become a rebel wisdom
member rebel wisdom is a new sense
making platform bringing together the
most rebellious and inspiring thinkers
from around the world if you're enjoying
our content then you can help us make
more by becoming a subscriber which will
give you access to a load of exclusive
films also you can then join our group
zoom calls to discuss the ideas in the
films and you can send us ideas for
questions for upcoming interviews we're
also looking for talented people to help
us out with editing graphics music that
kind of thing and if you're a regular
viewer you'll know we talk a lot about
the value of embodying or actually
living out the ideas that we talked
about so that's why we run regular
events in London check out the links on
the website for more and hope to see you
soon
you