[Applause]
[Music]
hey folks welcome to the Dark Horse
podcast I have with me Yuri Dagon who is
in Moscow he is a tech entrepreneur and
longevity researcher who has recently
come to my attention as someone who has
done extensive work looking into the
origins of the SARS Cove - pandemic and
I was very impressed when I read his
paper on medium I talked about it
previously on the podcast with Heather
and so many of you have seen his work
what you may or may not know is that
especially this week that work has shown
up in a number of mainstream
publications as a a strong bit of
research pointing in the direction of at
least not shutting down the laboratory
origin hypothesis for the virus so Yuri
welcome to the podcast thank you so you
and I have talked a number of times
about what this virus looks like to us
and why it is that we're having trouble
swallowing the official story that this
virus clearly came from nature perhaps
through a wet market but that it has
nothing to do with the two labs that
study that born coronaviruses in Wuhan
China so what I want to do is bring the
fans of this podcast along a bit so that
they can get the view from somebody who
really does understand the biotech
aspect of coronavirus research and they
can make a judgment for themselves based
on real information rather than just
dueling personalities making claims so I
hope I can fill those shoes but thanks
for the credit well I know you could be
giving shoes I you know I think you
don't fully believe that you are at an
epicenter of history but obviously the
pandemic is a major historical event in
some ways it is a singular historical
event and your work on you know your
work which is you know not in the
laboratory with coronaviruses but your
work revealing the patterns in that that
body of literature and what they suggest
about what is possible and what we have
to consider with respect to this
pandemic
that work is the gold standard you've
really done a better job than anybody
else surveying that literature and
pointing out what it implies I mean it
really the there's one problem with it
it's that the work is so complex that I
had to read your your paper twice in
order to understand fully what you were
saying and I think for laypeople it's
out of reach until we unpack it for them
a bit but it really is very high quality
work and you're courageous to have put
it out well thank you I just you know
disclaimer that I'm not a biologist by
any stretch of imagination and I mean my
knowledge of biology is I think you know
just at a level where I can just see
genetic patterns and blast sequences and
see differences or similarities and that
that medium Paul's post or medium
article is nowhere like it's not a
scientific paper and it's not meant to
be it's meant to be just an overview of
the things that viruses hydrologists
have been doing in the kind of research
they've been doing and and just my kind
of ramblings about the things that I
would have thought could have pointed at
a lab origin or natural origin and I was
kind of sharing my my journey which took
me from initially being extremely
skeptical about the possibility of lab
escape to being much less skeptical and
actually quite upset that so many
established scientists just dismissed
this as a conspiracy theory which kind
of leads people like me initially who
trust scientists trust their opinion to
just by association to do the same and
but actually when you look at the facts
I don't think we can be that you know
sure that this is not a lab leak and I
think those are biologists who claim
that you know there's zero chance or
virtually no chance of this being a lab
escape are to put it mildly incorrect
well you know you're obviously bending
over backwards not to say what I think
is clear to both of us which is we can't
say that this is a lab leak but we can
say anybody who tells you for sure that
it isn't is either very confused about
the facts or not telling you what they
know and that that you know you're not a
virologist but in a sense that may be
why you're able to play the role that
you're playing something about the
incentives that surround mainstream
viral adji at the moment has caused the
entire field to line up behind a story
that is incorrect that lab leak is not
worth considering as a hypothesis and as
I've pointed out on the podcast before
that puts us in a very dangerous
situation because at the moment when we
have a global pandemic unfolding with a
bat derived coronavirus the very people
who need to be at the forefront of
helping us understand what that means
what that implies about the the
mechanisms at work in this virus those
people have all compromised themselves
by telling us a fairy tale so what I'd
like to do is unpack a little bit what
the evidence does look like and what
what it doesn't yet tell us so can you
outline what the the facts are that are
most striking to you with respect to
unpacking the or with respect to sorting
out what the most likely explanation is
sure well I mean the biggest coincidence
would be the striking thing is this
happening in who had
which is you know that next door to the
lab that is like the number one lab in
China on coronaviruses and this is
listen himself is a huge coincidence
this that hasn't been explained at all
at this point and which has puzzled many
scientists including she generally the
the the chief scientist in Colonel
biology she's not the head of the
Institute but she's like a probably
number one leading scientists or the
most recognized name in corona biology
in China and she herself was the kind of
the number one person suspecting a lab
leak out of her lab because when is is a
very odd place for a chronic virus leak
to occur from like a bat coronavirus
because well first of all they don't
really eat bats in in wahdahu Bay as
opposed to like in the south of China
where actually like one dawn where it's
it is part of the cuisine and I don't
know all this like to me like when
people were initially saying that this
is odd I thought well come on it's the
wet market yeah it's like maybe a small
chance of happening but I'm sure they
have bats there but when I actually
looked at the evidence but before I
became skeptical of the impossibility of
the lab leak I thought that you know
it's not a not a big coincidence but
after looking at it I realized that it
is a huge coincidence because and those
bats that carry those kernel viruses
they don't live in nowhere near when
they live you know 2,000 kilometers away
in Yunnan and any other outbreaks of
kernel viruses that like SARS or HK you
want that happened that happened in the
I guess the tropical climate snake so
and one is just very very odd place for
this to have occurred it's an odd place
it's also an odd time since those bats
would have been hibernating absolutely
too conspicuous facts that suggest
something about the Wuhan origin is is
odd right and we
have any any other explanation like
natural origin explanation of how the
virus could have gotten there like the
scat scared the wet market and now even
beneficial Chinese sources dismiss this
hypothesis that no actually wet market
is not the place of origin of the
epidemic and so it's just a huge
question mark which isn't in any way
explained at this point and and lab Lee
explains perfectly you know yeah so I
think it would be worth pointing out
that you and I had a parallel journey in
this regard you were initially
researching to basically to buttress
your argument that the lab leak
hypothesis was an empty one and as you
delved you discovered that it wasn't an
empty hypothesis at all for my part I
was in the Amazon with Heather
completely out of contact with the world
and we emerged from a very remote
location the tipitina Biological Station
into into we came out and went into the
Andes for a couple days and we started
to look at what was on the internet that
we had missed and there was a story
about this corona virus circulating and
you know this was very early this was in
in February and I looked at it and I'm a
bat biologist and I saw okay there's a
wet market people are eating bats this
is a bat born corona virus the story
looked very straightforward to me and so
I tweeted about it and I said you know I
haven't done a thorough look but what I
understand from the evidence here this
does look like a virus that would have
been in horseshoe bats and that it would
have emerged through contact and I said
something about wet markets being
dangerous I think and I immediately got
back a number of replies that said so
you think it's a coincidence that it's
in the same location as this you know
biosafety lab level four that studies
bat coronaviruses and I immediately
retracted my tweet and I said there's
obviously something about this story I
don't understand
cuz that's a huge coincidence and you
know I initially thought maybe the facts
wouldn't turn out to be what I thought
they were they would turn out you know
as you wondered maybe these labs that
study these viruses are really very
common and so it showing up in wuhan
isn't that special because if there are
a thousand such labs or whatever then ok
emergen you're one of them but no this
is one of the two most important labs in
the world that studies these viruses so
anyway that that moment of waking up to
these coincidences are too big to ignore
then leads you into the biology and kind
of one of the contrary points that was
being made initially was that well of
course they had the lab where the bats
are so but then you actually examined
and realized no those bats don't live
anywhere near the lab they live
thousands of kilometers away and that
that that alone was enough to make you
almost scratch your head and think maybe
you know this is all to the story that
people like virologists make it out to
be so yeah a lot of questions that kind
of led me down the rabbit hole and after
looking at the kind of research that has
been going on in that lab and around the
world
the lab leak hypothesis has become much
more probable than initially yeah the I
think the frightening thing to me maybe
the most frightening thing here is that
if you have the background that allows
you to just even begin to look into the
facts here and you don't have a dog in
the fight
you're not a virologist right or you're
not signed up with a political team
that's selling a particular story then
you instantly end up in this rabbit hole
where all of the things that you're told
about why you shouldn't pay any
attention to that hypothesis turn out to
be paper-thin and then all of the things
that might point in the direction of the
lab turn out to be harder to dismissed
and then you would like them to be and
so at the point you start talking to
people about this you discover
that the resistance to this idea is not
based in facts or logic it is based in
something else but it is very strong so
have you encountered this I I don't know
if I said at the top you're in Moscow
you've been in Moscow for the whole
duration of the pandemic yeah I kind of
got stuck in Moscow
once the Flies got cancelled and the
borders closed
I'm sure yeah absolutely I can't
encountered it and actually I was bit
surprised that the strongest opposition
to the idea that lab leak is possible I
got from the Russian scientific
community and people who also supposedly
you know they don't have any dogs in
this fight either but to them the very
kind of thought of even considering that
the scientists could be lying to them
that was blasphemy and they you know
very harsh and the criticism that I'm
just gonna pet Lincoln's baseless
conspiracy theories but when actually
pressed for kind of a logical
explanation why they think it's it's
volcano dismissal a hypothesis why do
they believe so strongly that you know
it's cannot possibly be a lab leak they
don't really have any evidence or at
least nothing strong like conclusive
eventually all ended up being dependent
on the 4% difference between the
sequence of genomic sequence of SARS -
and the nearest common ancestor the are
ATG sequence are ATG 13 that will Han
lab released and it all kind of takes
wanna the word that this is the only
sequence and the closest sequence they
ever had and completely just trust them
and thinks that you know the that's
those people think the Russian kind of
critics think that that's the strongest
evidence that this could not have
happened inside a lab right a sequence
just that came from a lab that obviously
has a tremendous amount at stake in the
question of whether they're absolutely
and it's a very suspicious
which it was revealed and just those
little half truths about the sequence
that were like revealed in a piecemeal
fashion on like limited hangout fashion
that to this day haven't really been
explained nobody has been pressing the
hoo-ha nor she generally about this
sequence whereas there's so many
questions about it first and foremost
being why didn't why did she rename it
write it and why didn't she mention in
the mm you know 2020 paper why didn't
she mention that she collected it in
2013 from a mine in which six six people
got SARS like pneumonia okay so my my as
listeners are not gonna have any idea
what you're talking about yet so let's
let's put this story together so that
they can follow it so what's our ATG
thirteen is the name of the the name of
the individual from which the sample was
collected it's actually named the strain
Ras in all office Fitness yeah that's
right cheering Lionel officer anise
which is which is a horseshoe bat right
it's the one of the like the horseshoe
bats are like a big family and Fitness's
yeah is because they have Sinica s-- as
well as in Senecas bass rental office in
occurs where the ones had the first
stars and that was the kind of that
family that she generally initially
specialized in and a Fitness is kind of
the one that like the ones she initially
dismissed or at least she claims but
this is the one that that Harvard this
strange
So Ra is the bats Gigi is song Guang
Shan what Tong one or two on Guan Yin is
the place where the mine it was that
look at that area in in Yunnan and
thirteen is supposedly the year the
twenty thirteen or they collected the
sequence okay so the nomenclature you've
got a lab that specializes on that
coronaviruses they are studying these
viruses they're their grants and their
paper
point to the danger of a virus emerging
from nature they point to bats as a
likely place for a corona virus to come
from on the basis that SARS the first
SAR SARS Cove the initial one appears to
have emerged from a bat and so their
point at a scientific level was we need
to study these viruses and how they
might emerge so we can prevent a
pandemic is that approximately right
yeah and they have grants for this for
probably over a decade the work together
with eco health alliance Peter - Jack
we'll come back to him you're heading
that right but the story of let's get
back - yeah - the story of the strain
the RIT G strain it wasn't originally
named RIT g13 and in in 2020 it was only
revealed that what the Institute claimed
that they fully sequenced it and they
said that when they collected it in 2013
they only sequenced a very short
fragment of its are DRP gene the
polymerase gene that coffees virus which
they was their standard practice to
determine pretty much the phylogeny of
the virus I'm sorry I was already
interrupt you I want to go back to the
to the to the sequence of events so that
people can follow in 2013 this Wuhan
Institute of virality lab that studies
emergent corona viruses because of the
danger of a pandemic is looking rain
Yunnan Province in a cave in a mine that
has horseshoe bats and they're looking
there am I correct that there has been a
break there's a minor outbreak of
pneumonias right well they have six
miners having a minor outbreak no and so
they were invited the one Institute was
invited to investigate the outbreak
actually happened in 2012 and so they
were invited in 2012 she generally an
institute and other some other vital
ologists from other institutes from
cross chain
we're invited to kind of look at the
mind look at the viruses that inhabit
this mind and they had I think for three
or four trips and they collected
extracted this one in 2013 probably the
last trip that for in that time span and
by then the three of the miners have
died and they also analyzed for of the
miners samples so the four surviving
members two miners died right away four
miners were in the hospital and they had
their blood samples sputum samples
collected and sent to the who haunt is
hydrology on the advice of the Hat I can
academic in China responsible for SARS
dr. Zhang nan Xiang I hope butchering
his name so on his advice they sequenced
the miners samples not sequence they
checked the miners blood samples against
various viral antibodies and antibodies
for SARS the first SARS came up positive
they detected IgG SARS antibodies which
of course is hugely suspicious because
the first SARS outbreak was pretty small
in China it was just about 5000 people
in mainland China so the odds of having
four miners in the same cave carrying
antibodies from the first outbreak are
like negligible most likely it's
actually just SARS antibodies
cross-react with a close relative
another stars like strain which you know
which she only was on the hunt for for
many years and now we know that this of
course the the SARS - is this ours like
strain like it's close enough relative
the relative that there's a high chance
of antibodies cross reacting the
antibody test for the first stars cross
reacting with any kind of SARS like
antibodies that could have been produced
when people are infected by by SARS - er
RA TG 13 or any other similar strain
that could have been in that cave and so
the fact that this was never mentioned
not like all of this
knowledge now about the four miners
having SARS antibodies but honey
Institute testing the miners blood
samples is only been revealed in the
past few weeks through like Twitter
activists digging into Chinese PhD and
masters theses in Chinese that were
never translated into English and so you
know when when we kind of look at this
the story of chichén Li and Peter - Jack
saying that when they discovered this
bat strain in 2013 it was so
uninteresting to them that they just put
it in the freezer and never touched it
until in 2020 just by sheer luck
they sequence stars - and and saw a
similarity to this little fragment they
initially sequence that story kind of
becomes hard to believe you know I mean
you're you're being generous it it does
not add up the fact is right you have a
lab that has dedicated itself to
studying SARS like coronaviruses they
have it happened on a cave in which
humans have been infected the first step
in the pandemic sequence yeah and you've
got these reactive antibodies so this is
what they're looking for and their story
that they at the time regarded it as
unimportant just simply holds no water I
would point out that there's another
important piece of information here for
people trying to understand why you and
I and a few others have landed so far
from the consensus perspective one of
the things that is maximally conspicuous
to me is the virus that emerges in wuhan
is ready to go right it is it is adapted
to human beings there is no evidence of
a phase in which it is fumbling about
trying to discover the means to infect
human cells well enough to become
spreadable right no evidence of that it
hits the ground and boom now the story
from 2012-2013 in this cave this mine in
Yunnan is indicative of something that
must be true which is
actually little jumps into human beings
are not that uncommon in general no
pandemic arises because they don't
experiment successfully the viruses
don't experiment successfully and
discover the key to infecting large
numbers of humans so people may get sick
they may die or they may get sick and
they get better but the world doesn't
end up knowing about these things
because it's a tiny outbreak of
pneumonias and they're a pneumonias all
the time so the fact of the virus in
wuhan being so well adapted the fact
that we have evidence that viruses that
are not especially well adapted do jump
sometimes and it doesn't turn into
something that we notice at a historical
level these two things are really
important and then you have a laboratory
behaving oddly with respect to the exact
thing that they claim to be looking for
we know they were looking for it we know
that they were working on these things
and so now I want you to unpack if you
will the oddness so this is again
something that you called my attention
to I never would have gotten there on my
own
our ATG 13 is the strain that is
revealed in 2020 after the pandemic
begins or right 2019 okay so this is the
strain though Oh January 29th I think
was published by she was choosing Lee
publishes a sequence she says it's the
closest thing we've got to the
circulating virus the virus of
circulating in the human population it
comes from a sample we collected in 2013
in Yunnan and we didn't think much of it
at the time but here it is we've got it
or we had it am I correct that they do
not yeah she just mentioned it in
passing and like very short sentence she
never mentioned the mine she never
mentioned pneumonia and it's a different
name from the one that they had given it
in 2013 and also they don't cite their
original publication in which they
revealed is this original short sequence
of this strain they initially they
called it four nine nine one four nine
one nine nine one which is just
of the sample and it's just odd that
they decided to rename it and never
mention the like the original strain is
absolutely speaking this is unacceptable
you would not rename a strain and not at
least leave some pointer that explains
why you renamed it and allows somebody
to trace it and I think people should
actually look at your Twitter feed
because they can see you as you're
trying to sort out you've got these
sequences that may in fact be the same
strain under two different names and you
simply pose the question on Twitter are
these two the same right and it turns
out that we now know that they are based
on well what is well now they claim they
are is it's it's I mean there's some
wild speculations that maybe maybe they
just they couldn't bring themselves to
claim that are the same thing because
they just took the the four nine nine
ones did a little fragment and they kind
of worked around it it put something
closer to us ours too but maybe the the
actual actual initial sequence is
different or maybe it's extracted out of
the miner samples there's like this so
many possibilities and I agree they're
they're just you know wild conjecture at
this point but it's just very odd yeah
why would you know scientists not even
mentioned not inside themselves there
you know previous work where they
collected it they should get some you
know additional accolades for it and
they just can't bring themselves to to
to mention this and remain quiet about
it and still they haven't explained they
just all that happened is in their
internal database there's some big
Chinese database on on viruses all they
did is they kind of added in the four
nine nine one to the description of the
RIT G sequence just in brackets which
kind of indicates that now they have
confirmed that it's indeed the same
sequence that they collected in 2013 but
there's been no official commentary and
there's been no official explanation
and even I think in a follow up a paper
they still don't cite the 2016 paper by
by by the who Han Institute authors
which just very odd behavior so as if
they're go ahead yeah no I don't know
it's either there I'm really
uncomfortable with what they're doing or
because I mean it's obvious that you
know once they reveal it
people are gonna arrive at the
conclusion that it's the same sequence I
mean the original fragment for nine and
one was submitted to genebank in 2013
it's not like it could be you know
deleted from there so it's very odd that
you know the way that they chose to to
you know disseminate this information to
the public so in some sense the odd
relationship between sample four nine
nine one and our ATG thirteen the fact
that they appear to be based on the same
the same strain are not identified as
the same strain it's hard to avoid the
impression that this is functioning like
two sets of books where if you don't
want somebody to be able to follow a
trail you could rename something so that
it doesn't connect to the other things
that would constitute evidence of what
it really was so I'm not saying that
that happened but I am saying it is very
interesting that this lab is behaving in
a scientifically unorthodox unacceptable
and if it's intentional unethical way
with respect to samples that are now at
the center of a historical pandemic
whatever its source we have a right to
understand what it is that these samples
are and what the relationship to each
other is and then you mentioned
databases what has been your experience
looking into these databases in order to
figure out what connects to what
so there's another database where there
was another database by she's generally
herself like her private not private
personal database it was public at the
time and she essentially collected her
own
little viral samples or pasted some
little parts of the genome that she
thought were interesting into this
database rather than submit them to gene
bank or other databases but so that
database had been has been missing it
seems to have been deleted the link for
the download link is no longer available
and also that database was kind of in
the midst of a bit of a lot of scandal
but it was very interesting to see that
on December 30th she generally kind of
scrubbed the database of some mentions
of arthropod vectors or like mosquitoes
or she changed those names to not those
phrases she changed the bad
coronaviruses so initially it was a
database of potential wildlife
coronaviruses and zoonotic interactions
or actually called switching
interactions and all those mentions were
deleted and replaced by just bat and
rodent coronaviruses which you know a
lot of people notice that and maybe at
the time whoever well it was done under
she's jennyline's ID I think whoever was
doing the changes probably didn't
realize that there is a change tracking
system in place where people people can
just go back to the previous version of
the description and see the differences
and I mean that's that's kind of a minor
thing but major thing is that now the 60
megabytes database that was previously
available for download is no longer
there you you know the download link if
you click on any just get an empty
archive back and people have tried
contacting the host hosting provider of
the database to check you know it was
that her backup file can't we you know
get it back online and the response they
got was laughable that I'm sorry we
didn't keep the backup you know it's
they didn't keep the backup of the how
yeah how things can be yeah which I'm
sure there's biology labs that probably
have the backup because it was just one
double file it's not that big just 60
Meg's and if they have it it'd be
creative they could share it because
many people were down
right many people have doubted it in the
course of their work I'm pretty sure
that like the berry cloud would have it
because they've been working on a lot of
the similar sequences it's great to see
you know what your competitor /
collaborator has you know to kind of
maybe give you ideas on what they're
working on see their recent submissions
I think that can give a good idea of the
types of to a person skilled an art
could give ideas of what research
directions the competitors foulest I'm
sure they're keeping tabs on on each
other so yeah if anybody has the
database then they can share it or at
least check if there's any kind of odd
sequences maybe just you know no please
share the database with us if you
haven't this this is important and it's
you know it would be great to check some
hypotheses here but really that database
is disproportionately valuable in light
of the pandemic and what information it
might contain so you mentioned the
Barrick lab this is Ralph barek in North
Carolina is that right yes so Ralph
barek is the the PI in the other major
coronavirus laboratory he's in the US he
has collaborated with the the jangly lab
in China at times they are also
competitors them you know this is the
way science works so they're friendly
competitors who are constantly as you
point out in your medium article
one-upping each other with respect to
their ability to manipulate viruses and
things like this but anyway that it this
deserves to be on the table because the
Barrick lab has been quiet am i right
about these abnormalities and
coincidences they have effectively
signed on to the consensus that a
laboratory leak is so preposterous as to
not worth be worth our consideration
well I think there was just one brief
mention by Ralph Barrack that lab leak
is theoretically possible so he
personally I don't think he said
can rule it out that was a while back
but he never dove into the details and
one thing he said that at this point we
still don't have any evidence of a
natural origin we don't have a
intermediate host and since then I
haven't really heard anything from Ralph
he was just I just heard I guess a
couple of podcasts with him on like
biology the biology podcasts this week
in biology I think okay well that's
better I'm so glad to hear that he
acknowledges that it's an open
possibility at some level I think so I
mean that's
I hope I'm remembering correctly that I
mean I hope that he actually goes on the
record then and says what he really
thinks because I don't think yes anybody
who's been quoting him verbatim about
his stance on this being either a lab
leak or a possibility of a lab okay so
let's um we've jumped around a little
bit we've got a massive coincidence in
terms of the emergence of the virus
emerging in wuhan is suspicious at
emerging at the end of the year in
winter when the bats would have been
hibernating is suspicious even the
Chinese government now acknowledges that
the wet market is not the origin point
we don't have in the bat virus it
doesn't seem like the receptor binding
domain is not optimized for bats not
sure did it did they try and affecting
bats with this the starts to in any case
so the RBM came from a Pangolin virus
and that that's the whole now way to
solder I want to correct you the RBM did
not come from a Pangolin the closest
sequence we have is from a Pangolin am I
right about that it's not that we know
that the RBM came from a Pangolin
Pangalos offered as the likely
intermediate because the sequence for it
so the the binding domain is this
important sequence that creates the
proteins that allow the SARS Cove to
viral particles to invade cells right so
it binds the the AC II particle so am I
correct we don't know that this is from
a Pangolin but we that's our best guess
because of the sequence similarity
well the RBM is from a Pangolin training
the RB m is nowhere else to be found
that our BMS is pretty unique and so and
it's kind of been throwing a wrench into
this fill a genetic trees that because
in all the respects in all the parts of
the sequence rit g13 is the closest
relative of stars to but in that very
narrow strain of the spike protein the
RB m the receptor binding domain that is
actually kind of the key to entry of the
particular animal because you know the
AC to receptor is different in different
animals that came up that came from a
Pangolin
and more moreover the more interesting
part is that it actually binds to a
human receptor better than a dust to a
Pangolin receptor so it seems a bit more
optimized or adapted to to humans that
bangle a bangle is although the strain
is supposedly extracted from pangolins
that were smuggled or captured by
chinese customs from smugglers in
Guangdong in 2019 and then they sent
some samples to some labs biology labs
because those pangolins died of some
ammonia or something so they suspected I
still think we need to sort this out I
think we were having a communication
problem for some reason the sequence is
not a hundred percent identical to the
Pangolin binding domain sequence it's 99
percent I mean it's it's got like I want
to say how many it only has one I mean I
asked a difference in the receptor
binding motif there's a receptor binding
domain and the receptor binding motif
they are BM and that one has you know
all but one amino acid identical to the
Pangolin strain and B seven eight nine
and how big is the
how big is the the motif it's not that
big my memory I mean I think it's like
78 or 79 amino acids or one of them is
different yeah it's pretty sure the
domain is is bigger it's I want to say
maybe 100 and how what is the percentage
similarity of the the whole domain well
the the RBD the domain is actually very
similar between the three strains
between starts to the Pangolin and the
rit g13 and it's it's pretty conserved
between other with other strains but
it's actually the RBM is it's different
between SARS 200 TG 13 but it's nearly
identical with just one minute
difference between the Pangolin strain
and and SARS - and the only thing is
that it's identical on the amino acid
level but on the nucleotide level there
are some similarities and there's
actually quite a lot of differences for
some people to claim that you know it
couldn't have been like a lab leak
because it would have taken a law like
for natural passage of the two strains
to have such a high difference in
nucleotides although the United States
the same nucleotides have like a 12%
difference so you're talking some short
sequences you're talking about what we
call synonymous mutations right right
yes
so for those of you who are maybe
grappling to remember your high school
or college biology because you have a
triplet codon and you only have 20 amino
acids that are possible to be specified
there's a lot of redundancy in the code
so you can make changes in the genetic
code that don't change the sequence of
the protein in question and the protein
in question is the important thing
because that's what dictates how much
affinity this molecule has for the cell
receptor to which it is binding that
allows the virus to gain access is that
a fair summary yeah so when we're
talking about how similar or how
different we have to be care
about whether we're talking about the
protein in which case you have very
tight similarity for the underlying
genes in this case RNA which would be
more distinct and so then there's a
question about how much time would have
to pass and how much if you were
involved in experiment how much passage
in that is moving it from one cell to
the next or one you can also do this
with living animals from one animal to
the next would you have to do to get
this level of sequence difference so you
want to unpack for us what you think so
you have our ATG 13 which is the strain
that is revealed in 2020 by the jangly
lab you have 4 9 9 1 which is at some
level the same strain we now know
although we don't really know what our
ATG 13 is because am I correct there is
no physical sample of our ATG 13 well
this is a good question to I mean
because they claim they every sequence
the the old fecal swab that they took
from the bats in 2013 but and they claim
they don't have the live virus but they
re sequence something and so that
something must be there that the sample
they collected in 2013 and some people
are yes some people are skeptical at all
that RIT g13 event exists that this
sample exists that they actually
resequenced something people are
skeptical about that and think that
maybe they you know came up with a
sequence in other ways other creative
ways so let's just let's just be clear
about this we don't have any reason to
believe one way or the other
what we do as a physical sample but it
is entirely possible to take a sequence
let's say 499 one sequence and to modify
it without doing anything in a
laboratory and enter a new sequence that
has high analogy 2 4 9 9 1 into a
database under a new name so there's
nothing that prevents this this is on
the honor system people enter sequences
and you know it's up to them to provide
a reference sample or something
and other than that we are just simply
taking them at their word so we don't
know whether it's possible for it's
possible that our ATG 13 didn't exist
that it's a a modification of a sequence
that was created for a purpose it's
possible that the sample did exist and
they did do away with it they disposed
of it and have only the the text left
but anyway these are all open
possibilities and until we have a frank
discussion coming out of that lab about
what they did and didn't do we just are
no specific enough yeah and if they had
originally sequenced it they can then
you know take that sequence recreate the
original virus put it into some cell
culture do many experiments on it and it
will mutate and then they can take the
new mutated virus and re sequence it and
say oh no here it is what we collected
back in 2013 and you see you know many
differences from the original sequence
and as you said it's just their word
that in in in science you know people
take just people at their word and
normally nobody really has any incentive
to lie which you know in the case of
investigation might not be entirely
correct
so am I correct from the sequence that
they have given us that they could
actually even if there is no physical
sample of this virus left in the lab or
even in nature let's say it had gone
extinct they could resurrect that virus
from the sequence alone current
technology would allow them to take the
code from a corona virus and install a
genome that they had effectively written
from scratch is that correct yeah
absolutely
if you have the code the sequence you
can just print the DNA the DNA version
of the RNA virus that's what is normally
done in by reverse genetics you print
like seven fragments of the virus in the
language of DNA
then you stitch them together and you're
you know cells of interest and create
one you know one long DNA clone of the
underlining RNA virus and then you put
it into a different cell culture which
turns DNA into RNA and wow you got live
virus just from you know essentially
from a computer and I mean it's it's
done routinely and it was just recently
done with SARS - in two labs in one
Swiss lab did it like in in a month
put together sorry co2 from the sequence
alone yeah yeah they just download the
Chinese sequence ordered the DNA printed
in Genzyme in the states waited three
weeks until they got you know mailed
back and then within a week they
assembled the live virus from the
fragments that they got printed in the
states in Switzerland and you know the
Galveston lab in Texas did pretty much
the same thing it's a terrifying love
power well yeah that's I mean biology
and genetic engineering has been drawing
by leaps and bounds and the things you
can do today with genetics or life
systems yes so you have a little bit of
power to to do bad things yeah
we still don't know about they like
underlying mechanisms in many organisms
but we can walk around with them pretty
pretty good yeah we can we can composite
them we can take pieces from here and
pieces from there and in fact that's one
of the things that is very clear in in
your your review article that you wrote
is that we now routinely composite
viruses in order to find out how they
will function once done so the creation
of chimeric viruses that for example
have assets from one place and assets
from another place from two different
ancestral strains and then you can put
them in an environment and see how they
infect the cells from a creature or the
creature itself and then you can passage
them one generation to the next either
of cells or individuals and you can
basically guide them evolutionary
to become better and better at infecting
whatever creature it is and then you can
discover how the sequence changed in
order to make them better so the fact
that all of these things are now
happening in labs routinely presumably
usually with good intentions
with the intention of making us safer
rather than jeopardizing us it certainly
could be weaponized and maybe is
weaponized sometimes but scientists are
routinely doing these things in the
interest of making humanity safer but
the technology involved in doing these
experiments obviously carries a
tremendous risk you know SARS co2 is bad
it's highly infectious and has a very
long list of very dangerous symptoms but
it obviously has a relatively low death
rate / infection that could be worse and
the ability for anybody to download a
sequence and with you know what would it
cost to put together a laboratory that
was capable of taking let's say SARS
Cove - from the sequence alone and
creating a live infectious virus from
scratch I guess be in the hundreds of
thousands of dollars okay that's a very
low number you're given given for for
bad bad actor yeah and yeah you can
print the sequence for like a thirty
thousand base sequence but thirty
thousand dollars if you order it from
the states if you do it in Chinese
probably ten times less you can if it's
really you can order the sequence yeah
yeah I mean there's so many zeroes that
like companies they'll do custom you
know DNA printing protein printing if
you need like an actual like a peptide
or protein but yeah any kind of biology
work is now outsourced there's so many
providers and a lot of them in China
because it's it's cheap or India it's
it's a cheap commodity now
creation of dna/rna fe okay actually
yeah we we one thing we just briefly
touched upon about the synthetic
chimeric viruses and this is true about
SARS Cove - SARS - in precisely the rpm
the receptor binding motif that is
supposedly coming from a Pangolin now
supposedly it's it's the closest to the
Pangolin strain and everything else is
closest to our our ATG 13 so it's if
we're talking about a natural origin we
we have to explain somehow how the two
virus is recombined and of course it can
happen in nature but it would take a
Pangolin of the bat meeting you know at
the same spot for the virus to recombine
it needs to be in the same cell like two
different strains to recombine the need
to enter the same cell and you know
start replicating therefore for them to
have a chance to recombine and and it's
really unexplained at this point how
this can happen between because
pangolins and bats are not known to can
inhabit similar areas or have any kind
of parties together yeah it's not it's
not impossible but it's also right it's
got to be considered ecologically highly
unlikely and you know the other thing is
that's the way bats roost creates large
populations and the fact that they're
small animals means that effectively you
can have a large number of paths but
pangolins aren't like this and so the
number of individuals is low which means
the number of opportunities for an
animal to be infected by two different
strains that then get to combine is
pretty low Pangolin it's just a it's a
suspicious proposal as the intermediate
host so you know not impossible but at
some level we ought to be obsessed with
finding whatever the
wild intermediate host is because it
will tell us an awful lot and it will
allow us to put this lab origin
hypothesis to rest if indeed it should
be put to rest but one does not get the
sense that this is a focus and it really
it just it it needs to be yeah some
reason we don't see a huge effort in
China to to find this intermediate
animal or to serve the other Yunnan
strains or maybe go back to that cave
but I think we should really go back to
the fridge in the wine Institute and
check the miners samples those four
miners that had SARS antibodies we
should really try to extract the genome
of underlying stars like wires that they
have I think that that would offer some
clues to as to what this is yeah I think
it's a that's a that's a great point
just to fill in the what the problem is
and why we're focused here when you
generate a phylogeny that is a tree that
tells you how closely related organisms
are to each other we've all seen these
things these bifurcating trees of of
animals or plants or whatever you can do
this with viruses too of course
and the problem with SARS Cove too is
that it doesn't land in one place if you
sequence one part of its genome or in
fact most of its genome it lands in one
place closely a affinis affiliated with
the Rhino Louis horseshoe bat virus and
if you sequence this other very
important part it comes out much closer
to this Pangolin version of the virus so
not impossible the two would have come
together but very unlikely ecologically
and so really the question is which is
more likely that some very unusual
ecological event took place in some
individual Pangolin somewhere or that a
laboratory in an attempt to create a
virus that was highly infectious and
therefore highly relevant to the study
of human pandemics emerging from bats
would have composited two viruses
thereby solving a problem
for the virus that the virus would have
a very difficult time solving on its own
in other words the jump to humans would
typically be a very short-lived jump and
if you were in a laboratory and you were
worried about things jumping into humans
you might make that jump for it
you would composite two viruses you
would make a virus that had capabilities
that no wild virus does in order to see
what happens next and if that thing
escaped it might be that we are living
downstream of that terrible phenomenon
if it escaped from the lab having been
composited for the purpose of making it
more infectious or interesting to them
in some ways than many of the phenomena
that are so unusual that we are seeing
like the very large range of symptoms
that kovat 19 produces might be the
result of the compositing and the
passages viruses in a laboratory which
would have evolutionarily imbued the
virus with special capabilities
especially if it was passaged in human
cells which is something that's done you
may have heard of HeLa cells HeLa cells
being cells from a particular Helen lac
was her name a patient who died of
cancer and her cancer is now a cell line
that continues in many laboratories and
is used for experiments to see how
things interface with humans so you know
arguably this cell lineage could have
been used to passage viruses that had
been composited and then it would the
viruses that were then the result of
this experiment would have new
capacities that a human being wouldn't
know to generate but that over
evolutionary time in the laboratory the
the virus would have picked up you know
could that explain the incredible
transmissibility of this virus possibly
right and we didn't even get to the
furin site which is another big surprise
in a beta corona virus which you know
isn't seen anywhere else with anything
close to like less than 60 percent
similarity so let's let's have you spell
this out
what is a foreign site okay so that's a
cleavage side okay let's step back for
the virus to infect a cell it needs to
attach to the AC to receptor and then
what needs to happen is it's two-step
process the despite protein needs to be
kind of caught into and in the position
it's cut that this is where the the
fusion peptide is located that then
starts attaching to the cell membrane
and can invaginate the virus into the
membrane and start the fusion process
the membrane fusion to get inside the
cell and so for this fusion peptide to
become activated the spike needs to be
cut at this cleavage site and a very
efficient new cleavage site is found in
SARS - which can be cut by furin family
or foreign family of proteases that that
can recognize a specific sequence of
four amino acids all right hold on I
want to I want to I want to slow you
down just so people get it the the
cleaving peptide the protein that does
the cutting is resident in the human
cell am I correct
right okay yes thirty aces in the human
cell and then there is a sequence oh go
ahead
yeah and now in extracellular matrix as
well it's actually eat both inside cells
and outside cells and some proteases are
actually found on the membrane and the
fewer inside is a very efficient site to
be cleaved because it can be cleaved by
various families of these proteases and
this increases the viral tropism much
greater than without the site okay again
i want to get this into into
understandable language
the human being is producing a protein
the purpose of this protein what it does
is it cuts a particular sequence that it
finds and it cuts in a particular way
it's like a a surgical instrument that
looks only for one sequence and slice
whenever it finds it is that correct
yeah yeah you know it's correct I know
it isn't no that's not true I think we
we know similarly but so okay so the
virus by providing the sequence at which
this existing protease already cuts
takes a quantum leap in its ability to
infect human cells
is that correct and in fact its ability
to move between species am I correct
about that too right yeah okay it's been
shown that the addition of your insight
greatly enhances the ability of the
virus to infect different types of cells
and cells from different animals because
now the virus isn't so dependent on the
exact match of its kind of spike binding
domain and the receptor human receptor
but the actual fusion can happen to two
other cells where the attachment might
not be as strong like just from a
species standpoint okay so and these
foreign sites again a sequence at which
these human-made proteases slice that
fern site where do we find it in natural
coronaviruses well in in in at that
particular spot we don't really see fear
in sites in beta coronaviruses I mean
it's it's a cleavage site but it's
cleaved by different protease is not not
as efficient for like at least in humans
as fiorina's we see them in like alpha
coronaviruses or other families of
coronaviruses but we know that the
introduction of this your insight just
from previous experiments in culture and
other viruses as well and in influenza
that it greatly increases the
transmissibility and expands the
repertoire of a virus in terms of types
of cells and types of animals it can
infect okay so a fern site greatly
enhances transmission
but now you've talked about alpha and
beta coronaviruses so where do we see
for insights and where don't we see them
we see them in in alpha Colonel viruses
what are ours one in MERS what our alpha
coronaviruses it's just a different
family of I'm trying to I'm trying to
get you to spell out how unlikely it is
that you that you would find this fern
site in a horseshoe bat derived
coronavirus from the wild based on what
we see in viruses of that type that
we've encountered well just by you know
the phylogeny or surveillance of this
beta coronavirus lineage having none of
them having the fear in sight and this
one no stars to having one it's it's
just statistically very unlikely to
expect it to see there and moreover I
think when we put them in cell culture I
think it tends to actually mutate away
so um very interesting in cell culture
what kind of cells
I think they saw it in like viral cells
the green monkey
give me cell line but I'm you know I
wasn't really prepared to going this
deep about into the likely actual
experiments on the fioor insight but yes
are just very unlikely to see it in this
type of corona virus and the fact that
it seems that there is some kind of
evolutionary not evolutionary some kind
of selection pressure against it in in
the beta coronavirus lineage because of
you know in it maybe in in bats and in
horseshoe bats that beta chronic virus
is normally are found that that fear
inside is actually detrimental to the
virus so so if i can just translate this
probably there's a trade off cost to
having a fear inside right and so what
happens is if you allow the thing to
evolve under natural circumstances or
semi natural circumstances
fern site comes apart because some other
priority is higher what we see in Tsar's
Cove too is a fern site that is not
found in any of the natural lineages
that you know come from bats for example
and so the question is did something
really unusual happen here that put that
fern site either through an evolutionary
mechanism or through a hybridization
event did a fern site get added to a
virus that almost never has one when we
find it in fact in the wild never does
have it or did a laboratory decide well
one thing that we could study is what
happens if there was a fern site that
would create a virus that had capacities
we haven't seen and maybe we'd like to
investigate those capacities or third
possibility you tell me if any of these
are off the off the map of actual
possibilities third possibility is a
passage experiment generates a fern site
because the conditions that are provided
to the virus make it advantageous and
whatever the trade-off is is not
prioritized by the laboratory
environment so fern side-dish is short
in sequence am I correct yes it's just
four amino acids four amino acid so
that's a very short site and so you
could get there through chimerism and
you could get there through passages
am I right about that yes absolutely
so the the question then is is the
highly unusual fact of a fern site
showing up in this virus that is
creating the kovat 19 pandemic the
result of some natural event that is
very unusual or is it the result of
laboratory manipulation which would make
good sense if you were of a mind set to
study potentially emergent pandemic
causing viruses
it's it's a big question and unexplained
at this point and I think there's also
one interesting aspect of the site the
fear insight that I find interesting is
that it the way it's constructed in the
nucleotide code it actually has a
special like a digestion aid enzyme site
that could greatly help with screening
for mutations in cell culture to screen
if they're fever inside is actually
mutated away or on the contrary to
actually screen for colonies that still
have it the foul on for one restriction
enzyme site and the way it's it's
implemented for amino acids that are
coded for the first two arginines are
coded by three unusual codons that are
in general found quite rarely in in the
sequence and but they what they do allow
for is for this new restriction enzyme
to be present in the kind of in the
insert and this is another thing that
the fear inside is not only interesting
is that it's there it's interesting in
the way it occurred in the in the SARS
to sequence and it starts to genome is
that it's it's it's in there by an
insertion and it's insert of 12
nucleotides whereas usually you know
it's not unusual for viruses to develop
this few insights that didn't have them
before but usually happens through
mutations like the sequence length
doesn't change it's not like you see a
magical appearance of 12 new nucleotides
at the very spot that now has a few
inside which is what happened and SARS -
so these two interesting you know
occurrences are again they're not proof
of anything but they're just add to the
bag of questions that
kind of weighing heavily on the scale
they're very conspicuous when taken
together right yes absolutely yeah so
all right so you've got a fern site that
shows up out of nowhere in a play in a
virus that would typically not have one
you have the fact that the sequence is
added rather than the result of
mutations of the sequence that was
present that's also conspicuous so that
could be evidence of a laboratory
inserting this sequence rather than it
resulting from a natural process and
then you point two flanking sequences
that if I understand you right you're
suggesting they could be used as a kind
of indicator sometimes scientists will
add something to a a modification so
that they can detect whether the
modification is present in a particular
sample and so in this case if furan is
something that would tend to evolve away
as a result of a trade off cost you
might want a little indicator to tell
you whether it was still present is that
what you're getting at yeah absolutely
it's not even the flank flanking it's
actually inside of the insert in the way
the insert is done the the codons coding
for it the two arginines enable this new
restriction enzyme site to be there and
it could be used for you know our flip
the restriction length fragment
polymorphism screening process to very
quickly very efficiently see if your
colony of a virus has this fear inside
of a dozen so you can if you want it to
stay in the colony you can screen the
colonies that have it pretty efficiently
without you know having to bother to
re-sequence the whole thing so that's
that's I mean it all of it could be a
result of just occurring naturally but
it's just as you said taking together
all those coincidences just add up to
the point where you start you know being
somewhat suspicious about this being
handmade rather than you know
evolutionary selected for and another
point I want to make is that the lab
League doesn't necessarily mean handmade
it could also mean like everything that
happens in nature can happen in the lab
especially given that the lab is the
place where all of these pangolins and
bats all are brought together or even
maybe you know they're put in the same
culture maybe inadvertently and so just
like some viral justsay that it they
think it's the process of natural
selection that is at work here all
natural selection can work in a lab you
know just in holding pans for bats which
the Wuhan CDC had live bats to extract
virus samples from I don't know if they
have Bengal is but they have Bengal is
like Bengal is in Guangdong and the
Wildlife Refuge Center where the Chinese
customs sent the smuggle pangolins to so
just because you know some some
biologists thing that all the hallmarks
that we see in the virus like what
Anderson and others are claiming they
think these are much more likely to
occur through national selection again
that doesn't preclude a lab liek
national selection can be at work in a
lab without even the scientists knowing
it they can just you know have some
infected bats and effects of penguins
and it's actually a much higher odds of
happening in a lab than in some remote
location in Yunnan or Malaysia where the
pangolins normally live and even if it
does happen there it still doesn't
explain how this materializes in new Han
without managing to infect anyone along
the way yeah a big question so it's
funny you mentioned this issue of
evolution taking place in the lab
without scientists knowing about it
because of course one of the ways that
people know about me at this point has
to do with my discovery or my prediction
hypothesis that made a prediction that
the long telomeres that we see in
laboratory mice are actually not
indicative of the nature of mice
generally but are indicative of
and kind of evolutionary pressure that
exists in the breeding colonies that
nobody had recognized and so we now know
that this is right and that those long
those telomeres were elongated by
selection in the laboratory or in the
breeding colony and of course that was
not the intent of the people who were
breeding these mice in fact they weren't
even aware that they were exerting a
strong Selective pressure but it was
enough to radically elongate the
telomeres so this kind of thing happens
all the time and in this case it's
particularly dangerous because if this
virus was passaged in the lab under
conditions that were special in other
words if it was passaged in human cancer
cells
well cancers have particular
idiosyncrasies and any particular cancer
that you would choose would have
idiosyncrasies and those idiosyncrasies
would have a lot to say potentially
about the way the virus functions also
you point out the issue of evolving away
to the extent that this virus might have
been passaged
and favored to adapt to certain cells
that might be giving us advantages at
the moment like for example the
difficult time the virus has
transmitting itself outdoors
well the laboratory is an indoor
environment it's possible that something
was selected for that made it
particularly transmissible indoors and
it did so it cost at expense to it in
terms of how transmissible it is
outdoors and what's going to happen then
is over time it's going to become more
transmissible outdoors so I don't know
if that story is right or not I mean we
don't know if this came from the lab or
it didn't but if it did and that has had
effects on its nature as a virus then
not knowing that is going to cause us to
make the problem worse because to the
extent that right now we have a virus
that we can interact outside and not
transmit it to each other we would be
very wise to act carefully so that it
does not learn the trick of being
transmitted outside and if we're casual
about outside it will evolve in that
direction so one thing I really hope
people get from our disguise
is that this is not a question of blame
this is not a question of who cares it's
now a human pandemic and let's deal with
it this is a matter that has very
important implications for the pandemic
that we are facing how long we will face
it how many people will die if it is a
wild derived virus we need to know that
and the way we're gonna find that out is
we're gonna settle this by finding a
population of some other creature and
intermediate hosts in the wild but
that's going to require transparency
with respect to what went on in this lab
in wuhan yeah I don't know if we're
gonna get it I mean well hold all the
cards
unless there's immense international
pressure I don't know
well yes a whistleblower would be great
I would love a whistleblower but Yuri
you have no idea I think how important
and affect you are having on this story
right we saw yeah I hope not too oh yes
you're not important hello yes Yuri is
completely unimportant and he doesn't
know what he's talking about just ignore
him but if we were to put that aside
Matt Ridley published in The Washington
Post this week an article pointing out
what you have been saying and in fact
you know he wasn't just me a lot of
people were saying and many of them way
longer I mean way prior to to my article
and it's good that there are people who
are not afraid to speak out III let's
hope there's more and more but well
again I you know I don't want to put you
in danger by pointing out the centrality
of your work but I think a lot of people
have had the same reaction to it that I
have which is that you know we go
looking for evidence and we find that a
lot of the evidence is compromised by P
people who do have such a conspiratorial
bent that they are basically verifying
their own beliefs rather than doing an
honest careful job of sorting the
evidence that goes in both directions
what I saw in your work and what I
expect Matt Ridley saw in your work and
what others who I know have cited you
you know I saw another one in the The
Bulletin of Atomic Scientists today
investigating this question it also
cites you so you're clear self
scepticism your desire to do this
honestly you and I share a desire to
actually be wrong in this case it would
be much better if this didn't I don't
want to be right either but if we are
right that this is a the most likely
explanation I'll speak for myself I
believe it to be the most likely
explanation at this point if we are on
the right track there than it is urgent
that the virality community stop telling
us a fiction and that they come clean
with what they know and they understand
and I think in order for that to happen
it is incumbent on us to be clear that
let's say the worst is true let's say
that this virus was created in the lab
that it was the result of a chimeric
virus that was then passage through
human cells and that this explains
something about the way it behaves now
that's escaped into the human population
that does not mean that this is Chinese
in origin the scientific community was
engaged in these experiments yes this
most likely would have come from the the
lab in Wuhan but that lab was involved
in international discussions the
granting agencies include the NIH so
this is this is a global problem we
share responsibility for it and the most
important thing is that in an effort not
to take responsibility that we don't
bury the evidence of what the virus is
because that evidence is essential for
us figuring out how to deal with it
which is obviously to any reasonable
person the most important question on
the table
absolutely and the second most important
question I think is the nature of gainin
functional studies and the you know
should they be like what's the benefit
and should they be maybe reconsidered
and another moratorium on global market
Orion on them should be maybe in place
at least for a few years until we sort
out you know what are the benefits that
humanity is gaining from these kind of
studies yeah because what the humanity
was promised originally that they would
those studies would help prevent
pandemics that would provide vaccines
and treatments to viruses poised for
emergence to take the headline of one of
the studies those promises have come up
empty and we're nowhere
I don't think closer to any treatment or
vaccine from from those studies that we
were before they were conducted again I
might be a little biased here but so far
I just don't have any I don't know of
any conclusive evidence for vaccines or
or treatments that have come out of
studies not just on Colonel viruses even
influenza that the First's age five and
one gain-of-function experiments I don't
see it having provided the world with
anything of great value well the risks
the risks of these studies even if this
one wasn't a lab leak just in general
the risks of gain-of-function studies is
huge with i think i'm justified benefits
so this this is a second topic yes well
okay I I agree with this and I think
there's a third one too so the first one
is what do we do about the circulating
SARS co2 virus which depends in part on
figuring out what it is adapted for
which might be a laboratory environment
the second question is what do we do
about gain-of-function
research going forward in light of the
danger even if this wasn't a lab leak
we now are suddenly aware of all of the
things that are going on in a lab and
that that it is plausible that this
pandemic emerged from a lab tells us
that this is a this is a major global
concern and we need to figure out what
to do and then I would say the third
thing on that list is the fact that this
work is now possible even if we have a
scientific moratorium does not prevent
somebody from taking over that research
even if we stop doing it in the
scientific community what stops some
country that is interested in changing
its ranking in the world power structure
or a malevolent organization that wished
to use it to its own ends and you know I
will say it's not even difficult to
figure out a perfectly amoral entity
somebody who just really didn't care
about other people could use this
technology to greatly increase their own
power and wealth and it's not hard to
figure out how they would do it so we
have a problem we have now generated the
technology to do things which having
been generated and shared publicly
discussed in literature are now
available to people that do not share
our values and that is a big concern
yeah that's a tough one is bioterrorism
it was a very tough question it and have
become a much more urgent cause of
concern after some bad actors that were
probably not bright enough to to see the
potential of bioterrorism after this
pandemic they probably could have woken
up to oh and you don't even need a lab
now I can what I need to do is collect
some samples from that hour or maybe
steal samples from labs or
samples of even-even this virus and
release it strategically in places where
people don't expect it's church or
subway system or something and yeah you
can just wreak havoc on economies of
countries that you you know wait to see
go down well you can some big problem
you could do that and I also just as a
mental exercise I was you know early on
in the discussion of could this have
come from a lab could it be a bioweapon
and all that there was lots of
discussion about whether or not this
virus would make any sense as a weapon
and I agree that if your purpose was
military effectively this virus is not a
particularly good choice because so many
people are asymptomatic but that does
not have to be what was on people's
minds and I really hesitate to put this
idea into the world but my feeling is
it's so obvious that my being quiet
about it doesn't help so probably better
that we are all sobered up and aware of
this the if one decided to create such a
virus and release it one could pretty
reliably guess that it was going to have
a negative impact on let's say air
travel hotels cruises these kinds of
things and obviously the nature of
markets are such that if you can predict
when nobody else can that these
particular industries are about to take
a huge hit you can take small amounts of
money and turn it into large amounts of
money or take large amounts of money and
turn it into gargantuan quality
quantities of money for just simply
being able to predict what others don't
see coming
and that fact means that motive here
could be utterly mundane now again there
is no evidence that this was
intentionally released by anybody and I
think you and I are both believers that
most probable explanation is
well-intentioned research that
resulted in a leak nobody foresaw but I
have to say one other possibility again
zero evidence for it but it has to be on
the list of things that could explain
the phenomena that we see is that if
somebody did create the virus Wuhan
would be the kind of place you would
want to release it in order to hide your
tracks right because if it's released in
will on then the obvious you know the
obvious interpretation is that the
laboratories in Wuhan and there are two
of them that study back coronaviruses
that one of them made an error but yet
we'll probably have to be a huge inside
job for them to know that one would have
the are ATG strain really you know
setting up these dues because you know
the stars - so close to the strain that
one is you've had well so I agree with
your logic assuming our ATG 13 is what
we think it is and would you say that
the similarity to four nine nine one
similarity to four nine nine one is
sufficient that somebody would have had
to have they would have had to have lots
of information about what was going on
so it's unlikely that some malevolent
force it's not impossible that somebody
would release a bat like coronavirus in
Wuhan in order to hide their tracks but
the chances that they would get
something so close to our ATG thirteen
and four nine nine one is pretty low I
mean it's not impossible but it would be
someone with really deep knowledge of
what was doing so I mean probably if an
actor of that caliber was contemplating
something like this that they do a lot
of the homework and well that's it's a
possibility
it's a remote possibility there's no
evidence for it but I think actually
we're modeling something that I want to
see people be better about which is
conspiracies exist as well
huge concern going forward yes a huge
concern going forward and we have to
learn how to talk about the possibility
without being labeled crazy for engaging
in even considering it and so you know
what you've just seen is two people who
know something about this story and the
relevant scientific details and you know
I think we're both pretty skeptical that
this has unfolded now but we're worried
that it could unfold in the future yeah
I hope we're wrong too and I hope that
yeah best possible from my perspective
I'm sure I speak for you here is this
comes from the wild through some unusual
hard to imagine series Vaca logical
events that we are capable of
discovering and figuring out so the lab
isn't at fault they can be exonerated
and we can sober up on the basis that
we've been now through this exercise and
learned the lessons that it has to teach
us and we can figure out what we should
think about gain-of-function research
and we should think about what the heck
we're gonna do about the amazing power
that malevolent forces now have at their
disposal at ever lower price points
right and they were they always have
almost have to be some kind of really
broad surveillance of new viral
outbreaks or just outbreaks throughout
the world to where need there needs to
be some kind of like one big agency I
think there's a nuclear agency
monitoring like the possible
bioterrorism
and if there is a cluster of similar
infections you know one one geography
just really trying to sequence quickly
what is the agent behind this and
hopefully you know not let it get out
the way that this one got out and yeah I
gotta say like even without any
conspiracy theories or a lab leak the
way it was handled by one government or
Chinese government just not imposing the
log down soon enough and letting people
celebrate the Chinese New Year and they
intermingle and leave the country I mean
that alone is pretty disappointing and
in the future we really need like really
quickly isolate geographies where
outbreaks happened so that we can avoid
global pandemic on the scale is
completely crazy that this is and I'm
afraid we're just beginning to see the
numbers just you know start growing even
further in other continents on the
countries like now Africa and South
America reporting high growth so I'm
afraid we're not there yet
to see this play out lets you spend any
play oh yeah I share I share those those
fears with you and I do feel like as bad
as this is this is the ultimate trial
run this is the thing that Sobers you up
and you know I hope there's also a
willingness to consider the general
style of problem because I know that
over the last gosh what it would it be
2008 financial crisis 2011 Fukushima
Aliso Canyon and I don't know what was
that 2017-18
anyway we keep having this situation
where we discover what some industry is
doing after is too late when some of the
Deepwater Horizon accident in the Gulf
of Mexico so I constantly feel like I'm
learning what I needed to know after the
accident has already happened and that
what I really want is somebody to
fast-forward that process so I can know
all of the processes that we're engaged
in that are unbelievably dangerous so
that we can talk about them ahead of
time rather than once the the cats out
of the bag
and you know this may be the worst of
these
terms of the destruction economic and
human that ultimately comes out of it
and frankly even if this thing evolves
into something with flu-like levels of
hazard that humanity is stuck with even
that would be a major setback I mean we
have flu circulating every year that's a
big problem for humans to have a second
one of those if that's what this turned
into would be a huge disaster going
forward so we are playing with fire go
ahead yeah we're not even sure about the
long-term consequences of this it's only
been six months that we have kind oldest
virus we don't know if it can hide and
become a chronic infection like the
feline peritonitis which is also a
corona virus if you'd actually learn to
hide in in the immune cells and then it
just becomes fatal and like ten percent
of the effect it gets I hope this is not
into the case with this one yeah but
it's you know there could be long-term
consequences there which is not even
aware of
totally
I think Donald Rumsfeld be coding that
guy you know he's like the Yogi Berra of
video political phenomena or something
but I agree with you this thing could
hide in neurological tissue it could
hide in immunological tissue it could be
it could learn to change at a rate that
would allow individuals to be reinfected
multiple times over a lifetime we just
don't know what we're playing with here
and male reproductive system they
already have issues of the first stars
or you know autopsies saw-like infected
going out and you know there were
reports in China with male fertility
issues of people after having had this
SARS - so yeah it's just I don't want to
like scare people but I'm pretty scared
myself that like
long-term this can be a bad bad one yeah
I agree
like flu I mean flu is bad enough but
like chronic flu lightning side yeah I
find myself in these conversations all
the time to where people are I mean in
in my country people have been convinced
by our president amongst others to treat
this as more trivial than it is and I
keep trying to alert people that just
the size of the unknowns here the
magnitude of them is so great that we
are wise to be treating this very
seriously yeah at this point if anybody
is still unconvinced that this is much
more serious than the flu living under a
rock but initially we all kind of were
just based on the previous track record
of other viruses other outbreaks even
the corona viruses and SARS and murders
were pretty bad but like comparatively
it was just a few thousand people they
burned out again
yeah exactly and that's what we thought
you know or many people thought I me
included in the beginning that I was
just another you know something seasonal
from China that we get every year and I
just usually subsides pretty quickly and
it's exactly you exactly what I thought
too
it was I remembered SARS and I thought
okay
that's bad but yeah limited so let me
ask you two more questions one your
experience since releasing your medium
piece well it wasn't very pleasant I
mean there's a lot of positive feedback
but the share of the negative feedback I
got especially initially in Russia
very vicious just you know for some
reason people start attacking me
personally yeah yeah questioning my
intelligence or remember the
qualifications of being able to I don't
know what read scientific papers or
whatever that have really nothing to do
with what are the facts I presented I
mean I suggested initially for everybody
just to read with a skeptical mind and
analyze for themselves just don't I mean
I don't really put a lot of my own views
on in the article I just pretty much
summarized of facts of course I mean I
call her it with my views but you know
you can do your own analysis and if you
think I made a mistake just you can
point out the mistakes rather than say
I'm an idiot or I'm the conspiracy not
well that's not really what they're
saying as somebody with considerable
experience with things in this
neighborhood what they were trying to do
was make you hurt to dissuade you from
continuing and to make an example of you
so that others would know not to make
the error in their view that you made
but the error that you made was doing an
honest analysis and sharing what you
discovered with the public so my sense
is we needed you to do that and I know
that it as much as I was already quite
suspicious it gave me a tremendous boost
in terms of understanding exactly what
the suspicions were rationally based on
and how to follow the trail into a realm
you know I'm not biotech cellular
biology was never my primary interest so
just having somebody guide me into the
literature that was relevant to this
since I didn't know anything about what
was taking place with coronavirus
research that was all new to me so what
you did needed to be done which is
exactly why you were punished for it
that said yeah no go ahead well yes and
it did I mean if whoever had to reach
the goal of making me feel unpleasant
they they did so but the initial kind of
fecal fecal storm subsided and after
that I get mostly positive feedback of
people saying that it did open their
eyes to at least the scale of
gain-of-function research that has been
going on in the hydrology community and
the danger that itself poses even if the
lab leak theories is to them still
highly unlikely the fact that there's so
much dangerous research around and still
goes on to them that was a revelation
and in parallel some some scientists
have reached out and said that they you
know support they definitely support the
idea that we cannot rule out the lab
leak at this point and that should be
considered like on an equal basis with
any other hypothesis as opposed to some
people somewhere all just cleaning this
is sheer lunacy a conspiracy yeah well
so I've been suggesting to my audience
that the conspiracy theory is a stigma a
term that's loaded with stigma designed
designed for a purpose
conspiracy hypothesis is really what
we're talking about yes it does appear
at the very least that there is a
conspiracy to prevent us from
investigating what happened here in
other words the unnatural alignment of
virologist with each other around a
story that doesn't stand up that does
appear to be a kind of collusion now
there's also other evidence how's your
computer ok now it's ok now what
happened yeah well I think I might have
been hacked I just started doing really
things and connecting to the internet I
just you've had computer problems but
probably malware yeah I don't know yeah
I don't want to claim it it's connected
but swell to people I agree that's some
other computer issues at the same time
computers are looking computers are
complex things go wrong with them you
never know I've had computer problems
too of late it's pretty dramatic in fact
could be nothing you know of anybody
else who's been courageously
investigating this hypothesis you might
have had some trouble all right so take
that fer for what it's worth
people have computer I mean look there's
nobody who's watching this podcast it
doesn't have a computer they screw up
right things happen on the other hand
there does come a point at which your
problems are severe enough mysterious
enough and form a kind of pattern with
other people who are also using their
computers to discuss and investigate
possibilities that obviously powerful
forces don't want discussed and you just
simply have to ask the question are my
computer glitches normal or is what
seems like an anomalous rate of computer
errors telling me something about the
level of disturbance that I have caused
in the universe right so if maybe other
researchers who didn't working on the
lab leak hypothesis had some kind of
computer problems or any other weird
things happen in their lives maybe they
can share it and we can together some
kind of list of unexplained coincidences
outside of the lab leak hypothesis yeah
I think it's well worth considering all
right is there anything that you think
we've missed that needs to be on the
table for people to understand the
landscape they've landed in well I mean
I think we're ready that's way too much
for her for anybody
to get their head across this at this
point we discussed a lot of things but I
think we've touched upon all the main
points of this huge coincidence with a
lot of unanswered questions and I just
hope they're answered you know I just
hope somehow someone pressures the
scientists or not even just answered but
we need access to the lab we need to you
know the WH or whoever needs to check
the environment or we'd like to see the
samples collected from those miners and
we like to sequence and we'd like to
independently sequence the our ATG
sample to just verify that you know
everything that hoo-ha Institute was
telling us was indeed the facts what do
you think about the idea that for the
good of humanity we ought to be offering
immunity to scientists who were involved
in legitimate scientific research not
weapons research but legitimate
scientific research into potentially
human infecting viruses if this turns
out to be a leak would you be in favor
of them being assuming that they were
being honorable that they'd be immunized
from liability definitely and even
Article II so even if a leak occurred
the scientists they're not to blame
because they haven't been you know
engaged in anything illegal or even you
know
well weapons research is a bit of a gray
area but dude it's not illegal for
countries to engage in it in the States
and you know China and Russia and all
being engaged in weapons research the
thing is like if it escaped and there's
been a cover-up the people who are doing
the cover-up they're the ones who do
face who should face some ramifications
but what I think we really need to
establish is some kind of incentive for
whistleblowers to be able to
was so safely with immunity and witness
protection and big financial incentive
to do so
yeah and so far I haven't seen anything
even remotely on the sword from
governments which a little odd
considering you know initially I thought
you know the American government stance
was that you know it's gonna demand a
full investigation but it's not really
providing financial incentive for
whistleblowers to help out and so one of
the things I suggest suggested maybe you
know half jokingly is that maybe the
community can crowd found crowdfund
something like this to create a
crowdfunding hotline tip hotline for
coral virus origins research where we
can have some completely anonymous
system of rewarding whistleblowers or
you know people offering actionable tips
with cryptocurrency we just need some
you know donors of crowd funding to
collect a bit of a purse to to be able
to offer these rewards for like
meaningful amounts for people to be kind
of risking their livelihood I think this
is a great idea and the idea of doing it
with cryptocurrency is a wonderful idea
to would be a tremendous proof of
concept about how cryptocurrency could
function to the benefit of humanity
right it could be and that's one of the
usually problems of financial incentives
like if somebody really is in China and
he wants to or she wants to alert the US
authorities and be compensated for it
it'd be really hard to do it and not you
know get in trouble in China but if
you're doing it online through
cryptocurrency which is you know
anonymous and untraceable I think that
even if it's not crowdfunding I think
you know the American intelligence
agencies should should set up some kind
of system like that just otherwise the
risks for people in China to to go
whistle I think I'm just too great for
them to do so but if they're you know
can earn some money you know in a very
safe way I think they'd be much more
quiet to do so and that's not
necessarily just the scientists whom I
like we're working on this who might
know something it's probably like they
had friends family and who can offer you
no substantive tips on what to look at
and maybe who who - question for
investigation to go forward no no no I
don't know it's just let's just let's
just say humanity has an overarching
need to know what took place in order to
manage what we now are encountering and
that suggests we should pull out all the
stops with respect to liberating people
to tell us what they know and you know
people who have the capacity to do
something that would aid in that effort
know who they are and they may be more
creative than you and I are in a
position to be maybe they can figure out
some way to make it happen but let's
figure out where this thing came from
and if its nature you and I will oh this
does point something out if it is nature
with that this came from you and I will
be relieved to discover it and we'll be
happy to do a follow-up podcast and talk
about what what the meaning of what
we've learned is and if it came from the
lab let's figure that out last thing
before you go I wanted to talk about
I have increasingly noticed in looking
at all of the sources that claim to put
the idea of a lab leak to rest
I find the name Peter - check is that
right this shows all over the place he's
everywhere that the idea is mocked and
he is the see the president of eco
Alliance whatever eco Alliance maybe
he's
founder and yes I have comes
go ahead behind it yeah yeah he's he's
the domain guy who's been doing this for
many years very publicly and very large
amounts of money as like dozens of
millions of dollars in grant funding
from various sources from NIH to
Department of Defense just funding
research of essentially going out to
remote places in nature and collecting
all sorts of dangerous pathogens and
bringing them to one spot to analyze and
predict the potential danger of them
spilling over to humans which in itself
is I think it's a pretty futile exercise
to be able to claim that we can somehow
predict what in nature can and out of
the gazillion possibilities which
mutation will actually jump out from
nature to to to the human domain just
because you know I usually what happens
in nature stays amazing when we actually
start going out and and probing what you
know bats carry and in remote places and
actually bring them all together in one
spot like in whatever we're increasing
the chances of it actually happening
well I think I think there's a very
simple comparison to be made right in
general these things do not jump to
humans the ones that can general matter
what Peter claims and he's making some
very odd claims of like Oh in Asia it
happens every day and there's millions
of people exposed to zoonotic jumps and
he's making a huge huge jump from like
extrapolation from just six five farmers
in Yunnan that had antibodies six out of
like 286 farmers having antibodies for
related
coronavirus that can't even infect human
cells so he take those three percent and
extrapolated to like all the farmers in
in Southeast Asia
he's saying all those millions of
farmers every year that get exposed to
the viruses which I take I take exactly
the opposite message which is the jumps
when they happen burn themselves out
quickly because the things that have
jumped are not well adapted to humans in
general which doesn't mean it couldn't
happen but it does mean that we can
compare what is the risk of a jump
happening that we didn't know anything
about ahead of time and that if we had
known about the risk ahead of time we
could have prepared right so that's the
upside of this research and then there's
the downside which is what are the
chances that you are going to trigger
the accidental release of something
terrible by doing this research which is
clearly high and so anyway I have come
to regard this individual and every time
I see his name show up the information
does not check out and there's this very
strong implication that those who even
consider this hypothesis are telling us
just how naive and under-informed
they are which does not match the
information if you pursue the
information his assurance of this is
always wrong so I have begun to regard
him as patient zero for misinformation
well yeah I mean he's really fighting
for his life he doesn't have any other
way to defend himself if this does turn
out to be a lab leak ramifications for
him personally I think just too horrible
for him to consider to even entertain
the slightest idea of escape I think you
I think you're being I think you're
being too generous the misinformation is
too egregious and the fact is any decent
human being would recognize that
humanity's overarching interest in
knowing what took place overrides his
interest in maintaining his reputation
frankly I think the world would end up
being decent to a scientist who had made
a
honest error that had some role to play
in this thing emerging but I have very
little sympathy for somebody who would
hide the truth at expense to others I
mean people are dying this this is not a
joke this is not something where you get
to defend your career at the expense of
tens of thousands of other human beings
yeah one other point being that it's not
that he just went out and collected so
many viral strains is that they actually
had a whole program of synthetic
creating synthetic chimeras to can
expand the panel of possible first of
all to predict possible mutations in the
wild for some reason that again as I
said very naive to predict like out of
gazillion nature of possibilities which
of them can happen in nature to predict
them in the lab to create them in the
lab and then say that we need to prepare
for those and yeah in the latest
interview like before just before they
were actually in the middle of the
pandemic in December he gave an
interview in December of 2019 at some
viral adji conference where he was
saying that they had like a hundred
different strains that they were working
on and how easy it is easy easy it is to
manipulate current viruses where you can
just you know snap out an RBM and put
one back in and have like different
tropism between the virus so you can
study like a more efficient vaccine and
that was actually the kind of
overarching theme of biology research
over the past few years to create a fan
coral virus therap and corona virus
vaccine whereas so they actually needed
to provide as wide a panel of
coronaviruses as possible this is
actually mentioned in an article by a
raff barrack
it's mentioned in the grant for eco
health that our needs to do is part of
that they have a mission to create you
know many new viral strains against
which they can test potential therapies
or vaccines which of course you know
haven't really gotten in time for this
pandemic but that's a different question
yeah well I think that's a I think it's
a proper a proper note to end on
I hope that we will discover things in
the coming weeks that will lead us to
revise our our best understanding of
what likely has taken place here but I'm
very grateful to you for doing the work
you've done to unearth the evidence of a
lab leak hypothesis I regard it not only
as important work but I regard you as
courageous for having done it and it
troubles me that people have tried to
make you feel bad about doing it I hope
that it's ultimately internet there are
some unpleasant things on the Internet
I wonder why they put them there yeah
all right well you read again thank you
for for yes you know making this much
more widespread knowledge that it
probably would have been without your
work and and continuing to try to you
know make people realize that you know
this is very important and this is
important matter and we really need
political support to get to the bottom
of this because you know if it's just a
bunch of people complaining on Twitter
nobody is going to be pressured into
having a thorough investigation or if
it's actually a lot of people being
vocal and making their politicians heard
and making them know that we want you
know we want the truth we can hand them
yeah maybe it maybe will get to the
point of having a really independent and
true investigation into this
whistleblowers yeah yeah well one way or
the other we need to get to the bottom
of it yeah I hope we do okay I will put
a link to your medium article which I
think you have added to a couple times
you
made little edits that you have
highlighted so people will know what was
in the original and what you've added is
that correct yeah I had it initially
just when I released it there were a
couple of points that came out you know
I like updated I haven't really updated
since well I consider it the hallmark of
an honest actor is that you know of
course you release something as hello
you still there oops no no all right
well fortunately we got it all are you
able to hear me now
no can't hear me all right I guess we're
done you know that yeah all right
anyway thanks so much Yuri and I'd love
to have you back to give us an update
when there's some to talk about be well
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
you