hey everybody
you are back it is the Jack Murphy Lite
podcast and I am Jack Murphy you can
find me Jack Murphy live on Twitter at
Jack Murphy live at Jack Murray live.com
Jack Murphy live all over the Internet
actually you can find my book Democrat
to the horrible on Amazon and you can
come down check out the liminal order at
the window - or.com that is our omens
fraternal Association come on down and
check us out liminal - order calm my
guest today is somebody I'm super
excited to talk about his name is Robbie
Sullivan he is an associate editor at
Reason magazine his latest book is
called panic attack young radicals and
the age of Trump and he is a journalist
who's been covering a range of issues
but including and most notably to me in
this discussion title 9 and the
evolution of title 9 over the last 10
years and in up to and including some
very significant and important events
have just taken place recently we're
gonna get to all that but Robbie sir how
you doing welcome thanks for joining me
I'm doing great thanks - thanks for
having me with you yeah my pleasure you
know we've met a couple of times but we
haven't had a chance to sit down and
really talk so I'm looking forward to it
I've been a fan of yours for some time
I've been following your work at reason
and especially on the title 9 stuff
because I think it's really important
and we're gonna talk about all that but
as somebody myself who at one point in
my life thought that I was going to be a
full-time professional journalist in the
traditional sense when I was younger my
only school I ever wanted to go to was
Northwestern Medill School of Journalism
I wrote for my high school newspaper
produced independent sort of zine back
in the day and the 90s I'm always
intrigued and interested to talk to
journalists and see how they came to
their profession so that's my first
question for you is how did you get into
journalism has this been a lifelong
calling for you is this something you
were always interested in or what
happened sure the journalism
specifically was not a sort of lifelong
aspiration I always wanted to be a
writer of some kind since I was very
little I want to write
stories I was more interested in fiction
and yeah I haven't entirely given up on
the the dream of sort of moving in that
direction someday but it was in college
and then I was all I was always
interested in sort of politics and news
and history and things like that when I
when I got to college I became involved
at the University of Michigan I became
involved with the student newspaper the
Michigan daily I actually joined the
opinion section and I just got more and
more kind of invested and involved and
what the newspaper was doing and kind of
more interested in that sort of work
that became sort of like my dominant
extracurricular activity in college so
from there it was a pretty
straightforward you know applying to
kinds of journalism internships and and
really the first one I'll and it
actually was a dreesen magazine which I
then got a job at some years later after
doing some things in between but so
relatively straightforward path
definitely for people who are interested
in journalism working for a student
paper and then getting an internship
with a publication you like is the is
the path that I would recommend is
actually more important I think then
going to a journalism school or
explicitly studying journalism in
college and that's not just advice that
I would give you that's advice a lot of
professional journalists would give you
do you think that the traditional routes
of becoming a journalist and the the
traditional destinations for people
interested in journalism do you think
those are the same as they've been in
recent years or do you think that the
path to journalism as a profession has
changed at all well I mean certainly the
the path so to some degree the path has
changed tremendously
it hasn't changed so much for people who
want to go into like a sort of
mainstream journalism profession but I
mean there's you know gatekeeping has
been eroded there's all sorts of ways to
just kind of do your own thing and have
your work taken seriously on social
media without you kind of going up
through normal channels but but the the
kind of actually the journalism school
route has always even though it's
existed has always kind of been
something that again but even mainstream
journalists were a little skeptical of
so it's like this sounds like contrarian
advice that that's the wrong path but
that's actually something that a lot of
people in journalism have thought for a
long time that it's better to study you
know philosophy political science
history economics like a real sort of
liberal arts discipline and then just
because journalism isn't really a
obviously they have journalism schools
and some very good ones but journalism
is more a craft than it is an academic
discipline if you practice it you get
better at it so it's it's more you need
to be apprenticed in it rather than
taught it so to some degree that was
always kind of the the better route for
becoming a journalist and that's still
the important route if you kind of you
know if you want to go into a career in
a mainstream publication or newspaper
well I certainly would agree with the
notion that it's a good idea for a
journalist to have a grounding in some
other academic field that gives them a
level of expertise or at least high
level functioning utility of the terms
and the ideas and the understandings
that they that they may actually end up
covering I think too many times out
there we see journalists assigned to
certain beats that have absolutely no
experience in that field and then that
leads to some interesting
interpretations and and qualified
reporting I think and from my
perspective but I do appreciate that
perspective what did you study in
undergrad as an aside I studied English
literature and I got a minor and I think
European history and I took a lot of
creative writing I'm not sure how
valuable a lot of my English literature
classes really were because the kind of
writing they teach you in those classes
the sort of academic writing I mean it's
it's unsuited to I mean it's really
unsuited to all the writing that
everyone does whether they work in an
explicit writing career or not like it's
it's unsuited to writing good emails or
press releases or or and then certainly
doing journalism I mean nobody kind of
writes at the like eight page you know
beating a thesis to death
incomprehensible academic jargon that
has really taught in a lot of not just
English but just kind of academia in
general but my I would say that my I
took a lot of creative writing classes
again because I have this interest in
writing fiction and
those classes I thought were were
tremendously helpful at improving my
again improving the improving the craft
of writing the craft of storytelling
well you've really done a great job with
that I've read your book panic attack
recently and you did a great job we
should be commended for that I found the
narratives to be engaging and the
stories to be interesting provocative
and then you were able to really deliver
a whole lot of substantive information
in that framework which I which I really
appreciate it
back just one more question about reason
how did you end up coming to reason in
particular were you drawn there because
of the mission it is a nonprofit
organization some people might call it
sort of activist journalism what do you
think about that how did you come to
reason how does it fit with your
worldview did your worldview lead you to
reason as a reason shape your worldview
what do you think about that so yeah my
my worldview definitely led me to reason
I I'm a libertarian reasons a
libertarian publication I became
libertarian or became aware of
libertarian ideas sort of in between the
transition from high school to college
so it was when I was starting out of
college that I was sort of first
becoming aware of libertarian philosophy
and and who those thinkers are looking
at limited government philosophy and I I
think I I started becoming aware that
there was a sort of network of think
tanks and organizations that are broadly
promoting libertarian goals and one of
them the one that was most known in the
journalism sense was Reason magazine so
I very quickly on aspired to get to get
an internship there and the the kind of
there's a professional libertarian
Network that was able to connect me with
reason to do that internship and to kind
of be on my way so yeah pretty standard
in some ways but I certainly was
interested in reason for for its ideas
and do you think that reason stands is
there any is there any way to criticism
that it is act activist journalism given
that there is definitely a
that worldview behind you know that the
donors and and the the people the
editors and sort of the mission do you
ever feel constrained by that or do you
feel like you can do straight clean
journalism there without having to keep
in mind sort of the mission in general
yeah I don't feel constrained at all I
mean I look I share the mission so
you're pretty wholeheartedly so there
would be no conflict there activist is
probably not the word I would use
because to me activism implies maybe not
just not just advocacy but that you're I
don't know doing doing some kind of
political action like you're organizing
or you're handing out flyers or you're
trying to elect a candidate or you're
doing some something like that we're uh
we're uh we have opinions we're we're a
magazine and we're open about what our
opinions are no one would mistake us I
don't think for for a newspaper that's
just kind of doing straight news
reporting on a subject of course you
know we also I mean I talk a lot about
how I think this so the quote-unquote
objective journalists are just you know
just giving you the facts just giving
you the news well of course they have
their own ideas and their own agendas
and their own biases to some many of
them have you know very well-thought-out
worldviews it would be it's insane
actually to expect people not to kind of
form a larger ideological conviction if
they're writing about public policy and
ideas and the news and what people are
saying and doing so to kind of like a
twosome in some ways I find the kind of
pretense of objectivity that is
practiced by you know straight news
reporters to be kind of silly so we're
you know we're a magazine where our we
have views about how what we think is
sound public policy that inform our
writing that is the background of our
journalism but we're still very much
practicing good hard journalism where
were where we're interviewing people
were were you know filing public records
requests for information I think
probably in a way that the the kind of
ideology works to the benefit of the
Journal of journalism that an explicitly
that a libertarian ideology does is that
Taran's are naturally skeptical
naturally suspicious of authority
particularly government authority so we
don't you know we don't just credulous
Li believe everything we're told by by
law enforcement by politicians etc and
that is a beneficial approach that more
that and then meant that one that many
mainstream reporters who are successful
do adopt and have adopted that that's
that's very much a good thing yeah I
agree and in my conversation I had with
your colleague Elizabeth Nolan Brown a
while back she was she said that if
there is a clear viewpoint but it's a
pen sorry there is a viewpoint but it is
clear and it's explicit and it's stated
which does bring a little bit more
transparency than some of these other
folks who are operating with the
viewpoint that they don't necessarily
disclose all the time and I find myself
certainly being sympathetic to and
appreciating many libertarian arguments
so I find I find your guys work to be
very interesting and certainly we have a
lot of overlapping interests and areas
of focus and we're gonna talk actually
that's a theme I want to touch on later
which is overlapping or common and
unifying goals of disparate groups and I
think maybe you would understand why
we're gonna get there at some point
given that you did write the book all
about you know activists in the age of
Trump and why and how people come
together to work together towards a
cause even if they don't necessarily
have all of their interests aligned and
speaking of the book it's called panic
attack young radicals in the age of
Trump I read it it is excellent I
recommend it to everyone it is available
on Amazon right now and Robbie I wanted
to ask you how did you how did this book
come to be what what was the impetus for
it how long did you work on it what did
you do to make it happen it's a
fantastic piece and it's obvious that
there's a ton of work that went into it
so tell me a little bit about the
genesis of panic attack
sure so I I became I would say I became
interested in higher education issues
when I was in college working for the
for the paper I found the the papers
investigations into what the
administration was doing very very
interesting I thought nationally there
was a lot of attention paid to education
issues in general but often targeted at
K through 12 where a lot of the kind of
whether it's you know school choice
there's one category of things kind of
curriculum there's you know some and
social conservatives are unhappy with
you know what goes on in our schools etc
education is a big issue I thought again
this is back in 2000 the sort of 2008
2009 2010 when I was still an
undergraduate I thought higher education
was very interesting not not as as well
covered so I I kind of early on and
that's an important thing to do as a
journalist you've got a kind of broadly
pick an area of specialization or an
area where you think you can add
something to the conversation so I
decided that should be what was going on
on college campuses and for a little
while I thought that was mostly going to
be actually the financial side of higher
education student loans that kind of
thing
but as my career developed I became very
interested in the kinds of cultural
issues on college campuses the the free
speech issues the shutdown of speakers
the the inability of certain students to
to hold events and to invite the kind of
people they wanted to speak often
conservative students and and the kind
of formal structures that were
facilitating that it turned out that the
audience and not just the audience at
reason but before that I was at the
Daily Caller some other places there was
a lot of national interest in
understanding what was going on or
learning about what was going on in
higher in higher education on college
campuses in an informed way so and I
started to think about what well what
are the broader cultural changes that
are informing this you know I'm seeing
I'm seeing some very interesting things
I'm seeing that a you know college
campuses broadly speaking have a lot of
people on the left on them and I'm
seeing what appears to be a mounting
sort of hostility to what I would have
formerly thought of to be pretty solid
leftist principles that I actually
admire about the Left I'm talking about
free speech and due process I'm seeing
these things come under attack from
from a whole host of characters but
often from a subset of the students
themselves a very liberal leftist
students who who who who are not in
favor of free speech are not in favor of
free speech for controversial speakers
if they don't like the speaker and this
was very interesting and the people
reading my articles thought they were
interesting an agent came to me a a
literary agent and said I read your
writing I think there is the material
for a book here will you put together an
outline and we'll start pitching it so
that whole process took it took a long
amount of time and then writing the book
took a good amount of time I visited a
number of college campuses to to do as I
like to do reporting I really like to
talk to people to to describe their
views in the in the in the language that
they themselves use I don't like to kind
of make assumptions or to just you know
generally characterize people without
understanding how they characterize
themselves so I did a lot of a good
amount of on-the-ground reporting to
kind of put together a book that looks
at how how the activist culture has
evolved in recent years or even in the
last several decades to become less
friendly to the kind of values of the
old left and I spent a lot of time on
the left but I do look a little bit at
the right as well there have been very
interesting changes taking place among
kind of young conservative activism not
in I say in the age of Trump is the
subtitle of the book it's not
necessarily all because of Trump but it
is happening during the Trump phenomenon
so I looked at how the write was
changing as well so that's so that and
then it came out came out last year so
it's I think it's a you know I think
these things are I think it's important
I stress that you know some some people
make too much out of out of what's going
on on campuses you know not every small
incident of a student doing something
dumb or or or contemptible should
necessarily be I think elevated to
national platform national attention but
you know when you've been covering these
things as long as I have you you do
you start to see patterns emerge in in
the language the students the young
people use particularly around around
concepts like safety what is safety well
to most people safety means you know fie
of being being physically safe being
safe from from danger or harm or
violence they're using in a way that
means to be affirmed and comforted in
all the choices that they make I mean I
think that's very interesting and that's
important for scientists first deciding
to grapple with as these people leave
college and go on to a particularly at
the more elite colleges where these
people will truly go on to to affect the
norms that we all have to live under
whether it's in government whether it's
in the legal profession or whether it's
whether it's working for important and
influential companies companies that are
setting the rules of how we speak to
each other online like Facebook Twitter
etc so so that's that's my pitch for why
I think it it's it's worth it's very
important not just because of what it
means for life on campuses yeah you'd
definitely hit on some key themes that
I've been talking about for a while now
and especially with my last podcast that
I did with James Lindsay known as
conceptual James on Twitter he has
really done a tremendous job in taking
some of the theories and academic work
starting with post-modernism and then
tracing it through I think a number of
things we're going to talk about today
including radical feminism
intersectionality trans issues ablest
issues fat issues things like that and
you really you really definitely hit on
one of the key themes just there which
is there may be a minority of students
on campus who are sort of like the flag
bearers for these kind of movements but
as you correctly identify in your book
and just now the advocates for these
issues are in high leverage positions
it's come to control the university and
academic life through federal policy
which work definitely going to talk
about and then because a lot of this
stuff is elite based you know students
who then go on to powerful positions
they're then taking these ideas and then
infiltrate
all throughout our entire culture are
basically universities and media and
corporations all across the board and so
there is a tyranny of the minority that
is taking place and in some some
instances and and and it's a way of
seeing this like very high leverage
behavior that these activists in these
policies have in order to really change
the nature even of the the human
relationships and things that happen in
the dark behind closed doors among young
people and that's really what I want to
talk about with you today and in your
book you start off talking about
intersectionality which is something I
have talked about for quite a while too
but I would like to get your take on it
because I have my my positions in my
perspective that I have articulated
through my sort of personal narrative
I spoke with James Lindsay who gave his
perspective based on the academic
literature and the scholarly work and
I'm finding a really nice compliment
here with your work which is sort of on
the ground engaging with the people who
are engaging with these ideas and so you
may have a slightly different
perspective one that's useful and and
fresh for me to hear and so I would love
for you to explain a little bit about
how you came even to you know came
across this notion of intersectionality
what did you come to find it to mean and
and how have you seen it sort of play
out in our culture today because I
really think it's important and yet it's
something that you know 9 out of 10
people on the street probably had never
even heard of yeah so intersectionality
is a word that I think you're you hear
much more often you think five years ago
almost never no one would have heard
what it is now it's something that's
like all young people are using it's
interesting always how young people
adapt language or how the how the
culture of activism kind of spreads
outward just to use culture in general
and I think that's definitely happened
with intersectionality I won't define it
at great length since you already talked
about a little bit but of course it you
know it comes out of academia in the
1980s kimberlé crenshaw was the legal
scholar who proposed the word she needed
a way to describe different sources of
oppression she was saying that well if
you're a woman you've been oppressed
historically women had been oppressed
because of their gender
uh people of color black people have
been oppressed because of their their
skin color so so gender is a source of
oppression and racism oppression but
what if you're a black woman then you
have two sources of oppression working
against you and they kind of overlap or
they stack in a way and they result in a
more more marginalizing experience for
you than if you only had one or the
other status working against you and
then of course in subsequent kind of the
writings of other scholars and in other
categories class which is actually a the
category of oppression that kind of
predates these as the one that the left
was very worked up about but then you
can have you know you gender but also
gender expression gender identity
there's so there's so many different
subcategories of oppression even in
gender sexuality obviously and but then
also disability status age size all
sorts of other things all are being
under the under a kind of intersectional
framework are being discussed as sources
of oppression that stack so again if
it's to the extent that it's a theory if
intersectionality just means that
different people have experienced
different oppression based on different
characteristics and the more
characteristics you know you have
running against you I guess the more
likely you would have experienced
depression or or people yet it sure
that's true you know there's a sense in
which it's just a mundane obviously true
observation that I that I don't think
anyone would find that controversial so
it's really not it's not an issue with
the idea of intersectionality itself but
it's become again I I've described it in
the book as the operating system for the
modern left it became a an activist
framework there I mean there's this
tendency among kind of leftist social
justice II concepts to it to always be
very very hard to pin down what is meant
and then what is literally meant by it
is something benign but then it
encompasses this whole set of norms for
how you should approach the world and
how you should interact with other
people that become very very weird and
perhaps counterproductive so it has
become that
if you're an activist on the left you
want to be cognizant of all these
sources of oppression it is seen as sort
of wrong to be overly concerned about
one and not any other and in fact if
you're not sufficiently worked up about
the oppression that every single person
in one of these categories would face
then you're not intersectional then your
your contribution to the cause is not
valuable in fact they don't want you to
be part of the cause you're an enemy how
could you be an ally if you were not if
you are not dedicated to overthrowing
every single one of these sources of
depression again it it's probably fine
to you know to want people who are
fighting against racism to also fight
against sexism or something like that
but the since they've added so many
categories you start to get down to ones
that are still a little bit
controversial even among you know
broadly liberal people or where we're
still kind of figuring out alright where
I think there's a it is reasonable for a
reasonable person who is not like a
hateful person to still kind of have
some mixed feelings about how these
things should work out the sort of
gender related issues or trans issues
are are what you know and I say this as
a fairly socially liberal person who
doesn't who doesn't or dude doesn't take
a socially conservative view whatsoever
on trans issues but there's still some
some difficulties to be worked out with
the well what happens in schools and
sports teams and that kind of thing that
that really is not crazy or hateful at
all to discuss but but the
intersectional activists would say well
because you're not with you know what
because you're not on board with what
the most progressive trans activists
would think about this issue
you are dead to us we do we want nothing
to do with you that's what
intersectionality dictates additionally
there's a kind of jostling for power or
for authority in activist circles where
the person with the most matrixes of
oppression working against them is the
person with the most authority so if
your if so if you are a person of color
but also a trans person also you're poor
also you're you have all these other
things
you are seen as being an authority on
more issues because you're not because
the the oppressed are themselves the
authority on these issues although also
you're not supposed to ask them to speak
for themselves because that further risk
traumatizing them so there's also again
there's a contradiction there as well
but there's an expectation that we step
back and listen to the victims
themselves the new victims of the
oppression and the the which again
that's not the craziest thing at all
generally probably we the people who
have first-hand knowledge of some kind
of source of suffering probably do have
something to tell us and should be and
and that experience should be an
additional piece of weight for why we
might consider what they have to say but
the issue that I've noticed with this
becomes that well what so how do you
show a competition to be the most
oppressed or to seem like you're the
most oppressed can have negative
incentives whereby so what do you do if
you know you're just like a white dude a
very woke very liberal progressive white
dude but who does not fall into one of
these categories what I've realized is
that mental health is itself a category
of oppression the mentally ill are
oppressed so you you see this and like
this is this is true this is a
phenomenon I've noticed where there is a
tendency to describe as them as the most
salient thing about yourself how you
suffer from mental health issues how you
have post you're a survivor of
post-traumatic stress you're you're a
victim of mental abuse something like
that where often that's like the first
thing listed about activists people on
their biographies unlike their sort of
social justice Center at the University
and I think it's like it's in a very
real sense not healthy to create an
incentive structure where people want to
see themselves as mentally unwell like
that like just that's that's not that's
not good that's an idea we shouldn't we
shouldn't want people to overemphasize
their life experience or it reinterpret
their life experiences as deeply having
been deeply traumatizing or traumatic
when they actually weren't so that's a
that's an important criticism again not
a criticism of simply the the mere
theory of intersectionality but a
criticism of
how it has come to be used in these
activist circles yeah I think Jonathan
hate has a lucid eight at this point
very clearly in both his book and essay
titled the coddling of the American mind
where he basically lays out the
intersectional thinking leads people
into what he deemed victim culture and
competing for status based on victim
points which is actually and a whole
slew of other reasons to which is
actually why intersectional thinking and
be operationalized federal policies that
came as a result are actually teaching
people to be mentally ill and and
functioning in the exact opposite way
that psychiatrists and psychologists
would suggest that a healthy person
hurst healthy person behaved which would
be sort of along the lines of thinking
cognitive behavioral therapy like being
able to misidentify
you know incorrect thinking and re you
know turn it around into something more
accurate whereas we're teaching people
to actually embrace the things that are
listed as a mentally sort of challenging
or sort of emotionally unstable
condition and it's been it's been not
only formalized in policy but this
intersectionality approach also as James
Lindsay points out it went from theory
to application to now it sort of been
reified it's sort of godlike it's sort
of like religion and if you are to
attack the religion then you're
obviously a non-believer or worse you're
an apostate and therefore you're morally
opposed what we're trying to do the
intersectional is because everything
that they do is morally tinged because
they're all trying to look out for the
greater good and to are not the greater
good but to to right wrongs and to end
oppression and Wow I do believe that
there is some merit to giving people you
know understanding people's perspectives
in total not just based on one you know
element of themselves there is the sort
of unspoken core of intersectionality
which was perfectly outlined by kimberlé
crenshaw in 1989 where she says that
white male power is implicit and
understood and so that is that is the
problem that's the part that becomes
very problematic for people to use their
word is that if there's all these people
who are oppressed somebody must be doing
the oppression and that
you know that person tends to be
somebody just quite like me a white
males is hetero heterosexual male who is
now squarely in the crosshairs of all
this activist work and you know it's
interesting with intersectionality
because it sort of brings people
together that have a disparate
backgrounds but common goals which is
also you can see in the response to that
as well so in your book you talk about
the intersectional the critiques of
intersectionality and some of the
reactions to it and I wanted to try to
lay out like three different groups that
are have like a CO centric circle or at
least share some elements of a Venn
diagram and there are people like
yourself and like myself I believe that
have a very legitimate you know
rationally based criticism of
intersectionality but then there are
people who you outlined as being immense
rights advocates or big toes or and then
you even expand a circle to say people
who are like alright all three of these
groups have a similar critique of
intersectionality and of some of the
identity politics that are playing out
but they have also different goals after
that and it also makes for some very
unsettling sort of bedfellows or people
who see a particular issue the same way
that you do
do you and your experience give or get
that feeling that like okay I'm I'm I'm
interested in covering this issue it's a
it's a bad thing I wanted to change but
then look around at some of the other
people who were sort of on your same
side and did you ever wonder like you
know what's going on here why do I have
the same viewpoint as somebody who I you
know clearly outlined in my book you as
being you know wrong and immoral and
unjust but at the same time we have this
overlapping goal is that is it is that a
tension that you discovered in your work
I mean that's an experience I have all
the time as a libertarian well you know
I'll say as someone who defends kind of
individual rights just in general or
principles or due process or something
you know you have if someone with a more
political or partisan
partisan mine might not be the right
word but as some kind of framework like
that well they're gonna defend X person
or X group or X identity because they
like that person or agree with them or
they or identify them as an ally and and
so they're defending them for that
reason and I'm also defending them
because I could be for a for what I mean
for what I think is principled reasons
and then I'm also gonna defend people on
the other side for principled reasons
but a lot would so so so many other
people I occasionally overlap with you
know when I'm defending like I don't
know my ID for a long I defended my
Levine Opelousas right to speak at a
college campus or or Ben Shapiro I don't
with him I probably do agree on at least
some some things but I wouldn't Richard
Spencer is someone I was defend his
right to speak on a college campus to or
at least I would say the response
shouldn't be to invite violence against
him you should just ignore him and he
can give his his remarks to like two
people in the audience and go home and
probably think it was a waste of his
time and and you know if you're if
you're shouting these people down I
think you start to look weak and the
person looks like the martyr they they
always want to portray themselves as but
but but yes I have often found I think
whereas I am kind of critical of
identitarian ISM or or or or deriving
all your meaning and all your self-worth
from your membership in an identity
based group or thinking that society
should would be better served by
organizing around protections for groups
rather than for individual rights so I'm
critical of this you know when I'm
criticizing them doing this on the left
you know when i'm i'm criticizing
identity based political correctness or
or progressive diversity initiatives or
something of that nature you know i'm
getting a lot of support from people on
the right even from people in the very
the hard right or the or the the kinds
of the people you were referring to but
then many of them i even and this is not
a this is not a secret this they're very
they're very vocal about this goal is it
they're they're more just objecting to
the kind of leftist orientation of these
groups they see them they want during
much group identity or identity an
identity based reality but one that is
more favorable to whatever the identity
is that they belong to or think has
meaning whether that's you
white people or men or I'm seeing I'm
arguing right now I don't talk about
this very much in the book because it's
more I've just kind of started engaging
with these people a lot more in recent
weeks but there's a whole kind of
traditionalist Catholic conservative
faction you've probably encountered them
in some right-of-center publications who
seem that who seem to be having I don't
know a bit of a mo on social media
they're having a bit of a moment I are
I'm just engaging with them more often
and you know they kind of want and
varied to are very deliberate about the
regime that they want to promote to
replace sort of leftist identity
politics is a kind of Catholic
nationalism which again which I would
also very much opposed because I I am
for the recognition of individual rights
and individual individuality not kind of
I not identity based associations so
that so so the the the viewpoint I take
just often puts me in one group of the I
mean today just this morning I wrote
about I finally wrote about the Michael
Flint case this is a little bit far
afield but you know this is this the
former National Security Advisor who was
prosecuted for lying to FBI officials as
part of the rush occlusion investigation
and now the the case is falling apart
and so all everybody on the right is you
know some like oh he was mistreated and
you know this was horrible what police
law enforcement did to him and so I
agree that how they handled this case
was wrong and that it was like unjust
but it's also like this happens all the
time this is very much how law
enforcement operates they they catch
people in lies and they convict them for
a procedural crime not actually
underlying crime like this is this is
what they do in every case so it which I
don't like which I'm totally against I
would like to reform it but so right now
I'm agreeing with people on the right
but they're they're they're just taking
it and not everyone I'm sure some of
them have a principled view but many of
them are just bugged about what happened
to Michael Flynn because he's an ally of
Trump and in fact there will be no I can
there pretty much guarantee there will
be no vote to to change the standards
the practices of how the FBI work in the
long term there will there will not be
that reform because the criticism is
really only that they've mistreated
Trump people
coming from the right when this and then
the same principle is happening on the
left liberal people usually you know
more skeptical of law enforcement
they'll say law enforcement and has all
sorts of problems or problems on racial
communities for instance no well now
it's well we have to extent you know
defend the good work
the FBI was doing to hold the president
accountable or whatever nonsense they're
saying so it's just it's it's it's
utterly I'm its personality its tribal
identity based and that's just not the
way I operate yeah me either which is
why I am able to roll into Barry
heterodox circles and I tried to take a
principled stand and it definitely
creates allies and bedfellows in weird
places and you end up agreeing with some
people on some things and and then
disagreeing with them in the next breath
but I think that the theme there is
consistent which is pursuit of truth in
an honest and compassionate way and that
those are the kind of people that I'm
attracted to even if we have differing
political outcomes or risk assessments
of the same issues but you did bring up
just now an interesting topic that I
hadn't planned on getting into but it is
worth getting your opinion on you point
out the contradiction or some the
similarities of the critiques of the
process by which law enforcement often
goes about getting a conviction or a
plea made me think of the current
situation with Joe Biden now we're gonna
talk a lot about Joe Biden because Joe
Biden was one of the key pushers and
backers of the title 9 change that took
place in 2011 13 14 and Joe Biden also
you know but there's a me to advocate
you know I'm sure all of his friends
were the ones that were tearing down
Cavanaugh and the Supreme Court hearings
and such you know trying to tear him
down based on allegations that were
uncorroborated that weren't reported
that couldn't be confirmed in any way
but at the time they were demanding the
Cavanaugh Burris recused himself or
withdraw from the nomination they
shouldn't be approved etc etc and now
we've got Joe Biden who is in I call him
the king of rape culture because he's
the one that really pushed us in
to our culture through title 9 which
we'll talk about but now here he is
facing I don't know do you consider it
to be a credible allegation do you
believe that it's something that should
be investigated and if so how do I know
the answer to this question but what how
are people going to respond to this on
the left and then you know what does
that mean for this general theme the me2
theme and what does it mean for these
general themes about believe all women
etc etc how do you see that playing out
sure so so obviously I'm most interested
in the accusation as a means of holding
Joe Biden accountable for his bad he's
at his bad at his pernicious advocacy of
standards that have that have heard
people accused very much along the lines
of that he's now accused of calling out
his hypocrisy calling out what I what I
really think was was at from at least
from the start maybe not now at the
beginning was unequal treatment for how
the media handled this compared to how
they handled Christine Blakely Ford's
allegation against Brett Kavanaugh
haven't you get out into all that as for
the accusation itself I don't you know
with the term credible I don't know what
do you mean by credible is it does it is
it could it have happened is it is it uh
is it okay I guess you know if she said
he Tran transformed into a dragon and
and breathes fire at me that would not
be a credible accusation right because
it couldn't have happened
certainly what she described could have
happened she has given I think a
rational reasonable person some reason
to think it could have happened the way
she said probably the best best its
Missy it's not I'm gonna say evidence
but it's really not evidence because it
wouldn't work in a court it wouldn't get
you anywhere near establishing like a
51% let alone a higher threshold that he
did it but that she told a friend a
neighbor to a two or three years after
that and she she said that it was sexual
assault and this neighbor has gone on
the record and called this conversation
that it was actually sexual assault and
this neighbor has said I'm voting for
Joe Biden anyway I hate Trump but yes I
she Tara Reid said this happened her and
I believe her but even that is not you
that's not contemporaneous evidence
that's not someone witnessing it that's
not some piece of physical evidence you
know she she she said so sure she said
that a year ago when she was interviewed
by The Washington Post she told them
that there was a climate of sexual
harassment in Joe Biden's office place
and the you know her story is that she
was mistreated she was harassed not by
Biden himself but the workplace was was
not friendly to women and she was
uncomfortable and she was kind of forced
out because of it and and that is an
even more plausible story it's easy to
imagine the the office of a senator in
the in the early 90s or some time before
operating that way
but now she has a more you know a more
salacious story that she was actually
sexually assaulted by him in in no
uncertain terms and I and I I this again
this is a long-ago accusation it's it's
not it's not surprising that people
don't people don't remember hearing
about it
Biden doesn't remember her I I can't
imagine if and again we're just trying
this in the public square right because
this is not we're not talking about a
courtroom because you could not bring an
accusation like this to a courtroom
there's again there's no evidence to
establish some guilt in that kind of way
so then it just becomes you know do you
if you're a Biden voter does this make
you reconsider voting for him I I'm not
probably not going to vote for Biden but
if I was I don't know I truly don't
think this would be enough to make me
second-guess that I I think if this if
this people don't think there's enough
to this for them to kind of overturn a
general cultural presumption of
innocence that makes sense to me even if
she's you know she's I've listened to
her be interviewed she's I think she's
empathetic I feel for her you don't I'm
not when I'm hearing her speak I'm not
you know I'm not hearing obvious red
flags like oh she's crazy oh there's no
way this happened this is utterly
unbelievable I don't get that impression
but I didn't get that impression from
Christine Blasi for it either so then
you just you go to the other well who
did she tell someone how well does she
remember all that sort of things but
honestly that the the frustrating truth
for
accusations is that kind of it's never
gonna get you there to a position where
you're reasonably comfortable you know
what happened so and in that case
defaulting to a general presumption of
innocence seems to me to be the way to
go that's for the accusation itself but
then I'm happy to get into the all these
sort of other yes the enormous relevance
this has to Joe Biden's history of
activism on undermining the safeguards
of due process in a in a legal sense in
a formal sense and also just in a
cultural sense yes undoubtedly he is the
king I think of this of in spreading
this information in a in a structural
federally enforced manner and I bring
this up actually now thinking about
Rolling Stone right so the Rolling Stone
UVA rape hoax I remember when that
happened I was very involved and so I'm
freshly involved in Twitter and this was
a really big deal when it happened
the the Rolling Stone rape hoax revealed
to a lot of people was a red pilling
moment as it were for a number of people
because it laid bare so many of these
issues that we were gonna end up talking
about indefinitely and even all the way
up until this very moment where the
culture was primed and ready to just
accept any accusation of sexual
harassment rape or any other thing that
a man could do bad to a woman on college
campus that when this story came out and
was like 2015 it was ridiculous it was
crazy was over-the-top it was you know a
group of guys they threw her down on a
glass table and the glass table
shattered everywhere and no it was just
this horrible gang rape that took place
at a frat house allegedly and the world
laughed it up right the the media and
the activists and and everyone just
lapped it up because they were primed
and ready to accept this narrative and I
I'm curious this is important to me
because the that narrative arc I wonder
where it's going right now and I'm
wondering how it's going to play it
faul especially now that we've had the
the title nine changes which i want to
get to but he did cover the Rolling
Stone rape hoax a little bit in your
book was there anything about that that
stood out to you at that time did you
see it as like a mile marker on some
path they do you know where we were
heading at the time
does it have better context now that you
look back on it and put it into a series
of events that sort of helped create
this climate what value do you put on on
the Rolling Stone UVA rape crisis
scandal hoax thing in affecting our
current conversations and perspectives
on sexual harassment rape culture etc
sure I reflect on it a lot because it
was I was actually very important to my
own sort of career my own journalistic
development because I was I was an early
skeptic of the sort I don't think it was
wasn't the very first person I mean the
second person I was the first quasi
mainstream person to write an article
expressing some doubts about it so then
I was I became very associated with I
took I got to celebrate being right when
it when it kind of swiftly fell apart
after the initial round of accepting and
then some people doubting and then those
people being attacked for doubting and
then it all fell apart you know it was a
it was very much an important moment it
was almost a more important moment in in
terms of sort of activist journalism or
the the blending of activism in
journalism because the story happened
because there was so much of kind of
what Agner of victims rights advocates
believe about how their stories should
be told
was what formed the core of the piece
the author Sabrina Rubin earthly who
actually by the way had this long has
had this long history of doing this
exact kind of piece in just in a
different context she had done a she had
done a abuse in the millet sexual abuse
in the military piece she had done a
sexual abuse in in the in the the
priesthood of young boys piece that
actually
but actually you go back and look at
some of these pieces they look very
suspect they have the same kind of just
utter faith in a in a in a victim or a
witness who seems like they they very
much might have been making the story up
I I mean this is a crew joke but I'll
say it I hope that she found the one
like freeze to be a story that seems a
little doubtful if you dig into it like
I don't don't generally believe that
those stories are made up or wrongful
accusations but if you read this one you
might think they generally are just from
looking at the work she had done there
so she had this history that she brought
to this issue of just an utter
conviction that a victim telling their
story is telling the truth and if
they're uncomfortable or they're
unwilling or they're hesitant or they're
telling you different things that is all
that makes it more likely that they're
telling the truth that's the psychology
that would we've been told that that's
part of the training actually in a lot
of title 9 materials that well a victim
has all of these problems that in any
other context would make you doubt them
that probably means they actually were
victimized and their suffering trauma
and just the just the the inability to
question her or to go through normal
processes because honestly you you
should have the story should have been
never it would never would have been
published under normal circumstances an
editor would have said okay well but did
you reach out to you know XYZ people who
are named in the story to get their
perspective and of course Sabrina didn't
because Jackie wouldn't allow her to
Jackie being the the victim in the story
through the story's name but the editors
just went along with it because they
just sounded like this seemed like a
great story
huge story important and again fitting
the narrative of how we're supposed to
treat treat victims then obviously it
all falls apart Jackie she so she never
divulges to Sabrina who the name of the
person who attacked her who orchestrated
this horrific gang rape even though
according to the story Jackie knew who
it was she was on a date with this guy
so she knew who he was so that was a I
mean that was one of the red flags right
well I mean there's so many red flags
I've covered I've covered I've written
about so many sexual assaults on college
campuses
I I could believe there would be
certainly there have been gang sexual
assaults and there have also been
premeditated sexual assaults but I was
having trouble picturing or thinking at
all likely a gang sexual assault
involving multiple so multiple people
responsible for it that was planned out
in advance which was what the story was
suggesting that this was like some
initiation right and and the victim was
not incapacitated through drugs or
alcohol which is what it usually occurs
even in sexual assaults that are
actually taking place because you have
to have some the victim has to there has
to be some haziness so that they
wouldn't immediately go to the cops so
it was just that was quite a pill to
swallow as it turned out that should
have given the writer the editors the
fact-checkers pause because the person
who then finally afterwards she said
okay well this is who did it well he did
not exist messages sent from him to her
friends were actually sent by Jay whose
elaborate catfishing type thing which by
the way is not actually common yeah what
stands out about the story is that
Jackie was a sort of uniquely deceptive
person even in this sort of kind of
sexual misconduct disputes that I
generally cover it's generally you know
we both got drunk here's what I think
happened here's what you think happened
to like entirely fabricate a persona
send messages from that person to your
friends I mean that that's going to a
level that that you have to there has to
be something very wrong with you to do
that
so it's it's interesting that that is
the rolling stone got ensnared by the
uncommon case of the truly motivated you
know crazy delusional person when
actually the cases that are more common
that I write about you know fall in this
great much much greater zone of where
maybe the victim and sent it in the time
it doesn't consent now or may you know
it's they're they're harder cases this
one was an easy case which is maybe why
it turned out to be just utterly
obviously false yeah it was it was
fascinating that this case supposedly
had a bunch of evidence that you could
you know point to or at least in the
article they claimed to but then as
you're saying most of most of these
to harassment or assault cases or now I
don't I can't say most many of them on
campus there would be no evidence anyway
it's just a matter of recollection and
of people's perspectives which
perspective can change your feeling
around consent can change from one day
to the next which is another reason why
the sexual assault stuff gets so
complicated you did raise a couple of
good points are a number of good points
but I want to talk about a couple on
that last a little bit where the the
Rolling Stone case highlights the the
very powerful yet sort of duplicitous
pillars of the intersectional combo with
post-modernism and and into social
justice and critical theories that you
know there's only one truth and that
truth comes from the person who's
speaking it and you can't assail that
you can't tear it down you can't even
challenge it it is it is actually in
their worldview the only definition of
truth is your personal perspective and
it can't be challenged and you call they
call the standpoint theory so it's very
interesting to me how these philosophies
and theories and have turned into
application but they've also developed a
number of tools and soar branches off of
their theories that make critique of it
impossible that make challenging it
impossible and you can you can feel what
that means when it comes to a sexual
assault or a rape case like the Rolling
Stone hoax because you can even you
can't even challenge the accuser without
you know challenging there's their sense
of reality or truth and you're just
trying to you know it's through
questioning you're just trying to impose
your your sense of your dominating sense
and your power upon upon the oppressed
here and it's just another reason why
that that Rolling Stone thing just stood
out so bright and loud and and red pill
the number of us on the media as well
right because Rolling Stone that was a
trusted news source and and there
they were like pushing some of the worst
kind of fake hoaxes salaciousness that
you could possibly push on this this
this environment of rape culture and the
fact that you know the the Straits is
hetero white male is the this
promulgating rape culture where they say
one in four one in five women on campus
was gonna be raped
now that's something that I wanted to
dig into with you because the the rape
culture and the rape culture stats
became a catalyst for the title nine
modifications which operationalize
intersectionality became an operating
system as you say for our
intersectionality which then was how it
was rolled out across the country and
institutionalized let's talk a little
bit about the rape stats and rape
culture I'm sure you've done a number a
deep dive investigation on this and if
you could just give us a little bit of
intro on that because it's really
important about how this data came to be
even and how it made it to the White
House so so Bobby is it true do one in
four women on campus get raped at some
point I don't think so because there are
there are studies you could point to
that it propor purported to find that
finding the problem immediately becomes
how are we defining our terms you hear
it's one in four and it's rape but then
if you look at you know what what was
the question actually asked the often
you'll find that the person surveyed
would did not identify themselves as a
victim of rape but maybe you asked them
well have you ever been in a position
where you felt you had been at you'd had
more to drink that he wanted to have and
you were put in a position to feel
sexually uncomfortable some broader
language like that well guess what a lot
of people say yeah I mean under that
language you might find them more people
than one in five we've had that
experience there starts to be a kind of
slipperiness or an identifying or
asserting on behalf of people that they
are victims of something that they
actually don't see themselves of then
you then you have other surveys that
find actually women who are not in
college are at much greater risk of
sexual misconduct that women who are in
college or the women are of college age
because then you know you meet with the
reality of crime statistics where the
you know most victims of anything be it
assault robbery etcetera etc are low
income people it's in the household
people and bad marriages or living in
bad environments those those are victims
those are women who actually tend not to
be in college so there's like a there's
like a a undue focus on the kind of
narrow problems of college campuses when
there's actually a lot of reason to
think you'd probably probably the when
you're talking about a population of
people who are a variant risk of sexual
violence you would not be looking at you
know the undergraduates of like Oberlin
or Columbia or something there are all
but you know there are this is a hard
statistic to pin down there are there
are some studies that have purported to
find it and then there are a couple
other statistics that are very important
for this conversation
one being the the false report rate
which you hear a lot well how it will
aren't you know how many sexual reported
sexual assaults are false reports and
there you have everything from 40% of
them to like 2% of them which is a huge
difference is it is it that that like
nearly half of these kinds of reports
are false or is it that that they're
almost never false reports lower than
any other category of thing being
falsely reported and of course here you
find out that we have no idea that the
statistics used arrive at this are just
useless for one thing you know those are
the more rigorous ones that are looking
at police it's reported to police
well it's only going to be labeled as a
false report if the police would like
explicitly able to find evidence that
they knew for sure it was false which is
not which is not the length that they're
going to when they're deciding whether
this could be prosecuted right this is
like explicitly determining it to be
false is a whole nother another level so
this isn't so so that's statistic that's
finding like a low false report rate but
but it but probably it's true do
something you know how many people are
actually going out and filing false
police reports well I tend to think
that's probably low again that's a you
have to think about what's the level of
deception involved that seems extreme I
don't think that happens a lot but of
course I'm not talking about going to
the police and all these scenarios at
Christine Boise Ford didn't go to the
police Tara Reid didn't go to the police
these kinds of accusations by the way
are just kind of general did you say
something that was
true or not and of course we have no way
to determine what's the how often people
exaggerate or mischaracterize things
that happen to them recently or a long
time ago etc so there we just we have no
idea and anyone who sort of asserts that
well we we should think X because this
is how many reports we know to be false
this just you're just using statistics
that are not meaningful at all and then
of course and then the other very
important statistic for talking about
title 9 adjudication is the serial
predator statistic which I actually I
did the most work on where was kind of
just me looking at that it became very
popular in activist circles to think
that the that most campus rapists are
committing on average I think maybe six
rapes there they're repeat offenders
there are people who commit sexual
assault over and over again so the the
the the the the reason that matters is
that so then if you someone if someone
is accused and you think they might
you're not just it's not just that they
may be committed sexual assault it's
that they if they did commit sexual
assault they probably did it a lot so
it's very important to get rid of them
to ban them from campus
perhaps the argument for suspending due
process or have something less than due
process is more compelling because the
science shows that these people do this
over and over and over again well of
course the study and it was just one
study really that that launched that
wave of thinking it's by a psychologist
named David David Lee sac I looked at it
in great depth with a a co-author
actually a college administrator who
came to who brought this to my attention
and did a lot of writing on it as well
she actually talked to Lisa briefly
before he hung up hung up the phone on
her hey it turned out his research was I
was had nothing to do with the problem
of campus sexual assault
except in a very abstract way he was
surveying people at a commuter school in
Massachusetts who just happened to walk
with Randy he was not doing this this
was research his graduate students were
doing for unrelated work long story
short these were people describing
violent acts that they may have
committed probably against domestic
partnerships or their children or
children of their partners not in a
campus setting not student on student
violence not at all the kind of thing
we're talking about when we're talking
what is happening in the dormitories at
at the State University or the liberal
arts college or whatever and but that
research has been it was generalized to
the campus population to a degree
it's almost unfathomable is you know
this is a person whose guidance has gone
into whose opinions have gone have
informed title nine Commission's who
whose advice was taken by by prominent
politicians who appears in the hunting
ground which is the the famous
documentary film about the problem of
sexual violence on college campuses and
it really the the picture that emerges
from that data is very is not well
correlated with the actual problem so
that's so so the statistics we're
certainly a source of harm but then a
which I and I think will probably turn
to this now the the kind of most we
talking about the cultural issues and
the and the statistics the science of
course the explicit policy changes
enacted by policymakers and government
what was the is the immediate most you
know we don't have too well what's the
nebulous connection between this
cultural factor in this of course the
government's saying you have to do it
this way is the most direct reason that
it became this situation became so dire
so quickly on college campuses yeah it's
fascinating to me to see what happens
when people start digging down on these
statistics so the one on four number
that was something that I remember being
beaten over my head with it was
everywhere rape culture rape culture
rape culture but you start to dig into
it you start to look at the survey you
realized that the person who's doing
who's recording the survey starts
assigning whether the person was
assaulted or not even if the the
respondent to the survey didn't think
that they were they expand the terms
used to define sexual assault or sexual
sexual violence there's there's just a
number of ways that the numbers get
twisted and the studies turn out to be
terrible and even some of the studies
that were most regularly cited said it's
right in them by the authors even this
data is not nationally representative
and it shouldn't be extrapolated across
they all of our universities and even in
the face of
total absence of corroborating data from
law enforcement or FBI people still seem
to believe it because it fed into the
narrative that they wanted to believe
which was that men are bad
patriarchy bad patriarchy oppression we
gotta we gotta do something to stop all
these bad men and I see also a
relationship here too with the implicit
association test that test has been
debunked a number of times even this guy
who did the study himself said it
shouldn't be used to predict racism or
bias people have figured out ways to
game that whole test and yet there's a
multi-billion dollar industry of
diversity equity and inclusion all over
this country corporations human
resources departments that are
fundamentally based on this notion
that's put forth by the bliss of
association test Jessie single is a
single single to see whatever single
Jessie single who's done tremendous work
on both title nine and on the implicit
association test he's torn it apart to
shreds yet that thing still survives
still lives I remember being in a
company-wide meeting at my last job that
I got fired from because I got doxxed by
antifa and called it Nazi I remember
sitting in one of the meetings and they
brought up the IAT and they just started
beating us over the head with it and I
sheepishly raised my hand to say well
you know the guy that did that study
doesn't think it can be extrapolated and
we shouldn't base policy on it and they
just shot me down that was that should
have been a good sign for me for what
was coming what was coming from them but
to carry on with the title nine thread
title nine and the rape culture stats
are you cannot separate them and in my
research I figured out that it was
basically Joe Biden Joe Biden the the
rape advocates are not advocates the
rape culture advocates the one in four
people got a hold of Joe Biden's
attention and they terrified him with
these statistics and then do I have this
right I'm pretty sure I believe that Joe
Biden then became the the primary force
behind
what became the 2011 Dear Colleague
letter and let's Li use this as a chance
to segue into title 9 2011 Joe Biden
rape stats rape culture
operationalization of all this fear and
everything else yeah so joe biden was
very involved heat now he was not
involved at like the lower level
planning or anything that was you know
the office for civil rights the
bureaucrats at the at the office for
civil rights which is part of the
education department i've described him
as he's the hype man for this effort
he's leading the task force he's in
front of the camera to explain why these
changes are great and why this is a
serious problem and what they're doing
to combat it is so important so he was
which is very which is very important to
the work of selling it to the public so
he is highly involved so ok so the
change is being that come into being
under the Obama administration we're
relating to title 9 so first title 9 is
a federal law from the 1970s that
mandates that there be that there cannot
be a sex-based discrimination in
education or if schools receiving
federal funding cannot engage in sex
based discrimination later also
understood to mean gender based
essentially that you you can't you know
if there's a if there's a club or an
organization in a school and it's a
men's club and there's comparative
interest in having a woman's club you
have to fund that as well at a level
equivalent to the enthusiasm per having
such an organization that's an example
of a kind of thing that title nine
initially was covering and in Grant you
know there's always mission creep in
bureaucracies in compliance so it comes
to encompass a wider spectrum of things
over time even on its own some even some
courts let it have to happen but a there
but then there becomes a major
reinterpretation beginning in 2011 where
the federal government is advising
colleges that sexual misconduct is a
form of gender-based discrimination so
if you if you suffered harassment or
assault or or any of that kind of thing
for reasons of sex or gender your as a
student your access
your right to an equal education has
been negatively affected so then it
becomes so an institution that fails to
protect you is violating title 9 and
their federal funding can be at risk so
then the federal government again the
the an agency of the Education
Department is telling schools here is
what you have to do in our opinion to be
in compliance with this law that was
written in 1974 or whatever exact year
it was again the law itself being one
like one sentence long and just clearly
not being in intended to prescribe
specific procedures for how a sexual
assault adjudication hearing would take
place on a closed campus but that is
what federal bureaucrats are telling the
schools needs to happen so they can I
just can I stop you right there for one
second because this is I mean I think
it's an important point the Office of
Civil Rights within the Department of
Education they write a letter it's
called a Dear Colleague letter they said
it's one of the universities it then
becomes the guidance by which you are
supposed to enforce the law the federal
law the civil rights of so the title
nine stuff but this seems to be a very
important and powerful thing that the
the OCR did is there a system by which
these types of guidance letters or
policy changes or policy updates is
there a system of review of analysis of
public comment of debate and discussion
is do these things go through a system
like that or is this something that they
just send one guy writes letter and
sends it off and it becomes the law of
the land so these things are supposed to
go through the exact procedure you just
outlined this did not when when an
agency engages in rulemaking that is
they're coming up with a new rule that
they think is covered under is covered
under the existing law but it's a new
rule it's supposed to go through notice
and comment they're supposed to be input
from a variety of people and it takes a
while and then it's implemented if
you're actually you know and if an
agency is actually implementing a change
to the law then they can't do that
Congress is supposed to do that that's
why we have legislators we elect
legislators we don't
bureaucrats of course that didn't take
place this they they maintained that
they were not creating a new rule they
maintained the office for civil rights
they were just issuing guidance fully
fully in line with what the law already
said the rules that already existed so
they maintained they did not have to go
through any of those kinds of
verifications any of those steps so the
trade-off there was that it they weren't
saying this is a new rule that you have
to follow they were saying we think you
have to do what we're telling you now to
be in compliance with existing law
existing rules you're welcome to
challenge us and we can go to court and
figure it out but we're telling you that
we we think you would lose federal
funding because we're right this is what
you're supposed to do so of course no
school wants to make some kind of stand
against you know on behalf of young men
accused of sexual assault
to fight this so they just all comply in
and of course the agents the the aspects
of the school is complying with this are
the vast title nine bureaucracy that is
more than happy to have more to do and
more reasons to hire more title nine
coordinators and put it like there
there's no there was there little
incentive to to mount a like principal
ideological stand against this so of
course the universities did not the only
the aspect of the university that did
mount some resistance is of course the
law faculty at certain colleges in
universities including Harvard but
Harvard their administration has been a
has been a disaster on a level I can't
even convey in words their Lea their law
faculty was was thunderously upset about
this because these people come from a
world you know these are and these
obviously these are people on the left
but who come from a from norms of due
process saying that the procedures being
forcibly put in place are Byzantine are
horrifying
so those so the the the federal
government is telling universities
colleges that to be in compliance with
existing federal law they have to
adjudicate investigate and adjudicate
sexual all matter of sexual misconduct
much more aggressively they so there's a
speech even without the sort of due
process as there's a speech component
for just for free speech because they're
defining in the guidance they're
defining sexual harassment as any
unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature
which is so broad so that that could be
I mean you could be discussing like a
sexual assault scene in Shakespeare in a
literature class and run afoul of that
if anyone it's something that makes
anyone uncomfortable for any reason in
the employment law if we're talking bout
workplace harassment
there's limiting factors that judges
have mandated law has mandate it has to
be severe pervasive it's like all those
other things so that just not every time
someone is upset it's actionable that
was not part of the guidance that did
not exist in the guidance so you had no
check and then of course the norms
they're recommending for the procedures
including for the for the the sexual
misconduct hearings actually they're not
even they're not requiring hearings
they're actually pushing colleges to
move to a single investigator model
where you just have one university
official deciding this the entire case
essentially deciding who to interview
what evidence to consider and then and
then proposing a sanction proposing a
recommendation of finding without the
accused having any ability to not only
to present a defense but in some cases
to even know what they're being accused
of because they're not they were not
granted they're not guaranteed access to
the documents or are copies of the
document sometimes they get to glance of
the documents and then I have to like
copy them from from memory so just yeah
and we can go there just so many things
that just fly in the face of NACHA of
not just due process but common sense
that became that became a be an element
of handling these matters right and
aside from the Harvard Law staff was
were there any outspoken groups or
anybody crying foul about this letter
being sent out without a public review
or was it something that just sort of
went out into the world without much
notice at first it went out without much
notice to the broader world at first
there you know all along there were
people there were lawful tea members
there were professors who come out of
the old left you know I talked about
that a little bit how I think this new
left
is more hostile to free speech a new
process you know there's a kind of ACLU
left that believes that we'll even you
know accused terrorists could due
process the Westboro Baptist Church gets
due process the Nazis when they march
through the Jewish town they get due
process in free speech so there there
certainly were professors who you know I
probably I would not agree with them on
a lot of things but on the on this they
had a lot of very real concerns and and
and then of course there's you know the
foundation for individual rights in
education which is a free speech and due
process organization was you know was on
this immediately I think the sort of the
broader concerns and of course I said
the ACLU left is good on this but the
ACLU itself has become a little bit
captured by the by the newer left to a
degree so you you so actually they have
they I don't know to the extent to which
they celebrated the changes but they
have condemned every attempt to undo the
Obama era changes yeah that's been very
disappointing let's talk about the ACLU
for a second since you brought them up I
happen to have that written down in my
notes as well I have a personal
experience with the ACLU that's I think
worth sharing an in contextual here when
I was docked by an Tifa and called a
racist in a Nazi my workplace which was
a fete which was a federal agency right
because the District of Columbia was all
federal plus the District of Columbia
has its own Human Rights Act plus the
obviously federal agency covered by the
Constitution and that didn't stop them
from digging through after an Tifa Docs
me digging through all of my old posts
and all my old tweets and everything
else and they and they dug up like two
or three specific things that they were
firing before and they were all
politically related right they were like
critiques of radical feminism they were
questioning whether or not Montgomery
County is doing the right thing by
having sanctuary cities sanctuary County
and that the legal director art Spitzer
in Washington DC of the ACLU reached out
to me he contacted me he said he wanted
to take my case because it was a clear
violation of the
first amendment and a clear violation of
the DC Human Rights Act we went through
a whole long process we met a number of
times he wrote a really long paper for
me to respond to my employer with he
wanted to take the case he put it to his
legal committee the legal committee was
split and rejected taking my case he
appealed it to the broader committee and
they denied my case even though the
legal director who he claims he was the
last libertarian in the libertarian wing
of the ACLU and he said to me he said
that the reason why they declined to
take your case is because they did not
want to offend their coalition partners
and the coalition partners that he
explicitly said were black lives matter
and the Human Rights Campaign and he
said that they were not going to take my
case a clear violation of First
Amendment rights
one that he put in like hours and hours
and hours and hours of work on that he
reached out to me asking if he could
take the case and they said no what has
happened to the ACLU we're gonna go back
to title 9 but you brought it up I want
to ask you what has happened to ACLU
Robby
I mean your experience is that's just a
perfect example of kind of what's going
on with the organization they so I I
have to be careful because the ACLU is a
big organization and they actually
operate differently in every state and
they are still doing a lot of great work
so I can't I mean I'm gonna say the ACLU
is dead or they like you know
state-by-state they they still do they
take controversial clients there was I
think was maybe Connecticut or I can't
quite remember state you know they
defended I wrote about this maybe a year
ago a couple months ago students who
were expelled from posting they were
expelled after they posted this is high
school photos of themselves with like
guns on tik-tok and they got expelled
the ACLU took their case got them a
settlement like that's great they do
terrific work still unfortunately what I
think has happened is they have hired a
lot of employees who are younger who I
think instead of seeing the organization
as like a principled civil liberties
organization see it as an anti-trump
organization or a
just a progressive organization so the
things that they're passionate about our
immigration rights civil rights for you
know for for prisoners who are you know
the race issues in criminal justice all
sorts of things those kinds of things
which again I I'm generally probably
agree with them on and I'm glad they're
doing work on but it's not as much about
the kind of principle we're gonna defend
controversial people on the other side -
that's not how they see the organization
so I think there's no I don't think it's
resolved I think there's a lot of
internal tension about which that's the
direction they're going to I don't think
it's for certain that they just like
it's over there the battle is lost
that's the direction they're going
certainly it looks that way you know I
have friends I know people inside the
ACLU or like dissident people who used
to be for a you know with the ACLU they
they generally they may and they have a
range of opinion some of them are so
concerned some of them hate what's
become of the organization some of them
still think the organization is great
and can be you know redeemed it's it's
there but but they're in a place where
they're slated to just become another
progressive organization because that's
what the vocal sort of young activists
who works there would want which is
exactly what I kind of worry about in my
book that the the Atlee capture of or of
influential and important organizations
by a small number of activists woke
intersectional type people who then the
entire company it comes to recognize and
hold and explicitly advocate their view
not because there's a majority of them
but because they're the most vocal
person and they and and criticizing them
is a is a form of illegal it is
illegally traumatizing them according to
them yeah so no one's gonna speak out
against this happening when they say
well if you're if you're speaking out
against me you're contributing to my
harassment or my lack of inequality or
my right to a workplace story about that
kind of that's their mindset so they're
intentionally using that to weaponize to
weaponize their views against dissent
and that so that's to some degree the
story of what's happening at the ACLU
also part of the story and a lot of
other
institutions that have that have kind of
let the the the Fox into the henhouse
yeah well part of the whole thing with
the critical social justice people is
that they're taught that it's not enough
to write scholarly papers in critique of
certain ideas but the the job of the
philosopher is now the job of the
activist and it's the times are done for
writing papers and talking about things
nicely and it's time for actual active
change and because the active change
that they're seeking is morally
justified to them to the level of a
religion many would argue they feel
completely justified in doing whatever
it takes in order to enact the changes
that they want to see and they're very
active in taking over organizations
again the tyranny of the minority they
have done a fantastic job at getting
themselves into high leverage positions
and then using policy and federal
changes to enact even more high leverage
sweeping changes but on this one last
theme about the changing arcs of our
institutions as they get deeper into
social justice critical theory
postmodern etc we've talked about
Biden's
competing zark we're talking about it we
talked about ACLU in your book you
mentioned another organization
moveon.org you laid out a pretty
interesting arc for them as well that
has led them to a position that seems
sort of an anthem of the way that they
were founded isn't is that right did I
read that right I just think it's fine
actually and I brought this up in an
article I wrote the other day this
entertains people every time I share
this anecdote it's just not something
that's broadly known or I guess it's not
broadly remembered but you know so move
on organ is a progressive activism
organization that you know is pretty by
the books progressive leftist activism
on gender and and believing victims
believing with all that I'm everything
but people forget or they knew they just
don't know where its name comes from so
the margins the moving on was to move
from the from the sexual misconduct
episodes involving Bill Clinton the
people who started the organization were
Democrats were liberals trying to say we
should we should we should get over this
the the country should just kind of move
on is this that big a deal
I think they advocated like like
censoring him like censure by the Senate
and but not impede and not impeachment
or getting rid of it you know this is
that bit let's let's look we're gonna
move on there's more important stuff to
worry about which is again it's just
kind of hilarious and and now that was
actually entirely characteristic of how
second wave feminists treated the entire
Bill Clinton episode right the Gloria
Steinem writing in the New York Times at
the time a column that very derisive Lee
became referred to later as like the one
free grope rule that like well you know
he may be a kind of creepy dude who does
bad stuff but he's our creepy dude who
does bad stuff he's one of us he's part
of our team so we're gonna defend him
we're just gonna overlook the bad things
he did I actually I think there was a
moment at the very height of the me2
movement where that double standard was
be it was not being observed sort of the
I think the the so Democrats did turn on
Al Franken they they they did get one of
their own and say this is not okay you
have to leave that was like the most
high-minded the movement ever was and
now of course has lapsed back into well
you know when we simply said believe all
victims we didn't mean people who made
accusations against Joe Biden they've
totally just you know well he's one of
us and we're gonna totally if most of
them for the most part have said yeah
we're gonna we're gonna look the other
way on this or were or any way no not
that we're not gonna look the other way
but we're not gonna hold him to the same
standard the standard being all victims
must be believed not only their standard
this is Biden standard Biden said at the
time of the Cavanaugh incident and this
is well in keeping with the guidance
that he hyped as the spear man for title
line that we should believe all victims
we should presume the essence of what
they say is truthful no matter how long
it takes them to come forward no
or if their stories change we need to
boost presume that the essence of what
they say is truthful now he says now but
he is in the situation he says it
slightly different now he is saying that
well III meant that we needed to respect
victims but then you have an
investigation and you know if the
evidence doesn't show you that it
happened well then that's that
but of course no evidence is ever going
to show that this happened or didn't
happen there's just no evidence period
and in that situation under his previous
standard he would say that what we
should presume the person who's telling
the truth that's which is different than
just respect I agree we should respect
people who come forward there's no
reason to be dismissive or mean-spirited
or derisive or to not empathize with
them or talk with them you know in in
about what can be done to - as resources
for you this is actually one of the
great things in the revisions to title 9
that's now coming out of the Trump
administration that Betsy DeVos just
declared last week is now they're saying
actually well universities can offer you
reach out and offer support to victims
without necessarily initiating the kind
of adjudicative procedure if all they
want is to be heard listened to in
comforted but they don't actually want
the kind of the kind of courtroom sort
of thing then why not just do that
this makes perfect sense to me and and
again as part of the new the new
guidance but but so long story short
Biden is totally under the standards he
advocating it's crystal clear you could
be you could or and and people have been
expelled for sexual misconduct on
college campuses in the exact same
situation by it and now fly it finds
himself in he is lucky to not be a
student on a college campus languishing
under the standards he himself advocated
be something to see him held to the
standards that he held the rest of us to
one of the things that I love about a
long enough time line is that
unprincipled positions become get
revealed as circumstances and
environments change people's positions
and and and attitudes are change if
they're not based on core fundamental
principles and it's clear organizations
like move on sadly it seems as though
they cou is moving in the same way
obviously Joe Biden moving in the same
way that there's no actual clear bedrock
set of principles that they're adhering
to they're all actually just adhering to
the principle of power trying to get it
trying to preserve it trying to keep
other people out of it
and the hypocrisy is just completely
completely exposed and for somebody who
may had a and I don't think either one
of us but people who may have had a more
less a little less jaded perspective on
government and politics in the media
these last 10 years have been just
amazing at revealing hypocrisy and and
an agendas and and the motivation behind
things that people are doing even if
they're saying out loud that this is a
morally principled stance that they're
taking it's really not and none of it is
and that's part of why we feel this
conflict and dissonance and in this
unease and it's also why when you start
to interrogate somebody who has
positions like these that they tend to
respond with increased agitation and
anger and you know just frustration
because if they can sense when you're
drilling down and trying to get to the
point at which one could establish a
principle that they were that they were
standing behind or standing on there
isn't one there it's all based on it's
all based on quicksand and I think that
the the country really felt that with
title 9 I really felt that with the Dear
Colleague letter and that stroke of a
pen the on the the the policy that went
out without any public review that was
sent out in the dark of the night
and ended up changing the culture you
know that too didn't seem to have any
real principled standing and people got
really tired of it so let's move the
title 9 story along a little bit Joe
Biden he is the height man he gets this
the morning for rape stat they send out
the letter goes to college campuses
college campuses all sudden are afraid
that they're gonna lose their federal
funding which is to the tune of billions
hundreds of billions probably right
hundreds of billions of dollars and
they're worried that they're gonna be
found non-compliant they don't want to
have to go to court with the Office of
Civil Rights and entitled I'm the 2011
and I think in 13 the the the federal
government even urges the the
universities to preemptively seek out
and and stamp out harassment and abuse
so with all this in hand what do the
universities do what happens how does
this unfold across the country and what
what problems did it really bring to the
forefront I mean the the universities
implemented the guidance broadly to the
best of their ability and then some the
the issue with with federal guidance
that was never subjected to any
rulemaking and was just kind of made up
on the fly is that it's contradictory
and it's confusing and it it it
contradicts sort of other procedures
that the universities if they're public
universities would have to follow like
the First Amendment in in many cases so
the universities are in this weird
position where they have to enforce
guidance that probably many of them are
some of the administrators some of the
administrators enforcing it know is not
solid guidance or would not stand up but
they're doing it anyway because that's
what the federal government is telling
them they have to do so then and and
also you know some of them just don't
have some of the administrators you know
if he was thinking of the vice president
for what's the joke position I always
use a vice president for a sustainable
you know diversity and student life or
something like that you know these are
bureaucratic type people who actually
very well are probably not First
Amendment experts or fifth or sixth
amendment experts they you know
they're some of the things they're then
telling students and professors that
they have to do to be in compliance with
title 9 actually go well beyond what the
government told them they had to do
that's just how that's how bureaucracy
works people misinterpret things you
know I saw for instance I think the City
University of New York I saw an email
they sent two professors to faculty
warning them not to use gendered
salutations in emails like like Ms mr.
mrs. etc well mezzo mezz is not gendered
I did trying to police the language they
were using something like that and and
saying that if you didn't do that you
you could be you could be violating
title 9 of course no that does not
violate that that does not literally
violate the wording of the statute no
court would have agreed that that was a
violation of title 9 and in fact the
guidance from the office for civil
rights would not have held that to be a
violation of title 9 but nevertheless
the the the the instruction to just go
more insane on enforcing speech and
behavior related to sex or gender that
was the message and they got that
message you had I mean you can just you
can google me and go through my archive
of ridiculous title nine cases where
again this is this is actually not the
fault of the guidance this is the fault
of the bureaucrats processing it on the
other on the other end but the guidance
itself is also just fundamentally flawed
in the procedures it is requiring for
adjudication and you have you know you
have universities moving to just utterly
reprehensible policies not having you
know the guidance is recommending
against cross examination it's it's it
is not saying there has to be lawyers
it's saying if if the if the accused can
appeal then the the the accuser has to
be able to appeal its saying and then
sometimes it's you know it's set it's
its proponents it makes a settlement
document with with individual schools
and colleges first it you know it will
tell you oh we're investigating you for
violating title nine and then it will
later produce a document saying okay
here's everything you were doing wrong
the first one was the one for the
University of Montana which is the deer
which then it is supposed to be the
guidance for every
but then Adela so does a little bit of
specialized guidance for individual
schools and universities I read one of
these documents where it said well in
your in your title nine procedures this
is the government talking to the school
it says we're gonna do like what a
reasonable person would think well we're
gonna advise you against reasonable
reasonable reason reasonableness
reasonableness that's that's not the
standard we're going for I mean this is
the government telling them a reason
maybe this is me as an editor for a
magazine called reason but I find that
objection one problem with that yes yes
this is that is insane do you do you
think though I mean just to summarize
right like all of a sudden you can get
kicked out of school for making an
offhanded comment basically you no
longer have to clear a hurdle being
consistent persistent and and and
prohibiting the quote victim from
obtaining their college education which
was what the whole theory was based on
in the first place the level of
evidentiary standard was lowered to
preponderance of the evidence which is
after you put in in the book fifty
percent plus a feather but there was a
sort of the criminalization as a war of
things that had been ordinarily
protected under the First Amendment
there was no ability for the accused to
conduct an investigation or
cross-examination or face their accuser
all things that we hold to be very dear
and essential parts of due process all
these things start spreading out all
over the country and you said though
that you the bureaucrats took things one
step further I think that they were
probably gleefully ready and excited to
do that people that work in title nine
offices in the universities probably not
going to be right wing probably going to
be libertarian probably already
indoctrinated into gender studies and
critical theory that's why they're
working in title nine so all these
things work together to build a climate
and this is the part where I think it's
really important because it's not just
like in the old days where when you went
to school you got indoctrinated or
brainwashed as it were by professors in
your class on a specific subject they
taught you what they wanted to you to
know and it was up to you to be critical
or to accept it or not
but now the indoctrination process
begins in orientation it is part of the
culture on the campus it's plastered all
over the walls there's offices all over
the place the idea that you can wound
someone with words that you can
misgender people and that is harassment
all these things are now part of the
common culture because they are
culturally enforced and they're also
ruled and base enforced and so this is
the part that I really want to touch on
with you is you know please in your
opinion do you think that these
bureaucratic rules which definitely
impinged on civil liberties which were
definitely based on flawed data which
were definitely pushed in the middle of
the night without any public comment one
can make an argument that that was
strictly a procedural thing appear
Craddock massive laws that could be
changed but the argument that I make and
I think you know I'm interested to hear
your take is that this not only changed
those rules but it changed culture it's
changing its changing people changing
relationships that people have the
nature of their relationships the way
those can relationships are conducted
and then when you're raised when you're
raised you know when you go to go to
school in this environment it's now been
10 years you know you you that stuff
sinks in and then you bring it to your
next job and you bring it to your next
endeavor and so what what do you think
about that to what extent is title 9 the
Dear Colleague stuff what extent does it
does the negative effect go beyond just
as civil liberty elements in the
procedural elements but actually spill
into culture and the way that we form
our relationships and and basically you
know the identity of our young people
coming out of these systems so that yeah
I mean this is this was affecting the
entire living experience of being at a
universities particularly if you're
talking about one that's a residential
that has dormitories that kind of thing
you know you make an important point if
it's you know the right has often said
that well the professor's are
indoctrinating the students or you know
kind of thing I've actually found the
professors in general to be more
open-minded and interesting than the
bureaucrats the administrators and
that's the other thing you can you know
if your professor has a different view
than you most of the time I'm sure
there's plenty of exceptions but you can
generate you can genuinely challenge
them actually a lot of even professors
who are hardcore ideological like
Marxist or something right they like
they often they like the conservative
student and they like to argue or
something many of you know many of them
get into it for that kind of discussion
not all of them I'm sure there's some
cranky plenty of geeky faculty members
but oftentimes the classroom as it is at
least a place where ideas are exchanged
now people with dissident views often
think they can't speak up in the
classroom I'm sure some self censoring
takes place although studies have
broadly shown that they are safe to
speak up in classroom or at least the
the teacher is not going to retaliate
retaliate against them the problem is
some other student might some other
student might file complaint or you're
living some a residential advisors going
to file a complaint against you because
that residential advisor has been
trained that if someone has a view in
the dormitory on the floor that makes
someone else feel uncomfortable it might
be it might be educational equal
opportunity problem so the kind of
bureaucratization of just living and
being a human being on a college campus
that was very much a part of how title 9
has been handled by these administrators
by an incredible number of
administrators let's recall I mean you
want to know where your tuition is going
the ranks of the administration have
just have increased you know so
dramatically in the last 30 years
faculty salaries have not budged it's
it's it's the number of it's the the
amount of administrators and what
they're being paid they're being paid to
I mean to engage in a form of form of
indoctrination if you want to call it
that or to be a to to weeding out
dissidents or different thinkers and and
making everyone else feel like well I
may not agree with this this activist
person but I am better off not speaking
up it's not that I fear my professor or
something that they disagree with me
it's that it's that I feel like I am
required to agree
in order to even be allowed to live here
that and I think that will have and is
having an effect on the broader society
moving out of campus in deciding what I
mean that speaks to the erosion of what
what safety means that I that I spoke to
earlier again if safety means and it
goes to fundamental rights it goes to
free speech
you know we we the Supreme Court has a
long history of judicata your this
speech is allowed this what this speech
pointing out a specific narrow category
of speech you know like actual threats
of violence or planning violence or a
couple other things that is not okay
everything sort of that is okay but
that's not the standard these young
people have been socialized under
they've been socialized under a standard
where if your speech causes me to feel
emotional discomfort or pain then I I
have a I have a right not to feel that
way and I have a right to take action
against you there should be action taken
against you to prevent you from making
me feel that way the role of the
authorities in society is to protect me
from feeling that way and that authority
could be it could be the campus
administration if we're talking about on
campus it could be maybe it's the
employer if we're talking about the
private sector maybe in some abstract
sense it's supposed to be the government
I mean these are and again these are I
think very concerning trends if you're a
libertarian like me or really if you're
just kind of a person who believe you
don't have to be a libertarian you could
just be a person who thinks norms of
free exchange and free expression are
somewhat important this should be this
should be very concerning that we will
all be forced to live under the rules of
a kind of rules inspired by a title 9s
compliance and at elite college campuses
because the people who who who formed
their ideas about how society should be
organized were lived under that regime
and now we will live under theirs that
is such an eloquent way of saying it you
encapsulate most of my fears and
concerns there aside from the due
process stuff the cultural impact thank
you very much that was very
clear bravi um there a lot of people
point to 2010 to 2012 as a time period
in which there was quote a change a
significant change James Lindsay pointed
it out in his book was cynical theories
which is a fantastic book the pew data
shows that there was a sudden change in
folks understanding of racial antagonism
some of the questions that they've been
asking people for decades the responses
which they thought would indicate a
sense of racism had been declining
declining declining declining declining
and then all of a sudden 2010-2011 takes
a sharp turn and all of a sudden more
people think you know almost the
question that they always ask black
people would be better off if they just
worked harder or something like that you
know like the response to that they said
started as indicative of an increased in
in racial antagonism there is an
explosion in search activity around
intersectionality feminism racism and
stuff around 2010-2011 I felt it
personally just in the culture I want to
nail it down on title nine on the DC out
but what do you think about that a do
you see in your research shift in
marette racial antagonism or people's
thoughts of on the current state of
racial affairs in the United States do
you see any change in the data around
that time period if so what do you
attribute it to and is there any way
that the title nine DCL compliance and
enforcement had anything to do with that
it's very tough to judge you know what
are the well the first determined that
something has happened and then look
well what are the sort of nebulous
social causes that might have prompted
it I think I get the feeling that sort
of identity based antagonism might be
rising abstractly I think now you
wouldn't see it we often hear they're
more hate crimes this is talking about
this is actually something else I read
about a lot there's more
crimes against various identity groups
then if you look at the data you find
out that well a different there might
have been more hate crimes reported than
last year but it's just because
different agencies reported or different
agencies required to support actually
maybe more people reported this year so
then better data just looks like
something's getting worse so like this
is a problem we have actually we're you
know we're seeing this a little bit
right now with the pandemic you see oh
well well we have more cases and you go
well actually we're just doing more
testing well I mean it might be that we
have more cases but it's not the clear
it's not you know that just just the raw
number going up doesn't tell you what
you need to know and that's been true
for for hate crimes
I think there's been you know we have to
look for things that like our actual
changes so social media did not exist
broadly into nearly the degree it does
now before 2010 so it is true that there
is now a way for people to express their
views and to sort into like-minded
groups so if you if you held maybe
antagonistic views toward toward one
race or another you know 15 years ago or
20 years ago you might have thought you
were alone and you had nowhere to
express that view but now you can see
that other people are expressing it you
can group yourselves together I mean
this goes for you you could say this of
any sort of group of people with
uncommon views so they I think they've
been able to make themselves more known
or they're more noticeable now but it's
not really that the the membership has
gone up it's just that there's kind of
more there's a there's a better vehicle
for organizing so then that tend so then
that makes it look like like we have
this rising phenomenon for instance of
the alright when I don't know that it
may be like trivially true that it like
literally people who describe themselves
that way did not exist previously but
they did exist they just didn't describe
themselves that way and they didn't like
hang out together they didn't know who
each other were and they had no national
spokesperson do you know what I mean so
it's not it's not it's not act it's not
that it's not that like racism has has
necessarily gone up I do now I the kind
of dancer then you can you measure like
well has like sensitivity gone up has
the you know I I'm even trying to trace
what is it actually true that students
are getting worse on like free speech
issues or you
people are getting worse on free speech
issues and it just it matters how well
it matters what question exactly you ask
them older Americans test very badly on
free speech depending on how you ask the
question so you know the the kind of
average of the polling that I can find
does show that there is some degree of a
mounting hostility to principles I think
are important among specifically of the
college age set but it you know it
matter you can go back to you know
nineteen seventy and again how it do
matters how exactly you ask a question
you can get a result that would look
more sinister than you get now so it's
so and then I and then I tend I think I
suspect I guess at any rate the kind of
safety culture that came into being in
the 1990s has something to do with
what's happening on college campuses
that you have those people are finally
coming of age the people who you know
who who were born or very young children
under a time where we got like really
freaked out about shootings and
kidnappings related to school and you
know crime bill and oh we have to you
know we have to like like really weren't
bullying if we've kids get bullied
they'll turn into mass shooters that
kind of whole movement of like we got a
watch and vigilantly protect and control
our children and everyone gets a
participation trophy because if you're
depressed you'll probably become some
suicidal maniac that kind of mindset
that came out of the 1990s I think had
and I suspect had a negative impact on a
lot of young people some young people at
any rate and might speak to some of the
issues they have now but then that's
just them but but that's just my theory
I could there's like there's no data I
can point you to say yep that's why it
is a theory that Jonathan Hyde has as
well but but I'd I know I never like to
lead with it or overhype it because
again it's just a theory and I don't
know so it's all the Boomers possible
well yeah right everybody you know
instinctively knows that to be the truth
right that's exactly right because they
were the ones doing the parenting at
that time then they were the ones
setting the laws at the time now
and they're the ones that are causing
all this problem hahaha who knows maybe
it's true maybe it isn't but there's
been clearly a change there's been
clearly at least a change in the
conversations and in the narratives and
then in the reaction and then these
hyper empowered tyrannical minorities
are now equipped with tools by which
they can spread their narratives and
their ideas and a much more forceful and
impactful way you combine that with the
teaching that they get in critical
theory that they have to make change
we'll just talk about it and all of a
sudden you know you have sort of a whole
recipe and a whole just a stack of
things on top of each other that it has
led to this moment that we're at right
now so I'm I'm ready to start bringing
this into the homestretch here Bobby and
I want to just remind my listeners one
of the fundamental reasons that I voted
for and was vocally in favor of electing
Donald Trump in 2016 was for this
particular issue was for title 9 reform
I'm I found a tweet of mine from May of
2016 or I said if Donald Trump gets
elected he will solve the title 9 crisis
and save our boys and it became I'm not
gonna say I was a single-issue voter but
I certainly had a small handful of
issues and most of them were around
biting you know what I see is a
departure from Western values and
enlightenment values and science and
reason and towards those modern base
values of activism radical feminism etc
and title 9
DCL was one of the ways that all that
stuff was operationalized put into
practice had a direct impact on our
youths on our culture and now in our
corporations and such and for somebody
like me I'm looking at these things as a
system and I want to see how can I
disrupt this system which I'm opposed to
and reforming title 9 was probably my
number one operational goal and it just
so happens and this is why we're talking
last week
Trump's Education Secretary was able to
finalize their remedy or revision of the
title 9
guidelines and procedures and so why
don't you take us through that take us
through betsy divorce coming in the
charge that she was given the process
that she went through you know did it go
through public scrutiny did she follow
standards for implementing new
bureaucratic rules and then bring it
home for us and and and let's have a
little celebration because I know you've
been on this for a long time I know it's
very important to you it's very
important to me and it really felt like
something momentous happened in this
arena in the last week so let's
celebrate that let's let's take it home
what's the final story yes it's it's
taken a couple years because the
Secretary of Education did go through
proper procedures did do rulemaking and
comment did seek input from all sorts of
interested stakeholders she did
everything by the book so it's which
means it's taken a while but last week
they announced the revisions to title 9
undoing she so she had already cancelled
a rescinded the Dear Colleague letter
the bad advice but now she has announced
the the kind of the new policies which
which go a good amount toward Rhian
shrining some semblance of due process
and basic fairness she is now saying
there has to be a hearing your the
representatives for the accused and the
accuser their lawyers or representatives
need to be able to cross-examine each
other so there needs to be actually
presentation of evidence so that's a
good thing there's been some of those
limiting factors I talked about are
explicitly in this in this in the new
rules so it's not just any unwelcome
conduct of a sexual nature it has to
also be severe pervasive etc or for
sexual harassment for the kind of the
general sexual harassment conduct it's
still you know quid pro quo harassment
if oh you know if a professor says I'll
give you an A if you sleep with me that
still under the existing you can't do
that that doesn't need to rise to a
level of pervy R severe purpose for
something but there's a lot of good
guardrails being put back in but also
and I mentioned earlier the
you can that you don't have to initiate
a title line investigation if the victim
doesn't want that I mean that was
happening under the existing got like
this was a poorly understood aspect I
covered cases where a where the alleged
victim the purported victim was not what
had not complained like this is
something people didn't understand the
investigation was not necessarily being
initiated by the victim because the
victim was technically the victim but
really the nature of the victim was the
university in a sense they're they're
the ones who aren't going to be punished
for not complying with title 9 so they
were investigating some cases where the
victim said nothing happened to me it's
alright sometimes there was a boyfriend
and girlfriend and in a jealous friend
or a neighbor or a coach or something
reported it and the accused said no I
nothing happened I don't want this to go
forward and the university said excuse
me we will determine if there has been a
violation you don't determine that we
determine that and you know they didn't
call the victims a witness and so what
happens the person is found to getting
expelled like again I think every person
on earth would say that was insane and
unfair and that happened multiple times
so now there's so there's less of a
burden a less of an obligation under the
new the new rules for the university
they don't have to initiate if it's if
it's not what the victim wants if the
victim wants something else just to be
supported just to have resources you can
do that now a victim and also now a
victim could confide in a faculty member
something like a coach and and talk
about it and it wouldn't immediately
trigger an investigation and a an a-hole
all that stuff unless that's what the
victim wanted I think I think that's
important I want to give victims agency
look like that's what the movement says
they want so I recognize that the kind
of confrontational procedure is not
always in everyone's best interest so
now so explicitly under the new rules
also if the accused and the accuser want
to do something other than the formal
adjudication if they want to reach some
other restorative justice kind of a
gruesome other agreement they can do
that if both of them agree they can do
that which I also think is good we
should like what is the downside of
offer of three of offering people
options and if they both
want that option why not do that so
there's a lot of goods it will now this
will not solve the problem in Ireland
your you will still have a problem of
rogue title nine agencies continue to
operate under the bad standards and in
fact many university presidents have
vowed do to do business as usual it's
possible we're gonna have to go to court
over this joe biden has vowed to undo it
the second key is made president if that
happens so we're definitely not you know
out of the woodwork but this was a very
positive step that i was glad to see
taken that i that certainly would not
have happened under democratic
administration and i it's possible
wouldn't have even happened under a
different republican administration i
say that as someone who is no fan of i'm
trying i like some of the things he's
done i criticize him plenty of other
times i think this is certainly one
thing i can point to that i did that i
really wholeheartedly support that that
that goes so against the grain of what
of what the pressure to do was that that
i it might have it might be honestly
unique to this administration that they
actually took this on
and that is fantastic and something that
should be worth celebrating
from my perspective I understand why
it's unsavory to perhaps praise Donald
Trump depending on where you sit but
like I said I believe that this was
something that he would take care of I
said it even before he was the freakin
nominee I believe and he has finally
carried out my dream my vision it's been
it was its literally was four years ago
that I tweeted that and and saw this as
a possibility and something that I was
hopeful would happen and I think it
should be repeated that Betsy DeVos she
followed the rule she followed the
custom she followed procedure she went
to public comment and so she and Trump
together working together moved our
nation back towards a rule of law due
process freedom of speech in a way from
these unfounded unprincipled postmodern
nonsense one in for rape and I
for one am very excited about that and
Robby you should be commended sir
because your tireless work on this
matter your detailed reporting the
traveling that you did all over the
country the book that you've written the
speeches you've given the talks you've
attended the podcasts you've done all
that adds up and it all adds up and it
gets in people's ears and and you know
you had influence and you helped steer
the narrative and I think that you
should be feeling really good about
yourself and your work in this
particular matter like how does it feel
how does it feel that all this time all
these years later now that all this
thing that you've been so so focused on
spent so much time on has actually you
know at least taken steps towards being
remedied how does that feel it feels
great and this is one of the benefits of
being an explicit opinion based a
journalist and reporter is I can be
honest about the fact that you know when
I wrote on about these stories of people
often young men who were who were you
know punished under procedures I thought
we're totally unfair often in cases
where I thought they very likely didn't
do it or they were mistreated even if
they had done it and I felt for them and
I felt you know I
covered cases where people's lives were
we're you know truly ruined it is ruined
your life to get expelled from college
to be as some of these cases I've
covered involved these people are still
in debt that they will never recover
from after having been expelled from the
University for sexual misconduct and I
think their stories are really sad and
I've been I it's been my I thought it
was important to tell their stories and
that not a lot of other people
especially not a lot of other people who
have some connection to and credibility
with mainstream journalism
we're telling their stories and so i
i've wanted to do that i've been i'm
glad that i have done it and i'm very
very happy that it didn't help that it
contributed it in some way to to
revising these procedures so that
they'll be even if there'll be a little
bit more more fair next time i think
it's i think it's an achievement
you're absolutely right things happen in
our country generally incrementally
changes found on the margin changes are
made in bureaucratic actions and rule
changes and so this is how we do it in
America and it worked and we're here and
who knows if Biden gets elected what
he'll be able to do given the public
comment and process that this all just
went through and the light that you have
continued to shine on this matter
thank you very much Robby for your work
on that thank you very much for coming
to talk to me about it I'm really happy
that we had this conversation to put
everything into context it's been a
pleasure to speak with you and to get to
know you a little bit better everybody
out there please go by Robby's book it's
called panic attack young radicals in
the age of Trump you can also find Robby
at reason.com
and you can find him on Twitter Robby
what's your Twitter handle people
comprise ax ro VB Y SOA ve all right
fantastic thank you so much Robby
congratulations to you and you know
thank you very much and I hope that we
can do this again so yes terrific thanks
so much for having me it's been great
talking with you
[Music]
you