rival risk dynamics multiplied by
exponential tech self-terminate
exponential tech is a negligible we
cannot put it away so we either figure
out anti rivalry or we go extinct you an
experiment comes to a completion that's
the core thing economics is our value
system codified as value equations that
determines how much we value one thing
relative to another thing that
determines what we're incentivized to do
and what we confer power to so if a dead
whale is worth a million dollars on a
fishing boat and a live whale in the
ocean is worth nothing that's a value
system codified in a value equation that
then incentivizes behavior but it also
incentivizes psychopathy so I have to
kind of deaden to be able to do the
thing that is incentivized by the system
or somebody else does and I'm just not
effective in the system if you look at
the way economics then needs to protect
its own profit stream in the way it will
learn how to influence media to control
people's sense manky frameworks in a way
it will influence governance for the way
it will influence legislation on the
nature of what happens in education to
prepare people for the workforce so you
can't think about the evolution of human
consciousness in the evolution of
economics differently the paradigm shift
is basically everything
[Music]
we need new systems of governance
that are not any system of governance
the world has ever done so far their
systems of how do we individually and
collectively make sense of what's going
on make sense of what we actually value
and how those values can be
synergistically satisfied rather than an
a theory of trade-offs with each other
we need totally new systems of economics
we need totally new systems of education
all the way down to at an individual
level a new basis for identity values
our own individual sense making as long
as I think that I'm an individual it is
fundamentally separate from you and the
biosphere and everything else I can
think about optimizing my own quality of
life independent of and maybe even at
the expense of your quality of life for
the biosphere or anything else
as soon as I start to say okay well I'm
not that tree but what would I be
without trees well I would not exist
there would be no atmosphere if they
weren't plants photosynthesizing so I
fundamentally am not even a meaningful
concept without plants so if I think of
myself as me that is not fundamentally
interdependent with plants I'm actually
just not even thinking clearly and then
I start to run that and say well what
about soil microbiota and it turns out
that my life depends on the whole thing
[Music]
as long as I have a sense of I that is
separate and maybe even rival rescind
rival risk competition for some scarce
status resource attention partner
whatever it is then we have a
fundamental basis for war
and in a world of exponentially
increasing technology which means that
the warfare gets to be more and more
consequential that will self-terminate
[Music]
so figuring out NC rivalry is a
psycho-spiritual process inside of
ourselves can we pay attention to our
emotions and triggers that hijack us
from sovereignty because the moment I'm
getting pissed in my value system is not
to be an angry person and actually
hijack
can I pay attention to that and actually
have some sovereignty over my own
interstate and how I show up in the
world and can we figure out how to do
that collectively as well
[Music]
the other critical thing is that you
can't assume that other people are going
to fix these issues and you can just
kind of chill a little more
that also doesn't mean that you should
freak out and go into existential angst
on hyperdrive without running what to do
but to progressively lean in more and
say okay there's a path where we can
make it
but it's not a given at all that we do
[Laughter]
rather than ask whether we do or not how
do I help determine that we do and that
will require learning a bunch of
that you don't currently know and that
maybe nobody has synthesized well yet
and that's what being an imaginal settle
in the transition from caterpillar to
butterfly really means is taking some
empowered responsibility for being
someone who's recognizing that you can't
just run the instruction manual that was
given historically and the new
instruction manual doesn't exist yet and
it's actually the time of people in that
liminal phase is to work on developing
what are the new structures
you
[Music]
you