[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis so last time I tried to
develop with you the right side of the
plausibility argument I'm making and
tried to give an account of central
features of human spirituality and to
try not use that term therefore in a
vague indefinite way and and I made an
argument for how relevance realization
can explain many of the facets that are
found within the normal attribution of
human spirituality and I proposed a term
religio to cover all of those aspects of
spirituality that can be explained by
the machinery of relevance realization
there was of course an important
lacunae there was something that was
still missing from that account and this
was the account of the sacred and then I
propose to you in order to avoid
confusion especially post Schirrmacher
that we should make a distinction
between the metaphysical proposal of the
ground or the cause of the experience of
sacredness we're clear markers
emphasizing the experience and then for
reasons of the way my argument has
unfolded since I'm talking about the
psycho existential machinery of
sacredness as opposed to the
metaphysical proposal at least initially
that is where I should begin so I'm
talking now we began to speak about a
way of using the theoretical machinery
we have developed here in order to talk
about sacredness and we began by going
to the work that we'd already talked
about about Dom aside back to the work
of Gerrits and we talked about the
sacredness one of the ways it functions
one of the ways we can experience it is
that it functions is a meta meaning
system that affords a worldview
attunement
and thereby homes us against horror but
then I noted that of course in the
Hellenistic domicile there was not only
the machinery that attempted to rehome
us like the syncretic religions and one
could probably argue also stoicism as
I've already argued but there was also
there was an alternative response which
was the transgressive response of the
Gnostics ultimately and I then said that
gives us an opening into another aspect
of sacredness and this is the work of
Otto and his book that as I mentioned
was typically entitled the idea of the
holy and I said a better translation
would perhaps be the experience of the
numinous and what Ottawa's proposing is
that before we had a moral
interpretation of holiness there was a
pre moral view of what I'm calling
sacredness and this or at least an
aspect of the sacred of sacredness I
should say and what Otto was pointing to
was the experience of the numinous which
is closely related to the adjective that
is most applied to God for example in
the Old Testament which is glorious God
is shining and overwhelming and powerful
but glory does not carry with it any
moral sense in fact one way of
interpreting what's going on in the book
of Job is a contrast between some of
job's moral arguments about his
suffering and God's response is to
present his glory and how numinous he is
and so you're seeing it sort of a
conflict between these different aspects
of holiness in job of course that's not
all that's happening in the book of Job
and perhaps when I speak of Jung we'll
get back to that but right now what I
want to pick up on is this insight by
Auto that a part of sacredness seems to
the experience of the numinous and the
numinous seems to be transgressive an
important way it seems to be in fact it
seems to be taking us into the heart of
the very thing that the gear see and
model of sacredness was supposed to home
us against which is experiences that
border on horror now Otto describes this
experience of the numinous as having
three central aspects to it it is a
mystery very much
in the way I argued last time the rather
sense that we got from Marcel of
something that right brings about
sensibility transcendence that sort of
trajectory of trance framing and then it
has two opposing poles in it which make
a lot of sense so I think given what
we've what we've built together one is
is that it is deeply fascinating it
compels so a good way of I think a very
plausible way of understanding is this
is super salient to you it is really
grabbing your attention involving you
you can't pull away so it's super
salient and then the other is he said
right it's it's like it's terrifying
it's horrifying it there's an aspect of
horror to this now I got to stop for a
minute and he'll I don't want to use the
word terror I to his original term but
the promo terror is of course it has
become deeply enmeshed with us with
notions of terrorism and I want to put
that aside that I'm going to use the
word horror because it doesn't have that
that kind of Association but I had to
know distance how I want to use this
word from how it's become typically used
by us
so I much mentioned to you that most
mystery novels and mystery movies aren't
mysterious at all that
they don't have you confront mystery
they give you just a difficult problem
to solve and in that sense they're
instances of a kind of important modal
confusion that is pervasive in our
culture the same thing with many horror
movies you know many horror movies do
not actually expose you to horror many
horror movies actually expose you to
being deeply startled with fear okay so
deeply startled with fear so so much
much of what passes for horror movies
are movies that prey on our sort of
ancestral fear of predation so that
where there's some monster that although
the monster points towards something and
I'll come back to that and this is work
of course made by good work done by
Jonathan pazzo on how we should think
about Washington monsters we'll come
back to that and the monster is
basically hidden in some way or unknown
and it's preying upon people and most of
the what's called horror is how that the
surprising way in which the monster will
suddenly appear and prey upon its its
victims and then they get ripped apart
so you were startled oh no oh right and
and then and that and most of that is
not horror I mean I imagine it has I
find those movies boring actually
the inder stand why some people it that
this is just a statement of taste I
don't find them very interesting the
sort of startled and puncture movies
don't don't appeal to me they're often
in mashed also with sort of crypto
messages about sexuality and things like
that that need to be challenged putting
all of that aside alright so when I say
horror you have to there's a few movies
that capture it because horror has to do
with what we talked about with respect
to gears horror is when your sense of
contact with reality is being challenged
undermined where you feel you have a
grasp on things and then it's slipping
so horror therefore is often
prototypically not associated with fear
or directly with fear its associated
with insanity or madness and of course
there is the primordial fear of becoming
insane right now the monster points to
something very very interesting and this
goes back to the work of Mary Douglas
right that we often find creatures that
are inter categorical for us monstrous
because that's on a continuum with
another important feature of things
being into categorical so what is meant
by inter categorical inter categorical
are things that don't fall into our
ready-made categories and therefore we
typically regard them as weird she talks
about how they're unclean she does an
interesting discussion about and in in
the Bible the Book of Leviticus all the
animals that are unclean they're very
weird it's a very weird collection have
you tried to find some sort of essence
like well Wyles are unclean and
crocodiles are unclean and whatever and
certain birds are unclean and certain it
doesn't make any sense and then she goes
in and argues well no what happens is is
there's various ways which categorizing
the there's ways in which people have
categorized things and those categories
right have a certain pattern and when
that when that pattern is being broken
then these things these things challenge
our grip on the world they challenge our
grip on the world so let's for example
like there's there's an idea
Douglas argues that you should have an
interconnection between a creatures sort
of shape its morphology its means of
locomotion and its location like where
it lives so if it lives in the sea
should swim and therefore it should have
a fish shape so you have things that are
in the sea that don't seem to be
swimming like the Crawleys shellfish and
therefore they're kind of weird and they
turn out to be unclean and right and
then you also have this same she argues
this same schema is applied now we we
think all those archaic ancient people
know but remember don't don't do that
because we talked about how we also have
purity codes we find things unclean that
wort our system of categorization so
right remember if I take this and spit
into it repeatedly and then swirl it
around and drink it back you're grossed
out that's unclean to you because I have
this whole structural functional
organization of a way of categorizing
myself and my selfs relationship to my
body and how that's other than the
environment and then there's important
boundaries that shouldn't be shouldn't
be crossed and when the spit comes out
of me it becomes inter categorical it's
it's me but it's not me because it's not
inside me but it's outside it be but
somehow it was produced and on its
intricate Agoura call it's yucky and get
rid of it right so this is not a feature
of ancient thought this is a way in
which we respond to things that violate
our core categorical ways of making
sense of the world now some of those
things we just regard as yucky or gross
or unclean but if the the inter
categorical thing is inter categorical
between really really central categories
and it is represented as threatening to
us then it can it is what it originally
invoked horror for us so if you take a
look at many horror creatures there
prototypically into categorical right
the Wolfman is inter categorical between
the beastial and the personal right
the ghost is inter categorical between
the living and the dead the vampire is
also in two categorical between the
living in the
and also between right being a being
alive in the sense of consuming and
being alive in the sense of being able
to be generative because of course the
vampires consume and do not produce and
so and of course and there's the work
that Christopher master Pietro and
Phillip miss if ik and I did and
Jonathan Padua ultimately I sorry not
ultimately independently not ultimately
maybe ultimately but independently did
work on the zombie and how the zombie is
an inter categorical monster to
represent our current situation the
meaning crisis and you're going to see a
video of Chris Chris mr. Pietro and I
talking about all of that so I'm gonna
get that into detail so the fact that
the monster is inter categorical points
right and that and that and that inter
categorical and this can be on a
spectrum from just ooh
yucky - ah losing a grip on reality and
intelligibility because of the deep
connectedness between realness and
intelligibility this points right again
to the connection to madness and all of
this points to losing a grip losing that
contact that comprehensive grip losing
that optimal grip on reality so you you
can create pretty significant horror
without having to do the startle and
puncture moment I want to relate one to
you where I've had the most for me the
most prototypical and salient example of
an experience of horror that had nothing
to do with sort of the prototypical
being something jumping out of the
shadow with sharp pointy bits so I was
watching Kubrick's The Shining many of
you have probably seen it if you haven't
seen it of course there's been ten
thousand memes about it it's pervasive
throughout popular media
and my own I guess my own intellectual
arrogance contributed to the aesthetics
of the horror I was watching this movie
and I and some spoilers here but this
movies been around for a long time so I
I think it's fair game I was watching
this movies I was watching this movie
and I'm you know I'm watching this
character and he seems to be going mad
the Jack Nicholson character and that
that inner of itself is very interesting
and of course evocative of all of this
and then I'm getting all right Stephen
King right all right has some sort of
deep criticisms of alcoholism and so
this is a very extended metaphor for the
descent through alcoholism into madness
and and and then I sort of I was patting
myself on my back I get this movie this
movies all it's just a symbolic way of
talking about alcoholism and everything
and he's hearing voices in his head or
that's clear sense of madness and I had
it all well structured well in hand as
we say and then there's a scene where he
gets his wife actually traps Jack
Nicholson inside some sort of pantry and
locks it from the outside and then I
remember sort of coming to sort of a
full stop and what's gonna happen now
she's trapped him he's locked in that's
it and the voices are talking to him in
his head and I'm sort of dismissing that
because yeah yeah he's mad he's gonna
talk to the voices but so what and the
voices are sort of in his head are sort
of chiding him and you know what do you
do how did you let it get to this and
I'm glad and you're gonna spiral into
insanity great great and everything and
then the voices say okay it's time to go
and then the voices say now we're gonna
let you out and then they opened the
door from the outside the voices in his
head and a chill go went down my spine
because I realized oh I'm in a much
different world than I thought I was in
I thought I had this completely down and
no no these voices have an independent
reality and there's something else going
on here
now nothing nothing startling was
happening all they were doing was
opening the door so he could get out but
it was an absolute shell of horror going
through me because
and that's the most profound experience
of horror I've ever had in a movie
precisely because what had happened
there was I went from being out here
looking at all of this - I don't know
what's going on and I was suddenly
participating in his madness because I
didn't know what was going on and I was
losing a grip on this situation and
there was forces at work here that I
didn't understand
that's horror
okay that's horror and I met I mean I
think there's situations that bring
people into genuine horror but I think
it's much rarer than we realize all
right
so given that and like I said we will
return to talk about this later given
the sense of horror as being you know
the polar extreme of this continuum of
the the weirdness the eeriness the
yuckiness of the inter categorical that
the spaces in our grip on reality
through which things can slip right we
can return to this so the numinous is
super salient if there's almost
something like a flow state in that
we're being drawn into it but it also
has with it aspects of horror it shakes
at the structure of our worldview now
you say whoa like what's an example of
this
okay so here's an example of or I think
where people brush up against the
numinous and it's fairly widespread so
many of you will have encountered it
it's one that I find I guess annoying
because I find it dangerous so this
happens you're driving home and there's
been an accident on the highway and
people are slowing down it's very
dangerous to slow down everybody knows
you shouldn't slow down like that
because it's dangerous to slow down
because the chances are you going to
cause another accidents what does in
fact frequently happen but nevertheless
people feel compelled to slow down they
are fascinated by this because they hope
to see something horrifying I'm not just
disgusting they're hoping that they will
see death that they'll though somehow
get a confrontation with this and that's
of course is horrifying
because death has the capacity to the
confrontation with the threat of death
the presence of death has the
possibility to completely sever your
grip on reality literally in fact right
but they can't look away but if they see
something they they have the potential
of being very unpleasantly horrified but
of course there's something also missing
this because they can't actually see
death right they can see the fact of
death in the sense of the result of some
thing or someone dying but that won't
actually put them into something we've
already discussed that won't actually
get them give them what they want a grip
on the mystery of death the
phenomenological mystery of death and
that tells you something right Wonder
and awe have us open up to mystery but
if the mystery becomes overwhelming if
it causes us to lose any potential sense
sorry or yes any sense of our potential
ability to get right an insight or an
understanding that typically comes with
wonder right ah sort of liminal but with
horror it's like I'm ooh it's um it's
expanding so fast and oh I'm getting
overwhelmed so fast I'm being forced to
accommodate so fastest it's like the all
absolute worst culture shock and I'm
experiencing horror
so we can think of horror is when notice
what you've got here you've got all the
indications of flow right or something
like flow at least the beginning of it
right were you you're getting drawn in
in this accelerating loop something like
it at least right it's super salient to
you but it's it's super salient and this
is why I'm hesitating to just call it
straight-out flow it's super salient but
not in the fact that you're deeply
coupled it's super salient in the way
that you're seeking to be deeply coupled
and you're you know the machinery is
going faster and faster but it's not
actually getting a purchase because
what's happening is you're getting
horrified by a mystery now it's like wow
that's that's an experience of the
numinous
and if you read parts of the Bible or
you could meet other literature - but
the Bible of course is prototypical for
a lot of these people these researchers
like Otto like there's passages in the
Old Testament in which God is like this
right just weird and strange and
horrifying aspects of God fascinating
super salient and you're drawn in and
it's like like I said I want to call it
auntie Flo because auntie Flo is
depression but it's like that it's like
the shadow of Flo you're you're trying
to and you're getting drawn in and that
all the machinery of coupling is
speeding up to try and get what it can't
get which is a stable relationship and
so wonder that you don't get wonder you
might not even get aw if it's too much
it can pass into horror so
it's plausible that this is one of the
ways of interpreting certain even
commands in the Bible like that you know
you're supposed to it's often translated
as you're supposed to fear God this
doesn't make any any any sense for a lot
of reasons because God is prototypically
not the object that you can run away
from or fight or like what your field
would be absurd it doesn't make any
sense but I think a better account of
this is right you're supposed to have aw
for God and notice how this is the basis
of this word awesome but it's also the
basis of this word awful right because
it borders our borders on horror so
there's a sense of the experience of
sacredness that is supposed to take us
to the very horizon of our
intelligibility the very very precipice
of our ability to make sense and make
meaning of the world it's supposed to
take us I would say right it's supposed
to draw us in and the hope is not to
just throw us into horror but to take us
towards horror until we experience right
that sort of boundary between AA and
horror where we are forced into a
situation of confrontation with a demand
to change the demand to change who and
what we are and in that sense this will
overlap with the higher states of
consciousness in that this carries with
it a sense of being terrifically real
and I mean that terrifically real and
that right it is putting a demand on us
to accommodate to expand our capacity to
framing for framing that it is pushing
us to our very very very limits and the
aspect of horror is the sense stronger
words needed here the realization that
we are need finally ultimately
limited that no matter how much we grow
we can't grow enough to encompass the
mysteries that we are confronting so the
point of the horror I think is to get us
not only to grow but to remember that
our growth will always be the growth of
a mortal limited being a being there is
always caught up in relevance
realization so notice how I've been
pushing how much this is taking you to
sort of that deepest powerful
accommodation the deepest opening up
right
forcing tremendous change on you varying
who you are this is also an aspect of
the sacred now think about how you can
relate this on the continuum that we've
been talking about this is the ultimate
frame breaking but this isn't just
breaking any frame this is you know this
is trans frame breaking this is breaking
your capacity for framing or at least
taking it to the very as I said the very
limits where you are forced into a
trajectory of trans framing that is also
acknowledging that you are ultimately
insufficient it's supposed to in this
and I'm using this in a technical sense
it is supposed to humiliate you the
problem for us humiliate is that we can
only hear this negatively but of course
humility a deep deep appreciation of
one's inescapable limitations is part of
I've argued the function of horror it is
to bring you to that state of
accommodation while maximal
accommodation while also deeply
reminding you sati that you can never
become right anything beyond a finite
being it's to prevent inflation it is to
vent you ever assuming that you are more
than you can ultimately be so it's a
deep kind of reminding that's put at the
heart of this power look if I if I could
just sort of accommodate and wondering
ah there's a temptation that I would
have inflate and think I am right now
this puts you the numinous and
right therefore puts you into contact
confrontation with something that is
much greater than yourself and also that
has an existence by definition
independent of you precisely because of
the way you can threaten you so notice
what we've got here we've got over here
we've got right worldview we've got the
sacred doing these two things sacredness
sorry I keep slipping on that it's just
the way language drives you eh I fear
we're not getting rid of God because we
still believe in grammar
okay so sacredness over here we have
worldview attunement and it's very clear
right why that would be regarded as
sacred this homes us against horror but
we've of this other notion of sacredness
which is the numinous which is designed
to do the opposite it's designed to
expose us fascinate us horror with
horror
so over here we had right
basically what I'm gonna argue is meta
assimilation we have that meta mean a
that is designed to get everything to
fit together to belong together the
agent in the arena fit together but then
you have the opponent process the
opponent process and this is as I've
already argued this is meta
accommodation sacredness is doing a very
powerful at not at the level of your
even of your individual projects or
problems this is doing it at the level
of your existential being in the world
it is doing higher order relevance
realization it is pushing the machinery
of relevance realization again down
through all of the levels of your
knowing into your existential modes into
the depths the primordial depths of the
agent arena relationship and then it's
blowing it apart setting it in motion
with opponent processing that's doing
powerful powerful higher order relevance
realization sacredness I think is a deep
way in which we are seriously playing
with and now the seriousness is at the
level of awe and horror and also home
which is also deeply serious to you we
are seriously playing with the machinery
of relevance realization and pushing it
towards greater and greater put a
greater and greater development of
optimizing it improving it enhancing it
so if that's right
if sacredness is right the experience of
this machinery as opposed to either one
of its poles that tells us again about
its deep functionality that what we're
doing in sacredness is we're playing
with the machinery of relevance
realization in order to try and create
states of mind
states of body states of interaction
with the world that optimize and a
comprehensive and profound manner the
machinery of relevance realization our
connectedness to the world to ourselves
and to each other this I award for
example explain why music is so deeply
associated with sacredness I mean music
isn't about anything not in a conceptual
referential sense nevertheless as
Nietzsche said life would be a mistake
without music because in music we are
playing just with the machinery of
salience landscaping just with all of
this a machinery in a powerful way for
no other reason than for its own sake we
try to get into a flow state in which we
are just just for its own sake seriously
playing with this machinery and that's
why music is such a pivotal way in which
we try to convey and represent the
sacred and why music strikes us so
prospectively in such a participatory
way we we we don't just we don't we
don't just think about music or write we
write it it is it insinuates its way
into our perspective or salience
landscape and we embody it the red
and what's happening in the music
becomes sowing into our processes of Co
identification the way the world as an
arena is disclosed to we and the way my
agency has been structured are being
deeply transformed by music one of the
great difficulties with our culture of
course and I suppose we need to do work
on this how it contributes to the
meeting crisis is the degree to which we
have trivialized music and the degree to
which we have severed it from at least
explicitly unconsciously from its
connection to the sacred I think why
many people still are so deeply
dependent on music especially when
they're going through any transformative
period in their life is precisely
because of the way it puts them back in
touch and helps them remember at least
intuitively some of this machinery of
seriously playing with the higher order
relevance realization machinery of
sacredness now that opens up something
that we need to talk about because I'm
now invoking how we can use something
that's and we got up we're going to do
work on this something that's symbolic
like music in order to like play in
order to activate accentuate and play
with this machinery and a powerfully
transformative manner and of course
right religions which are right and
which have these aspects to them also
are rich with the symbolic machinery
that it's designed to activate and
seriously play with this so what I want
to talk about the relationship or the
role that symbols have in in our
experience of sacredness
so the important thing is how we're
going to use this word and symbol then
meet originally means to put two things
together and I want to I want to
distinguish this the the talk that I did
with Chris that you'll see one of the
talks also distinguishes between a
symbol and a sign so I'm not going into
great detail here this is sort of
central in stomach semiotic because we
use this term in multiple ways like we
talk about abstract symbolic thought but
when we talk about you know the the
cross as a as an important religious
symbol and we can get very quickly
confused and so a sign refers right so
it it by looking at it we can look
through it to look at something else so
I can use this as a as a sign for love
because when you see this it helps you
to think of love but this doesn't
actually exemplify symbols refer right
but more importantly they exemplify in a
particular way they exemplify by getting
you to participate in that to which they
refer they're going to invoke of course
participatory knowing because they have
to do ultimately with getting down to
the machinery of the agent arena
participatory relationship so compare
this as a sign for love and this is
something as I said that Chris and I did
to kissing someone because kissing
someone doesn't just make you think of
love it actually you gets you to
participate it activates and gets the
map machinery kissing is and I mean this
carefully is a serious play with the
machinery of the agent arena
relationship so that we can participate
in a reciprocal relationship with
another human being where we are right
where there's reciprocal realization
occurring
between us we can together remember the
being mode etc so there's a difference
there now I want to try and and and and
and unpack this a little bit more
symbols do this do this sort of double
job and they do this by having at their
core a metaphor and we got it slow down
here because this is also something that
needs to be understood understood a
little bit more carefully and we've
talked about this before about the word
metaphors itself a metaphor it means to
carry over or carry across what I'm
doing in a metaphor is I have two
different domains and I want to see this
domain differently so I basically look
through this was at least the theory of
block I look through this thing to look
at this so I'm saying that Sam is a pig
here's Sam here's a pig I put on sort of
pig glasses sorry for that and then I
look at Sam differently and there's the
the salience typography of Sam is
altered or Toni talks about this in
salience imbalance and that
reconfiguration of what I find salient
in Sam allows me to see Sam differently
I get an insight into Sam and of course
I'm not actually claiming that Sam is a
pig and I'm not just comparing and
saying Sam is like a pig I'm doing this
act of looking through and seeing this
and thereby getting an insight into it
in an important way that's fine okay now
we have to understand first of all how
pervasive and profound metaphor is
because we have a tendency to think of
it again as largely ornamental our
culture is so beset comprehensively by
patterns of trivialization again and
again again you hear me say we have
trivialize this we have trivialized that
okay we've talked about this but I want
to bring it back and develop it a little
bit how much of our thinking and this
goes to the work of Lake often Johnson
but I'll criticize it in a minute and
also somebody who I'm going to talk
about later Barfield
all right that we don't realize how much
of our cognition our ways of thinking
and interacting with the world are being
structured by metaphor so right to use
an example on halfway through this
lecture as if I was moving through a
space but I hope you get my point
or at least see what I'm saying but you
might not be able to because what some
of the stuff I'm saying is really hard
it's really hard it's really hard to get
my point but I hope you understand me it
used to be understand by the way stand
within but we changed it to understand
stand under it's interesting right even
right even words that you don't realize
are metaphorical have a metaphorical
origin like interest remember this inter
si to be within something so they're
there we're often see we're much more
naturally poetic than we realize
we are we are constantly trying to do
this use one thing look through one
thing at another now I have some
criticisms of Lake often Johnson because
they argue that what it is is I have
some embodied practice and then that
just gets projected up into abstract
thought
and so one of their prototypical
examples is I'll say things like he
attacked my argument right and that's
supposed to be from the hallmark of you
know abstract thought that's from
argumentation where we're at our most
rational but we're actually using this
word attacked right which goes back to
you know physical assault and the idea
is we take what we have here and we
project it onto here well I think this
notion of projection is too simplistic
okay but this is the basic idea all
right I know what this is because it's
embodied physical interaction it's
participatory right I know what it is to
attack somebody and then I use that
right I sort of just project that on to
the abstract conceptual domain and
that's how I get he attacked my argument
this this reminds me of a point in
Barfield Barfield says you know you read
you read in the old text and they'll use
words like newman ah NUMA sorry
right which stands either for wind or
spirit and we can only hear it one way
or the other and that's why we break it
into two words I sort of get what
Barfield saying here but the point is we
have that we use this word right and we
and we move between these without
realizing it like we attacked the castle
he attacked my argument and those aren't
the same but we may actually not notice
that we're using them differently
now why do I say that well this has work
that I published a couple of articles
with John Kennedy where we said this
simple model of just projecting doesn't
seem quite right because this for
example carries with it I can say I
attack the castle or I assaulted the
castle right
but if I say I assaulted his argument
it's like what what does that mean
that's weird the the the the the the the
near synonym doesn't transfer and notice
the reverse abstract thought and say
instead of saying I attacked his
argument I can say I criticized his
argument but if I say ah
let's criticize the castle you don't
what what that sounds like a weird Monty
Python routine see what I'm trying to
show you is it we didn't there isn't a
simple sort of identity relation we
didn't just project this and it's not
that right we're just sort of trapped
between two meanings we've seen two
clearly have a sense of this that points
downward towards the physical assault
and then points upwards if you'll allow
me these metaphors towards the
conceptual notice also something else
notice the three things I used earlier I
use did you see my point do you grasp
what I'm saying do you understand it
alright do you get it
these are very different interactions
these are very different things they're
seeing
there's understanding there's getting
and there's grasping and yeah all of
those independently converge towards
making something intelligible right the
act of making something until what
select what selected these four very
different things and drew them up to
their common converged meaning see what
I'm trying to show you is it's not
simply that this gets projected up
there's also something up here that's
constraining and acting downward helping
us select which of all of our embodied
existence we are going to use for our
more abstract conceptual
topics all right
so why is that important because I think
that points towards a different way of
understanding what the metaphor is doing
so there of course is an element of
projecting and projecting means to throw
but I think there's something much more
complicated and interesting going on in
a metaphor that isn't simply projection
which is of course itself a metaphor
okay so I think that symbols are going
to tap into these deeper kinds of
metaphors not just the metaphors that
are the ornamentations of language these
are the metaphors these more profound
metaphors that are structuring our
cognition and they and I'm trying to
point out to you that they have no not
only bottom-up emergence they have a
top-down emanation going on in them
there's a sense in which both sides are
interacting in a powerful way we mean we
need a much more dynamic account of
what's that work in metaphor so let's
build towards that dynamic account and
we've already gained something that
symbols are going to be making use of
these profound metaphors the metaphors
that are not just metaphors of speech
but are structuring the way we are
making sense making meaning of the world
now one important point of these kinds
of metaphors the triggers on the
participation gets into the profundity
but doing something with it is one of
the jobs of these metaphors right is to
hold in mind okay so let me give you
right an example of this we care about
justice we really do it's important to
us our culture of fact is really
wrestling with what does justice mean
and how do we best serve it how do we
best realize it but that means you need
to be able to reflect on justice you
need to me to be able to contemplate it
to think about it if you're going to
think about it and not just emote or
assert about it if you're going to think
about it you need to hold it in mind but
how do you hold it in mind if I were to
ask you without repeating the word
justice hold the justice in mind do it
hope what are you doing even right you
might be holding sort of a prototypical
instance but when I do this and I do
this repeatedly with my class what
people tell me is well when they want to
sort of contemplate justice - so they
can reflect on it and get clearer about
what it means to them they often invoke
a symbol they invoke the symbol of the
woman blindfolded and holding a sword
carrying right the holding the scales so
one of the things you notice is that
this of course is is a profound metaphor
we use the notions of balance all
throughout our talk about justice we
also use sword as deciding cutting right
but let's stick with the balance this
allows us to hold justice in mind that's
it's like stop pause if that's all the
symbol was doing that in and of itself
is such a valuable thing we need to
pause and appreciate if I can't relate
to justice in a participatory fashion
where I can engage in it and I'm trying
to internalize it and I'm trying to get
clearer about it I can't do any of that
unless I can activate it and hold it in
mind and I need a symbol to do that now
the symbol is metaphorical justice isn't
literally a scale a balance what's going
on here and what's right and how does it
plug in to where I'm trying to argue
there's something more than just
projection going on and this gets me to
a notion that I've mentioned to you
before exaptation
that's really like really important work
you gotta read his book by Michael
Anderson on this this is the idea that
your brain right is in a
self-examination machine not only a
cross species evolutionary but more
recently in his work within a brain in
its own development so to remember the
example my tongue has been exacted for
speech it has a structural functional
Organization for doing a particular set
of tasks but of course it has remember
the robot and the battery does all kinds
of side effects and those side effects
are a ongoing reservoir of sets of
capacities that I can tap into and make
a new structural functional organization
to do a new thing which is what I'm
doing right now I'm speaking so the
tongue has been exacted for speech and
what he's arguing is that a lot of what
we see in our cognition is what he calls
circuitry use circuits that have been
used for one thing get reused could he
get exact 'add in the way I've just
described by reconfiguring their
structural functional organization right
so that side effects become central
effects right and and what you do is you
get a new machine a new capacity created
that way so let's try and think about
this right we've got a clear example in
the cerebellum right the cerebellum
originally evolved for helping you to
keep your physical balance right and
what it does is it takes information
from many different sense modalities and
is constantly looking for how to find
patterns of contingency patterns of
relationship between what's happening in
my vision what's happening in my body
and it's really helping to do all this
sophisticated coordination and smoothing
out so that they start to coordinate
together much better
that's your cerebellum it's centrally
involved in your balance but you know
what you've done we've the cerebellum
has been exacted
to repeat it's been it's used not only
for finding balance between like my
seeing and my moving it's been exempted
to find write deeper coordination
between any different areas of domain in
your brain the cerebellum also allows
you to integrate your vision with your
working memory so that you can do visual
imagery let's put this together
carefully you've got this right
machinery of exaptation you've got
balance and then what you're doing when
you call up the balance idea is you're
actually right
notice your cerebellum has been exacted
up to helping to you manage massively
complex contingencies between variables
you know what you have to do to be a
just person you have to know how to
balance you have to optimize the
relationship between you have to pick up
on and coordinate and smooth out the
complex interaction between multiple
variables that's justice you know what
you can do if you invoke balance and
don't just talk about it but try and
participate in it you can actually do
the reverse of this you can go back
through balance right and trigger octave
it you can go from justice through
balance back to activating the machinery
of the cerebellum
normally I am looking through all of
that machinery at something but what I
can do with the symbol is no no I don't
want to I want to actually sort of
retrace reactivate go back through
exaptation and activate the machinery of
balance so that I can then use that
machinery in order to get an optimal
grip on this other domain which is
justice see this isn't just simple
projection right there's there is not
only a projecting up there is an
emanating back down you're also
reversing and going down and trying to
reactivate this machinery an important
way there's a top-down guidance that is
intersecting with the bottom-up
projection and so the symbol is in that
sense deeply participatory you are
trying to participate in this activation
of the very cognitive machinery that is
used both in participating in balanced
you know just look at balance you have
to be balanced respectively
participatory and then taking that
machinery into being just having your
perspectival and participatory machinery
aligned in a certain way that's what the
symbol is doing for you it is deeply
participatory it allows you to hold in
mind and then look back through to
activate and then bring that back up to
have insight participatory and
perspectival insight into something like
justice we're going to talk more next
time about the symbol and how it relates
to our experience of sacredness thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you