[Music]
[Music]
I'm here with with Darren Stevenson who
I guess I've known you for about five or
seven years through Facebook yeah and
we've had one actual conversation
through Skype but your presence that is
always kind of in the back of my mind
your your posts on Facebook are let's
say are you know provocative and they
have you know some quality of genius to
them as well thank you for taking the
time and having the interest to share
our minds you're also a very provocative
and fascinating writer and I find your
work to be very inspiring and kind of in
line with my own in in some ways and I'm
just grateful for have a chance to spend
a little time together and explore yeah
well you're welcome and another thing I
wanted to say was that yeah I've been
meaning to you know contact you for a
while and I had this idea in the back of
my head of having conversations with
people who you know who I find it you
know intriguing in some kind of way and
also who are not necessarily known to
other people you know because you know
in the in this sort of media landscape
you know a lot of people who have some
kind of something to say a fall through
the cracks right and let's say I have
this contact with them on Facebook and I
find it very interesting and then
there's this limitation of it being a
text conversation and and then I've
wanting to take that to the next level
and have you know actual conversations
yeah that all makes sense to me I in my
relationships that begin in an
electronic context I'm very skeptical
about conducting any kind of
relationship in text and in fact
whenever someone reaches out to me and
they want to have any kind of a
conversation at all it's pretty common
that all take a moment and just explain
to them even though in the modern
context this may be a little confusing
for some people
I don't conduct conversations in text
period
yeah I'll occasionally make a rare
exception in the case of somebody
doesn't have you know the technology to
do something else or maybe they live in
a place where we can't easily have a
phone conversation but almost invariably
I'll just say hey I love to talk with
you let's arrange a time when we can
hear each other's voices or perhaps even
better see each other's faces and
there's a lot of reasons for that some
of them having to do with the fact that
although there really aren't any methods
other than meeting in person that give
us privacy back I'm not happy about
having third parties in on conversations
not happy about the knowledge that what
we're saying is probably being recorded
or analyzed for producing analytics for
corporations I would never invite a
corporate representative to an intimate
conversation with somebody who I want to
talk there are no circumstances under
which I wouldn't even consider such as
that and yet this is
pretty much what's happening to all of
us all day every day even in our
telephone conversations even in this
conversation so then of course if it
happens to varying degrees I'm not
particularly paranoid about it I'm
simply aware of it and I I disagree with
it I don't like it I I want to establish
ways that that no longer happens or if
we're just living in a world where
that's now going to happen all the time
then I think it's very important that we
establish a system that delivers the
analytics to us and only us and then if
other people want any access to those
analytics we can limit that access and
they have to buy it from us essentially
so one of the things that concerns me
without going into too much detail about
this is just that we're building
pyramids of data for corporations and
the new money in in our time is analytic
data about individuals and social groups
and for anybody other than us to be in
possession of that data is fatally
dangerous it's it's terrifyingly
dangerous and for people who know
anything about history and the history
of like how very similar things have
been used and passed when there were
regime changes or things like this it's
really startling I've had people explain
to me things that happened with a system
that was given to Iran in the 1980s by
IBM and when the Shah was ousted and the
Ayatollah took over they basically went
through that system and this was minimal
analytic data it's nothing like what we
created or in possession of today anyway
the new regime went through that system
invited all the activists and scholars
and and people who had left the country
back telling them that they you know be
forgiving for any previous wrongdoings
and you know he wants you back in Iran
and when those people came back on
airplanes and my friend's family was
among those people they simply executed
them on the tarmac when they landed just
straight-up Shakman head right so that's
a telling example of what can happen
with an intelligent system and the
intelligence systems that we're building
are so sophisticated now that they
easily create the of the reality and the
future possibility of directly
manipulating our minds directly
manipulating our felt sense of being in
the world our consciousness what we
think about what we pay attention to and
I don't think anybody realizes just how
vulnerable we are to this kind of
influence most of us well one example I
heard was recently you know ads being
sent to two women who don't know that
they're pregnant yet you know and this
means that the Internet is developing
this kind of subconscious collective
subconscious right who's that's aware of
things before you are before your
conscious mind yes yeah there's all
kinds of astonishing things that could
be done with for each other if we
established a system where we use the
analytics that are produced by our
interactions with devices to learn and
to grow and to respond to issues or
threats together okay well maybe we
could talk about that result yes sorry
to interrupt I find that these kind of
discussions uh you know we're aware of
the totalitarian you know potential
listen that's often discussed right and
but your one thing I've noticed about
your posts is that your are the things
you write about is that you you very
much make us aware of potential you know
hoarders you know of our world and what
to each other but also you you also seem
to have a utopian sort of view you seem
to have a few that you know we can we
can you know we can we can harness this
technology for you know the good the
true and the beautiful or whatever so so
it so instead of this being just a
conversation where we complain about
corporations and capitalism and
dehumanization what what do you think we
can we can do in this online world you
know because you know I I I understand a
lot of the criticisms you have and I
think a bit more on a personal level
like I see sort of Facebook as wrecking
people's relationships with each other
often and and creating very strange
artificial relationships with people and
the damage that that does and the the
kind of collective you know addiction
that we all have so at the same time you
know I also seem to be working in your
mind towards solutions to these kind of
problems like you're you're a person
who's you describe yourself I think it's
a detective at one point and somebody
who's you know looking for solution so
what can you do what what get what can
we do what you know so first of all I do
think I have a very unusual perspective
on how we how our minds relate with
language and concepts and models and so
I have a variety of very intense
interests I'm interested in mind how we
form Minds how that happens together
what happens if we do it differently
what happens if there's intervening
agencies involved because of course
we're aware of this whether it's
conscious or not I'm interested in
dreaming very deeply I'm interested in
hypnosis and how people are influenced
I've been involved with computing
technologies pretty much since they were
invented as a technician I've seen how
email changes changed our relationships
I've seen how the onset of first cell
phones and then smartphones have changed
our relationships and I opted out of the
cell phone and smartphone sort of
transformation because I wanted to watch
it from outside and I've only within the
past six months for the first time had a
mobile phone of any kind I'm absolutely
fascinated and in in love with living
things I deeply observe insects and
animals and plants and I relate with
them very intimately
you mentioned can I just interject here
you mentioned insects and and I I've
heard you you know I've you've written
about insects and I find that I find
that very fascinating what is what is
your connection to to insects so first
of all it's just a natural thing it's
the way that I've been since I was born
this way I absolutely adore living
things and for me those represent they
don't represent those are the body of
the real they're not representations I
mean they can be understood in various
ways but and and so since I've been at
since I was a child I've just had an
incredible affinity for living things
and it's a shared affinity so there's
you know hundreds of stories of what I
think most people would consider to be
very unusual events but I'm a person who
for example has the experience and by
the way there are many such people I've
met others like me who can communicate
directly with an insect something that I
think most people would consider to be a
ridiculous idea and I can for example
talk an insect on in my hand carry it
around with me
if there's a fly buzzing around my
window I can get the fly on my hand and
just carried it out the back door if
there's a moth or a wasp or any kind of
little creature and of course every
every events unique and I'm not trying
to claim as I have any special
supernatural power or anything like that
I think rather that we've as moderns
because of the context we're usually
involved in and what we're taught to how
we're taught to see life and think about
life
we're just confused right we're missing
90% of the abilities and affinities that
are natural to to our humanity and
recovering those is something that I'm
very passionate about so I've been in a
friend and observer of insects and tiny
creatures since I was a child and I've
learned so much I continue to learn so
much from from that relationship always
I think there's something that I'd like
to say briefly about my perspective of
life on Earth and what's kind of going
on here and I'll return to some of the
other questions in a moment so in some
branches of human subculture there's a
fascination with aliens and and this you
know is the idea that there are other
intelligent life forms possibly either
from other dimensions or from other
planets in space that from time to time
or maybe regularly visit earth and
that's a really complex topic some of it
has to do with psychosis it's funny I
was thinking about that while you were
when I when you mentioned insects I was
bizarre I'd already made that that
connection see the bat down I'm gonna go
here so the topic of extraterrestrial
intelligence and it is one topic and
then there's there's this sort of
related topic which is how that gets
dealt with in human subcultures and
particularly media cultures and so
there's some really fascinating and
useful and intelligent exploration of
this idea and then there
some really bizarre kind of psychotic
paranoid examination of this topic and
it's a very sophisticated mess that we
don't have to thankfully we don't have
to tease that apart right now
what I wanted to say is something
relatively simple that I find both
shocking and and exciting which is that
you know when people see organisms that
they consider to be exotic like octopi
or preying mantises or wasps or or
mantis shrimp for example new to Bronx
you'll often hear them say oh it looks
like an alien how they know what an
alien looks like I mean what inclines
them to suspect that's something that's
strange
like why is their first move that must
be like from another world right looks
like a thing from a science fiction
movie
well har the reason for that is simply
that science fiction movies get their
inspiration like like we do for our
devices and everything everything that
we get that we make something of
originates in nature right so science
fiction movies has been have been
stealing insects and exotic animals and
sort of transposing those onto their
presentations of aliens right so we've
been kind of trained to think that way
but well is it terror of terror of the
uncanny and the unknown and and what is
farthest away from our let's say sense
of ourselves sure that that's that's
part of it um
I think we've basically unfortunately
many people have been trained to be
xenophobic they're actually just afraid
of living things in general living
things aren't predictable
they don't fit into our representational
paradigms they don't listen to the
language they're
they're intimately involved in their
experience of being alive rather than
our desires or representations of how
things should be or whatever so they're
they're sort of unpredictable and that
makes them scary and they could hurt us
or well like my wife for example is
absolutely petrified of spiders right
and III love them I could take them in
my hand and I'm the same way and I I
don't I don't particularly understand
that that fear because it's so
completely built into her nature in some
way it's almost like I guess she could
she could probably overcome it through
you know exposure to it you know she if
she really wanted to but you know what
Wyatt why why is that that kind of fear
seems to be deeply built into a lot of
people a fear of the strange right or
what they consider to be stranger or and
maybe it's partly fear of themselves
that they are are the alien or you know
they're alien no just fears that are
relatively natural I think for primates
right and the three the three that stand
out to my to my thought in the moment
are spiders and insects wasps bite you
hurt you they can be small you can't
find them you can't control them you
don't know if they're on but is there
one on me or not right like there's a
lot of kind of scary things that one
could imagine about them the other is
snakes snakes has been a problem for
primates from time immemorial and part
of the reason that snakes our
frightening is that they can be
invisible in the environment until they
strike you right so that's really and
this is the same thing spiders right you
don't know is there a spider on me right
now you can't really be sure there isn't
and then the third thing would be like
large apex predators lions Jaguars used
to eat human beings all the time in
South America
Panthers which actually there's no such
thing as a panther that's sort of pet
name for a class of animals lions tigers
stuff like mice right or another one so
for some stuff that might just be sort
of hereditary or hereditarily common for
us humans to be afraid of and some of
that has to do with something that may
or may not be pretty natural to our
animal form and then another aspect
though it has to do with how we're
enculturated so one of the things I
found very confusing as a child was and
actually very painful was just that most
of the other humans and adults saw small
creatures as something to be destroyed
often as a form of entertainment or you
know just if it moves kill it
so I think there's a there's a sort of
xenophobia that a fear of living things
Arab living things have an aggressive
fear of living things that's pretty
commonly instanced in human persons and
cultures but I want to get back to where
I was going about insects and exotic
creatures and aliens so one of the
things that's just blatantly obvious to
me and it's a little bit surprising that
it's not more obvious to other people
however our alienation from living
things and we have that if an individual
is experiencing that gets sort of
reprojected right and the aliens from
the sky thing is part about projection
in some cases yeah terrified of we're
alienated from living things and that
creates this sort of pseudo projection
of our alienation that then could
produce for example some form of life or
a being that was to us as we are to
living things
yeah I can imagine this process of
rejection happening but what I actually
find intriguing and you know you
mentioned like there's these two
branches right there's what am i
concerned about and and what can we what
are the positive things right so so I'm
concerned about human xenophobia it's
wiping out you know the remaining
conserved ecologies which was a single
most precious thing in our living aspect
as human beings these are the most
precious thing the ecologies that remain
in my in my view and I can get a new one
primeval original Ecology's well just
whatever has been be conserved right
whatever we've still got left is sort of
how I think of it yeah so those like if
you were to just point your finger out
into space right in some directions
where the sky right and you just
followed that line for who knows what
50,000 light years a hundred thousand
light years be very very unlikely that
along that line you'd come to this life
it's not possible we don't know but a
world as paradise eclis fraught with the
explosions of complex organism all
sentience and transcendence and networks
of life you're not going to find it like
this whatever there might be out in
space the one thing we can be sure of is
that it's not friendly to life it
doesn't mean there's none out there
right but if you put a human you know in
a space station or something like this
it's a it's a completely against life
environment and here we have this
amazing sort of evolutionary accelerator
with all these trillions of different
conservation xand it's just to me this
is the absolutely most precious thing
but what I wanted to say long way around
here is that Earth is a planet in space
and so what that fundamentally means is
that what we think of as
alien life life on other worlds well
that's what our worlds made of that's us
we are alien life like if you go to a
planet in space and there's life on it
Oh sir that's life from space time right
that's crazily exotic unexpectedly
amazing life right so so can I just
could I just throw something at you here
hang on for just check in here hello hi
I'm still on for the moment is there
anything we need to do are we just going
to check in okay I'll call you back
thanks sorry about that no worries um
can I throw it something can I just you
know let me just finish what I'm saying
excuse me so um when we look at any
organism on earth from my perspective or
a perspective that I prefer what we're
seeing are the qualities and characters
of time space uniquely instanced in an
organism and what that means to me is
that Earth is like this unimaginably
sophisticated library of organismal
forms and relationships and sentience
it's a mirror of the fundamental nature
of time space and that mirror is
infinitely profoundly exotic and
beautiful and intelligent and shocking
to directly encounter when we are in a
state of mind where we become available
to that so one of the things that I'd
like to help people who are interested
to understand is that we have
incredible opportunity to contact
non-human intelligence right here on
earth and the chances of us doing that
with a spacecraft are essentially zero
right we have everything we need to
touch the intelligence of time space and
intelligences that we might imagine
exists on other worlds right here and
we're busy burning that down to make
spaceships to go nowhere that we connect
like we're just not gonna find complex
organisms anywhere near our planet it's
extremely unlikely not impossible but
extremely unlikely so it's ironic and
common that we're burning up the exactly
what we hope to encounter because we're
presuming that we can only find life
from time-space on other planets and
this is a typically human kind of myopia
whereas what's actually going on here is
more than anything we've ever imagined
to be going on on other planets and in
fact I strongly suspect that there's a
if there are living planets in space
time and I believe there probably are
that these planets share information
across impossible distances and that
information involves the involves is
involved with the forms and development
of life on Earth directly so that not
only do we have a library of what has
happened here on earth I believe that
the relationship between living planets
in space time is expressed here and that
means that at least in theory we would
have access to the intelligences that
have evolved on other worlds right here
without having to go anywhere and this
is part of my suspicion about the nature
of time space in general which is that
you can't have a living world like this
unless all the others are included in
other words what you'll find out there
you can find right here so you know when
when there's these religious people have
religious experiences
that what's happening are they
contacting what you would call alien
flight forces well that's a very
sophisticated topic and like most of the
topics that we might examine about
humans in general and I'd like to make a
distinction here between talking
abstractly about something that we're
not actually in the presence of that
we're not right with right now right
about people in general or the abstract
idea that there's a we we often say like
we without actually having formed belief
right we're just talking about some idea
we have about if there was a lead or the
we that were passively included in
because we live in America did this
between talking about contexts and
persons Australia and actually being
directly engaged with a person or a
situation that we are examining while
we're engaged with it because these are
two very different kinds of thought that
we don't we're not careful enough about
in my perspective and it's useful just
to acknowledge the difference and we
don't have to say one is wrong or when
it's right but it's useful to notice
when we move to the abstract people in
general or topic in general and then we
talk about something specific so I find
myself doing that actually I hear my
voice and I think I'm just using words
which are you know modes of sort of
communication which are superficial
because I I I can't get really to the
heart of of what I'm trying to say so
it's this kind of blah blah blah you
understand what I'm saying so I just
throw these these these these concepts
up in the air but there's a difference
between let's say felt communication and
and and just just dry abstraction or yes
yeah I mean I think very carefully about
how we relate with language and concepts
so this is part of why I'm aware of this
but to return to your question when we
talk about people having religious
experiences we have the same kind of
confusions and problems that we have if
we talk about people who claim to have
encountered aliens and we have vast
range of incredible diversity we have
people who it's very clear from the
results have had some kind of very
authentic experience can communicate
something very meaningful about this
experience or sometimes not but it's
still obvious like this is a real thing
and then we have a whole range of stuff
that's delusional or based on a
narrative a story that they believe or
is actually psychotic
so it's we've got this whole range of
things but to answer your question sure
sometimes when people claim to have a
spiritual experience so our you know
would you be comfortable in speaking
about any of the kind of experiences
that you've had sure I would to it to
finish sometimes when people are telling
stories about experiences they've had
[Music]
that may be an experience of contact
with some kind of non-human intelligence
but even that phrase brings in a wide
range of possibilities so I think I
might discriminate between what I would
call contact with a nonhuman
intelligence which of course can happen
with a tree or a bird or an insect but
there's again a vast range and probably
levels of complexity and then a
spiritual experience which perhaps has
more to do with a relationship with
features of the universe that are
ordinarily invisible to us and that may
include beings that are ordinarily not
part of our conscious experience
or so yeah that's that's how I would
begin to respond to that question it's
just that there's a vast range of
possibilities and we need to take each
case somewhat uniquely because each
person is unique and each person is
unique in every moment in circumstance
that they're in but yeah sometimes
contact with non-human intelligence
could have to do with something in
nature and perhaps religious experiences
have to do with something that I might
frame as an experience of the aspect of
reality that is related to origin where
everything comes from right in the same
way I can think of earth as a mirror in
which all of the intelligences of
time-space are reflected in actual
organisms okay I can also think of earth
as a mirror in which the world of origin
is reflected in forms and relationships
and dreaming so the difference is
between an experience of the source of
all these other experiences and and all
the different manifestations of that of
that source yeah and you know I know
that when I was in my 20s I did
psychedelics and had kind of unusual
experiences but then I got kind of sick
of that and it just didn't seem to go
anywhere there seems to be an infinite
amount of experiences that you could
have but but then after that I started
to get into meditation which was more
like a cleaning up of the mind and then
then I going into all the different
forms of experience yes and I to have
been a practitioner of Zen meditation
now for some thirty years so I have some
familiarity with with that particular
branch of meditation
though I don't necessarily consider
myself above it's okay if I may I'd like
to return to an earlier question that
you had and I'll preface this by saying
people who are considered by others to
be very intelligent I think everybody's
very intelligent I just think it gets
expressed uniquely each and each group
but um intellectuals particularly suffer
from this kind of disease that I'll call
share the damage and it's this thing
where you know people go around telling
each other about the bad news in the
terrifying future and the incredible
problem and this kind of thing and it's
been my experience that this is an
extremely toxic habit only does it not
solve the problem it's debilitating for
the people who are subjected to it and
some of my closer friends in my youth
were the first people that I saw
exhibiting symptoms of this problem and
sharing the damage and I'm to say I'm
not a fan that's a gross understatement
of that kind of behavior because it's
just it's it's just catastrophic both
for the person who becomes involved in
that habit and for the people who they
communicate with it's it's really like
spreading and magnifying a disease of
helplessness and fear so although I talk
about problems and dangers that we face
as moderns
my I felt sense of those problems is
creative and I like to think about I
like to back-trace the problem to its
origins and mode and what motivates its
forms and its expressions and then see
how those can be inverted and I've been
studying social media and now for
probably 12 15 years closely and my
primary interest was in both
understanding the dangers involved and
then perhaps inventing something that
could invert those dangers and give us
not only freedom from the dangers but
access to the opportunities right
because when you went on Facebook I
remember you saying that I've come here
to warn people that this is a
destructive technology and at the same
time you were saying well there's this
incredible power and impossibility
happening here simultaneously so which
is absolute it isn't either it's what we
do with it that makes that decision so
for example how do we use Facebook how
do we use social media in a way that's
kind of constructive to our souls this
is what you and I both experiment with
this so we obviously have experience
learning that yeah Ben for all the
dangers Facebook presents it's also
extremely useful because I've been able
to form relationships on Facebook that
begin on Facebook that are actually part
of my life and heart and that are very
important to me and that means that I
Facebook allow me to initiate
relationships with people who I would
otherwise have no possible contact with
positive features of Facebook itself but
I have a model of how we could radically
invert the systems that were presently
subjected to and we talked into and
it's not something I'm particularly on
fire about evangelizing but I find it
the potentials for astonishing new ways
of being human and intelligent together
to be really exciting can you give an
example yeah so I'm gonna do my four
minute elevator pitch shooter okay
fine keep it really brief we're using a
browser that was invented in 1989 it's
2018 time on the Internet is very
accelerated so for something like
thousands of years of human experience
we've been using this incredibly
antiquated piece of garbage that
actually changes our minds to work like
it and it works like the index of a book
and our minds don't work like the index
of a book it's like - it's the same it's
analogous to music and listen listening
to mp3s right and in CDs which are kind
of antiquated sonic experiences stuck in
1985 or right so we're getting um all
kinds of artifacting by compression
damage to our minds and our because of
our relationships with machines and the
metaphors that they subconsciously
consciously present we're in danger of
having our our fundamental way of being
in the world and our minds changed to be
like broken old machines so in any case
it's now very us it would be a simple
map no one has even had one better idea
than the way we currently interface with
the Internet which is through an
incredibly antiquated browser that
really hasn't changes changes invented
so the first thing we can do is invent a
browser that works more like our minds
and involves like images for the right
hemisphere and language for the left
hemisphere if sitting in my room right
now where I have books over here
television images over here if you look
in
people's rooms you're going to see this
all over the place it's not absolutely
the same in every place but you're gonna
find out that people naturally organize
their world for hemispherical
lateralization right you're gonna sign
books on one side images on the other
essentially you know in this pen so we
can build a browser that works more like
our minds and that uses the intelligence
of connotation rather than denotation
right so can you explain that yes so we
understand things not by their literal
definitions but by their associations
this is how our minds actually more like
how our minds work how the right
hemisphere works no they both work this
way okay if you didn't have associations
your left hemisphere would be incapable
of understanding words okay but what
I've understood from Achilles book is
that the right hemisphere is
metaphorical and-and-and and makes sort
of you know wild they're kind of
contextual associations whereas the left
brain is is more literal and map map
making and that's true but they're both
involved in each other's processes right
there's not a really clear distinction
so one of the things that I would do is
I would build a browser that works much
like our minds and instead of telling
you a lot about what that would look
like although it's pretty astonishing
I'll continue with the other portions of
the model that I have so step one would
be a browser that actually works more
like our minds and learns how it
continually learns how to work how our
minds work individually and as groups
the second aspect would be the
localization of all of our analytic data
in a specific artifact write a file if
you will that has layers it should be
like a world layer national layer local
layer an acquaintance layer close
friends layer family layer and personal
right and it would organize and and
allow us to make use of all of the
analytic data that's produced by our
interactions with devices all of it
because a lot more this is coming and is
presently at hand there's gonna be
health data there's gonna be analytics
from having our bodies read by machines
our movements our pulses our breathing
probably our blood pressure stuff like
this and even relatively primitive
devices are already capable of this like
the Kinect for Xbox a--'s can tell that
your eyes are doing stuff like this and
can read your pulse so that kind of
stuff is incredibly dangerous to put in
the hands of other people like so
dangerous that it's unimaginably
dangerous but we could do something
really astonishing with that data if we
gathered it for ourselves and for each
other networks of related interest in
activity is this related to your concept
of pods like you talked about a pod
being the kind of ultimate sort of human
organization like and you related that
to a pod of dolphins yeah I mean I
fundamentally humans are animals that
were evolved to function healthily and
effectively in small very tightly knit
groups of shared interest in concern of
course in case this isn't clear someone
wants an example you can just look like
for the representation of that which is
a sports team right right right right
they do the impossible there they're
considered to be like superhuman
right another example be like a rock
band you get like five hundred thousand
people together to watch a bunch of guys
kicking a ball or why yeah why is that
so compelling well it's so compelling
because we're not doing it so we want to
participate in in this sort of projected
representation of that happening and I
mean another thing that's really
interesting to me is just like what if
we got those five hundred thousand
people together
you've actually mattered even for an
hour what we do with that so we were
talking about solution and I mentioned
that I have a model and the model has
five or six elements one is a browser
that works more like our minds and
learns how each of our individual minds
work what is a the data artifact that's
associated with our analytics and this
is something that can be devoted both
personally and in layers of networks so
this is one of the most astonishing
things is we could actually build data
artifacts like this I call it the the
CAW
which really just means knowledge
artifact but how's that interesting
Sonata me with the Egyptian soul or
whatever each of these features is very
sophisticated and what I'm going to
present is just a really simple quick so
the car we could actually build a car
for people who no longer alive so that
you could search the internet the way
Einsteins mind worked or the way some
you know like Henry Thoreau's mind
worked
you could build a car from text based
records of people's writing even before
the internet existed and you could just
basically swap out like someone else's
call for yours and and get an experience
of relating with information more like
another person's mind or the mind of a
group all kinds of features that we have
nothing even vaguely resembling today so
the knowledge artifact is is the
fundamental heart of the system which I
call the knowledge him so it would be
like searching in somebody's mind the
Kaw informs how information is related
with
and it informs it by using the analytic
data that we've gathered about ourselves
or another person or group and that
becomes the how to put this the
perspective the organizing perspective
for a search or relating with
information and it's basically just a
layered resource made from analytics and
those analytics can inform each other in
networks and the basic model of this
involves what I'd call human assisted
artificial intelligence so we teach
machines how to learn about us rather
than rather than the other way around
yeah the other way around and I think
the future really lies in that direction
and that is the essential problem with
artificial intelligence isn't it that
the machine would would have control
over the human rather than the other way
around I mean so there's a lot of
problems so the first the first problem
I have is is that I think the idea of
artificial intelligence is just simply
wrong there's no such thing as
artificial intelligence what we're
actually doing is computation we should
call that computation we shouldn't call
it intelligence if if our species is
intelligent I can't find much evidence
of that so before we could invent an
artificial intelligence we would
probably have to ourselves become
reasonably intelligent or have some idea
a meaningful idea a healthy idea of what
intelligence actually means it looks
like me it doesn't mean or look like
what we usually associate with it but to
stay on topic briefly so there's a
browser that works like our minds
there's a localized store of analytic
data that can include a mean formed by
all of our interactions with information
emails texts whatever we make whatever
we do even biomedical data then there's
a thing that I call the funny I haven't
thought about this in a while so there's
a an aspect of the the model that we
would build a database that would allow
us to have essentially a readout on any
media item that we might be exposed to a
piece of news a video of someone talking
about something a text an email and what
this would allow us to do is to get very
very sophisticated analytical data about
the origins of a piece of media what
related topics
informed it who's making money if it
gets circulated what the agenda of the
creator is so it's a vetting Sentinel
that's the excuse me that's the specific
title I came up with excuse me
so how would that not become something
that would be another form of
surveillance like you know this is just
gonna have that anyway so the question
is do we build it for each other in ways
that are useful and helpful and help us
to be smarter or do we let other people
do it for us right so if let's say I'm a
betting Sentinel in our minds like one
of the reasons why I have this element
is we each have one of these already
with which we determine whether
information is trustworthy or not whose
interest is this information in and the
problem were the one that we have is
that it's extremely poorly educated so
the goal of creating a human assisted AI
version of the betting Sentinel would be
to eliminate the possibility of content
that was mostly lies mostly propaganda
identify rhetorical errors or movements
in texts or speeches from political
people just we could see we would just
get a window of incredible usefulness
into the authenticity or the lack
thereof of various media item saying one
of the things that would do is it would
kill garbage right it would just totally
expose stuff that it was completely
made-up or filled with lies or just
propaganda and would make it really
really difficult for for example
political people to speak in any way
that could be authorized by any audience
after having been taken apart this way
okay
so again I'm still having this I had
this reservation in the sense that I say
you know let's let's let's say I put
this video up me and you talking and
then somebody can find layers of you
know of what is real and what is not
real who decides what is real and what
is not real and how do we model that
correctly I mean it's a good question so
what's the authority here like behind it
I mean so firstly very few human beings
are rhetorically educated now what that
means is they are not intelligent enough
to understand the difference for example
as an example between something that
absolutely cannot be true something that
it just it's impossible if this thing is
true something that might be true and
something that is relatively likely to
be true in a specific context since true
right is a pretty deep idea we're just
talking about the context of people
speaking to each other or communicating
to each other about circumstances ideas
situations and relationships so because
most human beings are very poorly
rhetorically educated and by the way not
so very
go in the wealthy classes in Europe
rhetorical education was a fundamental
part of elementary school educate our
children these skills so are linguistic
and conceptual intelligence as moderns
has been under assault and is you know
in a terrible state of disrepair so one
of the simplest things we could do is
just point out rhetorical fallacies and
text and that's something that you can
train a machine to do all day long and
it's just a fact
right this way of saying this thing is
both a lie you know or an exaggeration
or a manipulative move meant to deceive
right just that one thing if we could do
just that one thing that would be has a
staggering effect and that's something
that can be done well wouldn't it sort
of it wouldn't it kind of destroy 99% of
the discourse between human beings I
mean no right I mean just on an
everyday basis you know how to think and
speak in ways there were more
intelligent and it wouldn't destroy
anything it would just give us feedback
when we're being exposed to media about
whether or not this is in any way
reasonably trustworthy alright you can
still make your own your own decision I
didn't have to obeying the Machine
readout but just this one feature of
rhetorical analysis and there's lots of
other amazing stuff we can do and in
terms of who is the authority
there isn't a central authority it's a
distributed Authority it's humans
teaching a vetting Sentinal both
individually right about like my own
habits because the vetting Sentinel will
be informed by each car and each network
of cause right so this is this a very
sophisticated system that I'm trying to
present in a very rapid way I'm just
going to go back over the three and I'll
answer any questions in a segment so a
browser that works more like our minds
the local collection of analytic data
that we
that artifact is something that becomes
more and more valuable over time and if
corporations want any access to that
they have to pay us so this is something
that would be like an heirloom right
that every person who uses the internet
if they wanted to opt in could make
money from allowing limited buffered
access to that analytic data to
corporations that want to use it for
various purposes and so just BAM you may
take rather just a take right so I would
invert that model then we have the
betting Sentinel that would give us a
window into how trustworthy is what I'm
looking at what are the orientations and
agendas that are being promoted here who
makes money if this is circulated that
would give us a lot of analytic data
about the media that we're exposed to
and it would learn how to do that both
in a group sense from the whole network
and also in an individual sense from a
given person or a given group of people
or subgroup then there would be a social
media aspect that would be like Facebook
except again the analytics come to us
instead of them and then the final
component is a team building social
adventure aspect where we have an avatar
in this universe and we form teams to
accomplish specific goals that we share
with other people and that avatar
acquires it's a it's a gamification of
social activism essentially so the
avatar acquires an identity and history
and abilities and statistics about what
they've been involved in what they've
accomplished so that people could
actually playfully compete to solve
specific problems that are facing us as
cultures social groups and and human
beings in general and that's that's the
essential model of the knowledge Channel
well there's a few things I find
interesting there is just it's a new
model of Education right because I think
obviously we're moving in that direction
and the other the other thing that
interests me is this is what you say
about social justice and that
gamification because social justice
today is so corrupt it seems to me you
know is always is always to be out on
the street with placards you know
against this monolithic you know useless
and and it doesn't seem to be very
intelligent so so so in order to create
a better better world we have to
redefine what social justice it seems to
me what social justice means agreed so
that's something I think I can
understand that from from what you're
telling me and also just finding new
organizing principles for for the you
know breath or how we how we are
becoming you know you know changing or
how we're changing I can't even explain
the profound opportunities that would I
mean many of them can't be imagined
until the system's instanced but even
just imagining a system like this
presents staggering opportunities for
our humanity and for how we relate with
each other and how we relate with
information that unless we do something
like this we're going to get the
opposite of it right we're gonna get
subjected or already colonized sorry
we're already sort of there is a sense
right that the human beings are sort of
destroying each other I mean there's a
feeling that this is what we're doing I
think I don't think I'm alone and I
think a lot of people feel that you know
it's it's good that you you have some
whether there's an optimistic message
rather than just you know the sort of
nihilism which we could build the basis
of a system like this in six months
right now uh-huh
why are we doing that well because
nobody's have this idea okay so yeah
yeah my idea it's up to me to put the
model together market it do something
like that
so I'll take responsibility for not
having completely done that yet I have
both distractions right I'm a human
being I live a actual human life yeah
and I also have fears I can't tell what
such a powerful system what effect that
would have on the future of humanity or
what kinds of really dangerous things
could be associated with it it's
unpredictable
although my answer to that problem is
simply well what's going on right now
what we're not doing and what we're
being subjected to is catastrophic ly
worse than anything this could probably
produce so I mean we're our privacy is
being colonized our minds are being
colonized our social networks are being
colonized and redirected by forces that
aren't human corporations are not human
deed they're not beings
they're they're like complicated ghosts
so it's a terrifying situation that
we're actually in and I think very few
people if it's not useful to sit around
being terrified of it I think very few
people understand the actual
implications of the capacity for example
for your computer to know your heart
rate and know when your pupils are
dilating or constricting right this will
allow corporations to directly
manipulate our emotions our minds our
interests our attention in a way that is
slave-like and the dangers of a system
like that are staggering and that's
what's coming because our machines are
becoming more and more intimately
connected with our bodies so we need to
move quickly to invent systems that both
protect us from those dangers and grant
us the opportunities implicit in the
technologies and unexpectedly this is a
reinstalls
that begin in our own lives and in the
history of our species with language
language is technology it's a technology
that does the same kinds of things that
we're talking about here
but we never mastered it we were not
given the powers to creatively and
intelligently relate with this
technology and so many you know
generations later we are primarily
dominated by it and that's you mean
we're dominated by language and I mean
we're dominated by these sort of you
know language forms which which
hypnotize our minds in some kind of way
to actually get heart attacks are
against their own better nature yeah
they limit and and focus and direct our
attention in certain ways that while
they might be useful in some contexts
are devastating in others and we have no
sense we're not trained yet and we can
learn and train each other to be this
way so there's an opportunity and this
is something that I'm very involved with
and care about but yeah language is the
first fatally dangerous technology right
and all of the other similar things
emerge in its shadow we need to be in my
perspective it's crucial that we become
extremely intelligent and that we learn
and teach each other how to understand
our relationships with language and
concepts and how to not be crippled by
those relationships how to both avoid
the dangers and become and help each
other to acquire direct access to the
opportunities because like like all
technologies where I'm gonna get rid of
them right we can't we can't just go
around saying like well language is
really dangerous yeah yeah then what I
want I wanna there's there was an
article by Jonathan green wall where he
distinguishes between what he calls the
the red religion in the blue church
right and the blue the blue church he
describes as being you know the sort of
broadcast model right where you know
somebody is telling you something in
your passively you know you're absorbing
their message and this is how the 20th
century has been working in terms of how
to keep population
you know you know you know under control
etc and that that this this red religion
model is where there's a there's a
back-and-forth thing going on and it's
much more chaotic and it's much more
dangerous and it's it's more like let's
say it's more like YouTube then then
public TV right there's a bunch of
people you know all kinds of messages
are assaulting you all at once so we
have these two different kind of kind of
models and so so on one one side it's
it's it's it's total chaos and the other
side it's total order right how do we
how do we have how do we create a
balanced you know system how do we work
with this contradictory aspects of our
own nature even you know so again I
notice the common tendency to speak very
abstractly about broad generalized talks
that's okay once again my recommendation
about that is only that we recognize
when we begin to make such move and by
we I actually mean you need right now
and this one word we is is actually a
word we need but it's important to pay a
great deal of attention to how it is
being used and to does it refer to an
actual we that we intentionally formed
together or does it refer to an abstract
we and in your previous question
it refers to an abstract we it refers to
we engine us in general yeah well I was
talking about I was talking about you
know tendencies of culture I was sure no
it's perfectly reasonable you said I'm
not being critical about I'm community
recognized okay
this is this mode right so we can still
relate and talk and do everything we
want about that mode I just think it's
important to recognize when we're using
it and there's reasons why that is
aren't particularly relevant right now
so back to your question so what you
present it is a model of the state of
our society and exposure to media and
obviously each person makes decisions
actively or passively about how they
relate with that situation now if two
people or more should come together like
you and I here right now we actually
have come together intentionally for a
purpose and that is the formation of a
real we right that's a factual weak that
we actually have done this we have
chosen to come together we are here now
in real time speaking and exploring and
if that we wanted to approach the
question would be very different from
what we might imagine if we respond to
the question of the generalized we so
for example for myself I have a very
thick buffer I have a buffer that
protects me from news from nonsense
I'm extremely selective about what media
I'm willing to interact or relate with
and why and that's what I would call the
topic of media hygiene right how do we
each do first of all do we even have any
you what are the motivations that inform
that so before we could answer a
question as general as the one you posed
we would need probably just to identify
some motivations like what are our
purposes in asking the question
and one of the most amazing things about
human beings in general and human beings
in particular is both that purposes
underlie how they relate with each other
and with information and yet again we're
very rarely educated enough about this
to either notice it clearly or to use it
intelligently in our relationships with
each other with the world with media so
examining purposes and being aware of
the purposes that underlie our questions
and our desires and our fears is
fundamental to forming an intelligent
answer and I think that's that's a
crucial first move in any in any such
style well most of the most people well
here here are making a vested
generalization but a common one I think
most people just watch media they don't
have media hygiene it's just it's just
you know it's it's whatever interests
you it's whatever catches your attention
and so so you you know and then and I
think I often consume media in that way
I go from thing to finger thing and I
click on ons on stuff that seems kind of
attractive or you know even you know
even horrible or whatever it's it's it's
it's some kind of you know it's like in
a kind of low-level addiction that it's
almost most of the population has this
right yes and maybe that's because they
maybe that's a substitute for cigarettes
or or some other kind of addiction that
people need to kind of survive in a
sense in a world that you know makes all
these demands on them and stresses I you
know they have to go to work every day
and isolates them and crushes them and
divide from the prodigy and genius that
is there not
all human inheritance if you want to
talk about addiction for example it
strikes me that most addiction emerges
from precisely what I just said and
perhaps most fundamentally from our
having been divided from the prodigy and
genius that were our natural human
inheritance that we brought to birth
when we were children and and had then
judged reformed amputated punished not
rewarded not noticed not recognised so
society crushes us is what you're saying
does not just society but um this is
complex and goes back to my concerns
about language it's my perspective that
in childhood we actually undergo a
crisis that is rape like during our
exposure to language and concepts and it
happens of course it begins in early
childhood as we begin to acquire
language but the primary window of this
for most children is between 3 and 1/2
and 7 with the beginning of the window
usually comprising the very challenging
aspect of this crisis and without
wanting to introduce religious topics I
can't help but notice in the Bible the
story of Cain and Abel where Cain kills
Abel and essentially exiles him to the
underworld which we could understand as
what happens when we fall asleep right
dreaming something like this process
actually happens in each human life in
our childhood and a dominating yeah
conceptual linguistic authority is
established over our humanity and our
innate creativity and our capacity to
love and feel intimacy and to connect
with others in a deep and meaningful way
and society is
the re instancing the extrinsic
reinstated I think is crucially
important for us to become aware of
together and to work with now not
wanting to convert anyone to my
perspective it's it's a it's a
perspective that's course optional I
don't want to I'm not an ideologue
that's right demanding that people see
things the way that I see them you know
I am interested in prophetic
perspectives from my own experience and
understanding what you say makes sense
to me I want to just throw something out
there and see how you like not exactly a
criticism but nature right you know when
I was in northern Canada I live in
France now I I listen to the baby seals
you know the mother seals would push the
baby seals off onto the ice because they
couldn't feed them right and you can
hear the the baby seals you know making
this noise you know and I can project
human emotions on that or or or you know
what I'm saying is is you know you speak
of nature as this wonderful
extraordinary thing but it's also
equally terrible is it not at much of
the environmental kind of dialogue seems
to be to say oh yeah human beings are
thus cancer on the earth and and and the
nature itself is pure we have this sort
of extremely demonic quality and we also
have this dream the exilic quality at
the same time it seems to me there's a
photographer name escapes me at the
moment who's very famous for
photographing her own children and it's
fairly clear that they live out in the
wilderness
probably in a swamp and her children
just look like animals yeah and she
doesn't have any of the questions or
concerns that you're raising because
they have no
existence in the context in which she
has chosen to raise her children and in
the way that she's chosen to raised so
you can see this like incredible that's
one of the reasons why why she's famous
and very provocative you can see this
like totally feral her children are
little animals they're just they're
human animals in the wilderness being
crazy
dirty endangered by by the environment
to just being you know human animals and
it's and it's beautiful and it's
haunting and it's evocative right so she
selected a context and also selected
modes of relation with the world culture
her children education health care all
these things those selections formed a
context in the same way that those
selections you make form a context in
the same way the selections I made form
the context or affected the upbringing
of my child so the first part of my
answer is just context is going to
dictate a lot of the fundamental
variables and then within those we're
going to make both passive and active
choices about how we how and if we crush
our children's innate prodigy how and if
we recognize it how and if we support it
how and if we reshape it well on the
other hand I don't find your image of
this person you know these wild feral
children attractive you know the word
paradise means walled garden there's
there's some sort of protection right
you're not just you're not just at the
mercy of the elements
yes but of course it's not clear whether
the wall is physical or relational it
occurs to me that the photographer in
question certainly takes careful care of
her children and that there are some
kinds of priests and of course I'm just
presenting my idealized perspective
based on exposure to her work I don't
really know deeply about her story or
her children but it's a beautiful
exception to what we more commonly see
and expect and that's what I think
intrigues me about it it shows us like
wow in a different context humans can be
entirely unlike what they imagined they
are inside cities and you know civilized
contexts so that's that's what I find
interesting about it there's naturally a
pragmatic constraint concern for our
children's safety right that's just
about saying and that's a natural
concern the question is how do we
negotiate intelligently between the
threats and dangers that we perceive and
the purposes for which we go looking for
them very important feature we usually
overlooked and our children's innate
gifts and prodigy and creative potential
to exist both within you know culture
and society and beyond outside as well
to rip to to to let them have both
identities and and to have those not
necessarily be so conflicting that they
have to lead to mental illness or
despair or addiction so
yeah but it's really hard for
individuals to accomplish it on their
own with no you know outside of any
context that's supportive of that it's
pretty tough I think it's pretty
challenging some parents manage it they
are in the minority by far it seems yeah
I'm kind of fading here Darren's okay my
brain is getting a little happy
to have a future conversation I saw what
we were doing today in my imagination
anyway primarily isn't it's like an
experiment right so like yeah we'll try
this and see how things work and then
maybe we'll do something more you know
more formatted more formal if if you're
agreeable is that something you want to
do it's my perspective that the nature
of our humanity is mostly hidden from us
we are commonly exposed to something
like one or two percent of the
potentials and intelligence and
relationships that we're actually
emerging from right it's not just that
we have a relationship with them we
originate in these and most of us is
invisible to us and and the primary
things that make that invisible are our
relationships with language knowledge
Authority society culture and the lack
of relationships that encourage us to
explore and rediscover and recover these
aspects of our humanity so these are
passionate interests that I have and
while I'm very capable of forming
incisive critical statements about what
we're subjected to societies we live in
the dangers associated with them in
language
I'm also very creatively and
optimistically engaged with flipping
that over I once we can see what's wrong
right kind of perspective we can usually
together if we agree to invert it and
play a different game together and
that's my fundamental passionate
interest is playing a different game
together and I hope we've been doing at
least a little bit of that here today
great great wonderful good good nice
conclusion and a nice summary of some of
the things I've seen you saying over
over the years some of the words that
have have come through the into the
magic internet in my direction and so
thank you for talking to me and I hope
that I hope that this is of interest to
some people and some people get get to
hear some of the some of your ideas yeah
me too and I'm not interested in
speaking ex cathedra I like
conversations right so anyone who wants
to continue the conversation or learn
together or grow together I'm up for
that
you can find me on Facebook as Darren
Stevenson in San Francisco and I have a
website of my own organ oh cool okay so
to be continued then excellent thank you
very much good night why streams my
friend good good afternoon in your case