hello everybody thanks for tuning in
okay a couple things before we start the
dialogue oast with with my friend Mark
Lewis so been a really good friend of
mine for a long time few housekeeping
things so the art of circling which is
the course that I teach to train people
on how to circle with my company that
the circling Institute starts in March
so if you've been thinking about that
and you haven't contacted us yet you can
do that all the links are at the bottom
of the page if you're interested in
doing coaching with me or working
one-on-one the way that works is you
just email me let me know and then we'll
set up a time to get together and talk
about it what else is there I thought
there was one other thing I can't think
of it so there's an integer I introduce
mark in the beginning so I won't I won't
spend a lot of time doing that right now
but I hope you really enjoy the dialog
that we just had it was it was in many
ways rien couraging me in the in the in
the deepest sense of the word - what has
been encouraging for me about these
these dialogues and these conversations
and I was just reminded of how much of
that the beginnings of that for me was
actually in my relationship with Mark
and how just awesome he is so I hope you
enjoy him as much as I do and I'm
excited to have him in this conversation
whatever it is that we're doing here all
right enjoy
pewter done all right hello mark
well hello guy and welcome to my
computer screen feels like that it looks
like I mine yours but that's all part of
the magic trick so I just wanted to make
sure because I always forget this part
is to ensure like to give context to who
you are so people who have not listened
to our conversations before get a sense
of get a sense of you and then we can
discover more about that sense together
as a as we go along so mark so so mark
and I have been friends for 20 years has
it been 20 years yeah and I initially
that yes I initially met mark in the
like I think initially like roughly in
the community that was at the beginning
of circling all the people around that
and I think I met you at a party once
and then you came and did art a and then
that's when we fell in love with each
other and my relationship with you has
been one I would say I would say like a
deep kind of love for the the inevitable
the the transcendent to the the talking
about being and meaning and existence
and you know we've I feel like that that
when we start talking about that there's
there's a kind of love an ecstatic love
that comes from like contacting being
contact with the source of
intelligibility and I know that you have
like to me you have the kind of mind
which is you're interesting because it's
you on one level you have the kind of
smart that is I would associate with
really left brain kinds of stuff like
math and you know memory and that kind
of intelligence but you also have this
other right side of your brain right
which seems to be
seems to also be super super high in
intelligibility so there's I often say
that that you know there's people that
read the Bible right it's tracked like
are very intelligent and abstract
extracting things out of the Bible and
then there's people to just write the
Bible and then you're like what are the
people that breaks the Bible you kind of
invent distinctions right and I've
always really loved that about you
and so just some of your bat licks some
of your background mark like like what
planet did you come from yeah okay well
so suicidal thirteen-year-old gets into
therapy does psychodynamic family
therapy group therapy through my teens
like I was going to a therapy twice a
week and then my therapist did
psychodrama
once a month hmm and so I did
psychodrama essentially ten plus times a
year from the time I was thirteen to
eighteen twenty-two going through
college and stuff through that process
decide I want to be a psychologist went
to graduate school realized they weren't
going to teach me what I want to know
quick graduate schools started seeing
clients went to work for Tony Robbins
got into the business world and and then
started teaching my own stuff wrote some
books on relationships spirituality and
hmm so I do coaching mostly with
entrepreneurs now mm-hmm I'm a
profitability coach right I help I help
business people make increasingly
profitable decisions that kind of stuff
right you know something just occurred
to me as you're talking about you know
it's a great way to start okay
suicidal I mean it's a fantastic way to
start yeah
looking back it's it's I'm like I'm
blessed at like so many turns you know
it's like so many things you've been
looking for
well thanks I think ad you had it at the
beginning that's not a good as man thank
God when I was 16 going on 17 my shrink
gave me a book on neural linguistic
programming and I and I learned that the
way that I think about the story that I
tell the way that I grasp my experience
determines what I think is happening and
therefore who I think I am and what I
feel right and so I got that meta level
of how am i generating my experience at
a very young age right right essentially
spent my entire life just teasing out
the consequences of that and the
spiraling consequences of that so right
basically basically like out of that you
got the basic sense of it that that one
there's experience and that you have
something to do and generating it yeah
there's a me experiencing it but then
there's a me that's like experiencing
the me that's experiencing it yeah yeah
and and then and those you could say if
we simplify just down to those three
levels we could add the fourth of and
what am i part of like what what what am
i belonging to right horse level but
like having these levels of experience
and becoming conscious of that and then
using neuro-linguistic programming to
actually because they phenomenologically
examine how i generate those just what
to wake up everyday in this yeah yeah I
mean sure I've told you this before if I
were up in heaven
and God said what he want I would not
have the balls the gumption the cojones
to ask something this magnificent as
human experience conscious of itself
just and in the 21st century
hmm
anyway well no one go beyond that what
was that when you look at when you look
at what was having you find yourself at
sixteen and suicidal I would imagine
that like I would imagine that that why
you were suicidal and why you were in
the situation that you were in probably
as time went on you look back and you
realized more of that of that that
you're I'm just imagining a growth of
your interpretation or understanding of
that time like what I'm curious about
like what like when you look back now um
what what had you in that kind of crisis
would you say how do you understand that
now so I find the people I have read
most recently the people who I've
encountered and dialogued with most
recently those friend Eames tend to
shape how I remember things right so
yeah like I was just thinking of all the
answers I have to your question right
and then but but what's the fresh answer
mm-hmm yes yes and and I was profoundly
out of integrity
trying to be who I thought I needed to
be to survive to make it through and and
who I was being was so out of integrity
right in terms of all of the lies I was
telling as a 12 and 13 year old so I
could do whatever I wanted to do I would
just lie to my parents at least you know
to my friends I had a I had a certain
intense kind of integrity but to my
parents and to teachers and everything
it was all just say anything that you
can in order to give myself the freedom
to do what I wanted to do right and and
and just being unable to navigate my
social world in a way that that I got
the love and caring that I wanted and
the strategies our I was using gave me
an identity which I was living in and
protecting and furthering that identity
but that identity was false and not
nutritious mm-hmm you know I was just in
a lot of pain right all right yeah I
hadn't I hadn't really thought about it
like that but it's really just
tremendous lack of integrity yeah yeah
and like when I'm when you say integrity
this is the picture it's going out of my
head is that there's like the notion of
integrity which is kind of like on one
level there's I say something and then
actually do something different right or
or I am something and what I say is
different than what I am but then
there's also integrity that's a little
bit more deeper which I think you you
highlighted which is like um who I
really am and what I'm identified to be
right and therefore what I do is based
on that identity that I don't understand
isn't me in its totality right um I get
this
it's like that deeper sense of integrity
that you're talking about yeah yeah and
I think one of the things that just I
mean because this is I think the fresh
perspective which is is influenced by my
current my god
conversations with everything right is
is this whole notion of like the meaning
crisis and like how what that is how to
talk about it how it is or isn't being
addressed you know all those kinds of
things and I so when you said when he
started off like yeah suicidal at 16 I
have this whole current conversation
that I was just thinking about on the
porch and writing about and you know
working out in my head that had me um go
oh yeah that is probably more common
than we even understand like that
experience now do you have any do you
have any senses about like there's
what's going on individually and then
there's what's your insight of right do
you have any thoughts like now that you
think about it um that what is what was
it about the context that you're in the
time that you were in the culture that
you were in the structured like the the
structures in which you were embedded
and in that gave or I do you have any
thoughts about that one or two and the
fresh ones
whatever fresh one is let me find yeah
the fresh one yeah you know
saying that one of the things that I was
again the living conversations that I'm
in that you're in that this YouTube
thing has allowed us to be in with
people who are following these
conversations I understand what Verve a
key means by the meaning crisis and
obviously I think that's the case I
think that from lack of a better term
the postmodern move or the the post
enlightenment questioning of the ground
of our stories you know as Nietzsche
said God is dead right that the
underlying stories are fractured yeah
and that that fracturing is continuing
and you could say in our current
political environment in the face of the
fracturing people are tribal izing and
attempting to polarize because by
pushing off against what you're not you
can become something you like right
again Verve a key yeah and and the
transgender
right you have the subject you have the
object and then you have the symbolic
union of those yeah through a
transgender
it's like you've touched the thing and
in touching the thing you feel your hand
right shape yourself to the thing right
you cannot know without being known and
you cannot be known without being
changed that yeah thisis yes yes right
that that
now the world that we're confronting is
so fractured in terms of the stories the
narratives the values that it's hard to
create a coherent self because there
isn't a coherent world yeah to interact
with so I interact over here and I get a
self and I interact over here and I get
a self and interact over here and I get
itself but the cells don't go here
mm-hmm great right and so hmm so we're
in a particular form of the meaning
crisis where there isn't a coherent self
there isn't a coherent story from which
to get meaning right but but in my
readings of history there has never been
really a coherent story ken wilber talks
about the wayback machine mm-hmm where
it's like I say it's fucked up now but
back then it was okay mm-hmm Yeah right
oh you know the framers oh it's back in
Greece the Greece you know the Greeks
and the Romans they had it they had a
coherent then you go back and look at
the Greeks not all missing oh that's the
pre trance that we'll see right yeah and
then it's like oh well the Greeks and
Romans didn't have it but the
agricultural civilizations didn't have
it great they had it
agricultural circulations go well they
didn't really have it well it was the
tribal it was the when we still were
under the Dunbar number that was a
coherent society when we go back there
they still have war slavery all all the
things right so when I look back to my
childhood in the context in which I was
in it was relatively coherent it was
relatively coherent I knew what I was
supposed to do I
[Music]
supposed to be a good boy
I was supposed to listen to my parents
while at the same
time being rewarded for my creativity
rebellion and independence I was
supposed to get good grades in school
yeah I was supposed to excel in sports
and in chess and in being nice with my
cousins and my friends and I was
supposed to grow up and go to college
and get a job and participate in society
all right in that sense I mean it was a
relatively coherent but what does that
mean you know to use in a patriarchal
right capitalistic system right right
again with the wayback machine saying
it's never been better
but in this like we live in a system in
which it's based in competition we're
biological animals so I don't know that
there was anything particularly
fractured about my context it's any
different than how it was in 1900 or
1800 or 15 hundred or a thousand or yeah
I don't know that we've ever not been in
a meaning crisis right right it's
interesting yeah autograph that yeah and
especially because I think as you know I
have a four and a half year old grandson
no kids just grandkids yep
and he's growing up in
an exponential age like we're on the
edge of the singularity more is gonna
happen in the 2020 to 2030 more change
is gonna happen in that time then it has
happened from 1980 to 2020 like from
before computers to now more of that's
gonna change in that 10 years and then
that's gonna double again in five years
and it's gonna double again in two and a
half years and like by 2040 like the
world is gonna be more different than it
was let's say in 1800s something like
that some version of that yeah but my
grandson has a relatively
straightforward story he doesn't
understand the complexity in the
fractured nature of it he he doesn't
really encounter that except in the
fractured ways of being of the parents
the factored way of being of the parents
of his friends of the teachers
everybody's fractured and so that
trickles down but his world is
relatively straightforward he needs to
be a good boy and he gets rewarded for
his independence and he gets rewarded
for his independence cuz he gets what he
wants because he's tenacious right right
I mean I thought I absolutely like I get
it he's like I want what I want
that's his world there is that which
gives me what I want and that which
thoughts what I want yeah I liked the
things that give me what I want I hate
the things that work what I want and I
look at that and I go that make sense to
me mm-hmm right it's
yeah it's also it's also I mean you and
I have been having this conversation for
a long time yeah and and you and I have
been building an increasingly coherent
experience of self yeah like such that
the way that we interact with the
various projects and contexts that were
in like we grasp it we find a way of
grasping it the way that's true to us
and the way that is true to us keeps
getting more and more yeah
dynamic but but static mm-hmm like I can
I can encounter most experiences and I
get to keep my foundation because my
foundation is relatively featureless
right right it's it's it's it's a
refined logos yeah the way that I trans
jacked again yeah an agent
yeah in an arena right and then we've
got this translation ship between them
mm-hmm where I as a being as a as a
character for lack of a better term I
have a way of being that confronts an
arena and it fits the arena by applying
a logos yeah I've got an interpretive
framework that I've developed right
allows me to create a deep integration
in the arena with the character that I
already am while allowing the arena to
really shape and bring out the character
in ways that I hadn't anticipated Janna
GOG a with that logos right that trans
jet is right I I say there's an agent in
arena and an adventure right right right
there's perp there's pleasure and
prosperity and purpose to put it in
words that you and I've spoken about
before it's like there is a purpose
there is a framework of understanding
that allows me to be incredibly impacted
by the arena
without having the arena change who I am
fundamentally changes ya how it
expresses and I discover myself yeah
becomes a meet yeah like I like a
mutually affording yes and a GOG ik yes
all right and and and I think because
you and I and others right we've been
having this conversation really trying
to get down to what is the essential me
the foundation and wraps and Jordan
Pederson terms the Father the order that
I have reclaimed that is mine I've
separated out the baby in the bath water
and I have a pretty solid order that
allows me to extend into chaos such that
I can I can grasp chaos right I can
bring it to order right and I can let it
inform and change me
yes building that I think so to say one
more thing so Jordan Hall mm-hmm
Danish maqam burger mmm-hmm Jamie wheel
mm-hmm right Daniel
is really focused on you know how do we
what is sense-making what would like
optimal sense making a look like right
and Jordan is like ah what is the
process that actually causes
sense-making to happen in dialogue in
this jazz mm-hmm and Jamie Jamie's like
okay yeah but what's the path yeah these
are nice ideals they're nice
possibilities like game be fantastic but
how do we get from here to there I'm
interested in how do we get from here to
there yeah what is this logos what is
this framework that both you and I have
like both you and I have developed this
to a point where like put us in a trippy
situation oh yeah we come to life right
right it's like I don't know what's
going on here yeah we get curious we
trust our foundation we trust ya our
order
and so we can go in and face the dragon
and we voluntarily like you and I are
both crazy like this like ooh that's an
interesting conversation I wonder where
that's gonna go so and that's that's
what I think that's that this is a
really good I think way of highlighting
the sense of being sovereign is is that
like the less the debt foundation right
is more content oriented right and needs
its reflection and it's stability from
like the scent the sense of staying the
same right the more brittle it becomes
right the more self other other becomes
more threat environment becomes right so
so then then all of us are novelty
becomes the thing to be scared of and
what you're talking about is like where
you can kind of start to see where the
the deeper sense of identity being more
reciprocal right with the look with that
kind of deeper sense of logos
we're actually novelty becomes the thing
that's most attractive and to move
towards right like deep leg the idea of
like being completely deconstructed by
something is exciting yeah bring it on
yeah bring it on because I know who I
will become in the process of grasping
this like again in this transgenesis but
I only know who I am when I'm in contact
with something yes yes right and it's
through the contact that I actually
become something that grows me that I I
become something right yes whatever that
is is going to be good yeah right and
and I was just talking with someone
about reclaiming the religious language
that has been tainted by Dogma right
that that's in for some people their
religious experiences this was true for
me in pushing off against my religious
training I lost the baby in the bath
water right
and that's actually like it seems that
my life is more and more revisiting more
things that I have rebelled against to
find their beauty and and the one of the
one of the words faith like I have faith
in my self where I have faith in my soul
that my soul can create a new self right
as need be and therefore everything is
an adventure
right right I mean he's like it's like
what are we gonna talk about today we
don't know let's find out yeah totally
the so one other thing that I want to go
back to something he said he talked
about earlier which was an interesting
thought my attention so let's see what
what caught my attention with this was
um when he said I think we've always
been in a meeting crisis right
and when I think I like about that is
that it does seem it just seems like
something like the human being is a
meeting crisis right in it in a certain
sense even like even in the high garyun
notion of that that that the the being
that we are is the is the being that's
in question right to be is to be in
trouble right to be is to be that which
it needs a foundation but in looking for
one that foundation goes away right that
[Laughter]
right don't look like I said somebody
said that have you ever done EMDR drama
therapy and I'm like no I'm afraid if I
did and it worked I disappear where'd I
go up you know y'all just drama so
there's I think there's a sense in which
that what you said is probably his
prophets truth is on multiple like
speaks to many many levels of the
different levels of truth but there is
that sense in which ya to be to be human
in fact I was I think I quoted this and
to somebody where Wilco talks about this
in a in his first dueño eulogy where he
says yes and even the warm the warmth of
the animal gays knows that we are not at
home in our interpreted world right
perhaps their remains for us a hillside
right or a violin yielded itself to its
to our hearing and maybe like a wave
came towards us could
we just simply behold it right that's
already too much for us so there is this
kind of sense about it seems to be
inherent with consciousness like
inherent with being the kind of beings
that we are that seems to be like we
kind of show up and by the time we wake
up already begun with the first name and
a last name with a whole set of concerns
right that yeah I think that's been true
for as long is that we've had this way
of being this kind of being wouldn't you
say I think so
and it's not to say that this particular
moment isn't more intense yeah but but
what whatever difference there is that's
what we focus on yeah right I the the
perfect example for me is that like the
poor in the United States today have
more choices better choices than the
wealthy of 1900 or the kings and queens
of 1700 yeah
1600 yeah right but it doesn't matter
because it's all relative yeah like the
question is not like do I have enough
food but do I get the food that I want
am I getting good food is it convenient
enough food is it as good as food as
other people mm-hmm right it's like oh
yeah I have a television but it's not a
blank television I have a computer but
it's not a blank computer I have like no
matter something's like I remember you
and I in front of our wife in front of
my white board or your white board again
and again and again and it's like we
start off with something's wrong
[Laughter]
right like we're looking for a problem
to solve that's what the mind does
that's its function yeah
i as as Jordan Peterson might say it's
like we create avatars like we envision
a prop we look at the world we look for
problems we find a problem we envision
avatars that try to solve the problem
various ways and we look at which one
lives and that way our avatar our
avatars can die instead of us right
right
right so I think I think you're I think
you're dead on we just always find
problems mm-hmm and it's different now
than it was let's say in the 50s for a
certain percentage of the population
because there was a believable future
that you could move towards and now the
future is so uncertain that people don't
even have a believable future to work
towards or rather yeah right because
people have not created that they're not
encouraged to create that in fact
especially with social media and this
attention-getting culture mm-hmm yeah
right we're constantly bombarded with
there is something really wrong yeah and
the way to become a self is to find the
thing that's really wrong and to fight
against it and to declare yourself
against that because that's how you get
ourselves mm-hmm right rather than
you
earth you have an earthly life you're
like especially like for us it's like
here we are in 2020 we're in in in
Western countries we have wealth beyond
understanding no time in history could
ever imagine this much well this much
choice and boom you wake up here right
now huh what do you want to do with all
of this Yeah right if we were conscious
if we had a coherent story that reminded
us of this right this religion that's
not a religion if we had a coherent
story which said dude you're here you
can do anything you want I do not think
that people would have if they really
saw this smorgasbord in front of them
they would choose you know what I'm
gonna choose an enemy and I'm gonna
fight that enemy and that enemy is going
to be a political partisan
oversimplification generalization which
is comic in its simplicity and its
projection shadow yeah like wheel we
would only choose that if we didn't have
something better right and the question
is how do you get something better and
that's the meaning crisis and and I
think that's always existed but it is
I'd say it's particularly bad right now
just because of the intensity of the and
in particularly I would say and this is
where some of my like my through
trying to understand why circling is
really caught on and what's caught on
exactly I think exemplifies some of what
we're talking about which is like I
don't think as far as I can as far as I
can tell you know before say the
answering machine um like I think the
answering machine was as far as I can
tell it was the first time that that um
in order to exchange information
basically in an immediate kind of
immediate way you also you had to you
had to engage this kind of this like as
Lebanon's we talked about this moral
facing each other this relating back and
forth we need to talk right and there's
a there seems to be implicit implicit
coordination structures right that that
seemed to seem to ground a lot of
morality as Lebanon to talk about right
like for example he would say he would
say that the face-to-face encounter that
we you experiences the other is this
implicit sense of obligation right you
find yourself in the other and being
another with others and that our
nervousness like why we feel different
when we look at each other's face versus
when I look at a wall or a rock right
why do I get nervous right cuz there's
this self-conscious sense and he he
would say I mean it's a lot more to it
than this but he would say that if that
wasn't there ethics wouldn't make any
sense
right if there wasn't a phenomenological
sense that was hard to get under that it
would hard it would hardest to see
ethics and it's explicit around make
sense so whatever whatever's around that
there's some philosophy around it but
but social media the answering machine
and then texting and then Facebook and
Twitter now we now have a choice that we
never had before
right where if I wanted to relay
information I could actually just do
that without having to deal with the
more of the morality
when we're facing each other right I
think there's huge implications around
that like what is like for example you
know you say stuff in Road rages you
know like somebody cuts you off you like
fuck you right but the moment like you
if your windows open you go next to them
there's this kind of sense of you're
different right because you have to deal
with the impact of that relation that
you don't have to when you're in the car
right and I think more and more but it's
more comfortable in the car so now that
we have a choice to continually move
towards like move towards the easier
kind of communication I think we do and
it's multiplied on multiple levels right
now it's getting to this point where
people who have grown up in that their
sense of their identity is actually
distributed amongst these things right
and where they locate themselves in what
they call real is really different than
it than it was I think for us right
Generation X I think is what we are
right so there's this there's this whole
other complication around it right which
is like I don't even know if I can begin
to understand the implications of it
right of where yeah it's like if not
only I would say is it a is that we're
just it not only are we just getting
information that's really negative but
what like what how we locate ourselves
as an identity right is starting to be
reflected off those things right where
it's an identity where I'm against this
but you know Joe who's tweeting stuff
about that and having a whole identity
right around it you know if you met him
on the street he's probably nothing like
that
on some level but where he gets all his
dopamine and everything is not the guy
walking around on the street but the guy
who's tweeting right the guy walking
around on the street seems to be more
and more and more isolate
so there's a there's a lot there's like
a whole lot going on here and this is
why I think one of the reasons why I
think circling has really been has been
catching on or speaks to a lot of people
is because it kind of it's a it's a it's
a it's a practice where it's all about
the base the basic unit of the I thou
encounter right and right staying in it
and being with what is and exercising
all of those that the nerve like all the
capacities of presence and all that kind
of stuff and staying in it right as a
kind of yoga um that I think I think 20
20 years ago wouldn't have made any
sense because think was there was soul
in a lot of ways 20 30 years ago in a
lot of ways um there was so much
interaction built into life because it
was structured so differently but with
technology I think there's a there's a
huge thing going on that fashions us
very different that's difficult to see
it's interesting mm-hmm again it comes
down to is there a meaning crisis now or
has there always been a meaning crisis I
I think about esthe and the encounter
groups of the of the 70s which seems to
me to be very much the same the same
desires led to that movement growing
that is leading to circling growing
mmm-hmm yeah so in that sense like I
it's like I almost want to argue against
what you're saying in in for for
funneled I'll go one more level towards
that which is that I think a lot of
who were really caught up in that world
mm-hmm
can't imagine why you would want to do
why would you want to do circling mm-hmm
yeah like they don't have the requisite
mm-hmm like foundation to be able to
risk that much vulnerability oh great
right in this in the story you told of
the guy who's builds an identity around
tweeting huh like that's an identity
mm-hmm yeah whereas when he goes out in
the world he's not really interacting
with people so there's no identity
because there's no trans jected gnosis
of becoming who he is through the
relationships with other people
yep and so it seems like circling is a
sweet spot for that where I've tasted
intimacy mm-hmm I've tasted a
conversation which isn't about being
right yeah yeah isn't about triumph as
Christopher might put it all right the
goal is not triumph yep the goal is
mutual discovery with an intention of
mutual discovery yeah yeah totally right
it's like I'm I'm in conversation with
you not to make a point not to dominate
you but
discover myself in the process of
discovering you yeah and for this third
us to be formed the I the you and the us
for this us to be formed it's shared the
unshared reality this exactly this
creation of this communities community
you know it's interesting is I would say
when we first started doing that around
the time that you and I met is what
would it
these are kind of fine distinctions but
what I've been noticing is that it's
made more and more sense to me and
people have seen circling less and less
like a personal growth thing in the
sense of like more like a yoga practice
right
whereas before like with the sensibility
or who's kind of like okay I'm gonna go
through this I'm gonna go through this
obstacle course because there's a
potential of myself or something I need
to work through or something like that
and I'm not saying that that's not the
case with circular but there's more of a
sense where people are just seem to be
aware of a sense of isolation um and a
loneliness and a kind of lack where
they're not necessarily looking to have
breakthrough they're looking to have to
engage in connection right and what I'm
saying is I think that reveals something
that's going on in the way our culture
set up that has a lot to do with social
media right that has people have the
gold not be necessarily
self-transformation
right but just coming into contact and
experiencing that coordination so so for
example a lot of let of you know because
I live in us in the Bay Area lots of
programmers and engineers and people
that work in front of computers and
what's interesting is this that this
does seem to be something especially
Relic Millennials have noticed
that they can there's a day somehow can
be aware that they're missing something
and then look for it like I've noticed
that there's a certain kind of where
they can go oh yeah I don't know how to
relate you know remember for us it's
like part of being a geek when you were
like right our age in our generation was
that you didn't know you were a geek
there's a certain kind of obliviousness
to being a geek that's what kind of what
made you a geek right but there's a
certain kind of self transparency at a
certain level where geeks can go yeah
I'm a geek I'm missing part of the human
experience and so I'm gonna go and geek
geek becomes a verb of endearment yes
totally like Issa yes Issa girl right
right it's like she she really
introduced me to geeking yes yes she's
like oh I like geeking out with you yes
keke that is what's happening I am a
complete geek about this right but I was
I didn't understand like I completely
agree with you great Millennials they
they see that so to verify what you said
mm-hmm
20 years ago people were doing circling
more for self transformation yeah by
doing this I will create a self that is
better able to deal with the world and I
can succeed more and I can have more
intimacy in love and getting motive
variances but as time has gone on people
are engaging more for the actual
experience of the doing yeah yeah
and that's is something I've seen happen
it's a subtle shift but I think that
it's it it's it's really present to me
I'm seeing it a lot more than such as it
stands out right then you know back back
then like which was which I think would
say is more primarily asked I still
think it's all part of the human
potential movement or whatever that is
right
[Music]
yeah that's just the distinction I like
I would I would make about that how does
that change your experience of circling
when like the the intention that people
are going into it like it's it's
interesting
deilogos this as as especially John and
Chris are like furthering this
conversation naming this conversation
seems to be very much about self
transcendence self it's this you know
poletik rationality it's the it's the
aspiration towards suddenly with the
deal the deal logos as a mechanism a
process for that the dialectic is the
praxis the d logos is the process
towards this becoming mmhmm yep
right it's a becoming of being it's
certainly being focused but it's
aspirational it's aspirational yeah
totally which again i am as you know
like that's my that's my jazz that's
other thing it's like totally like where
are we going how does this play out what
what is this story that this is a part
of that expresses it yeah
shift you've noticed how does that
impact like how circling works what it
is well I think on one level it it
helped to Claire like it helped to
articulate and clarify what made it
distinct right so for example a lot of
the thing that we've always talked about
was circling however has become more and
more prominent in this way is this sense
of having an agenda having an aspiration
of not having an agenda right which is
still aspirational so I think it's
highlighted that sense of like no
there's something that this the practice
exercises it right it exercises
machinery right that lead to these other
things and what I'm saying is like the
reason why I do is totally aspirational
right this is like a you know this is a
spiritual practice for me and in in all
of that but at what I'm what I'm more
saying is that the people what speaks to
people and why that they're they're
coming seems to be more not about the
aspiration of what you get out of it but
more speaking out of the sense of like
I'm really missing something and so I
would say that like they end up
oftentimes people do that right and they
start and then they have these spiritual
experiences right and then they're and
then this whole like in in the paradoxes
is that you know if you if we let go of
agenda and let go of any explicit talos
and you'd be with what is you you real
you realize at a loss inherent within
the moment and you just be with that and
then the whole thing unfolds and that
seems to be an outcome but that doesn't
seem necessarily right to be why people
are initially coming and
it's funny and I don't even know if I
understand it or see it correctly and
it's very difficult to see what you're
inside of right like look kind of like
the whole thing about you know we're an
ant on writing on an elephant
they can only see yeah I kind of feel
like it's a little bit like that for me
but those are my preliminary sense of
making sense of it so there's like
people are much can see the value in
actually just dwelling within content
and staying there almost like they go to
a yoga class right of like it's like
they do yoga to exercise these things
because they're because we don't have to
move it at all right so people go to
yoga classes right um in and that helps
them because it exercises a machinery
that helps them move in their whole life
and all that kind of stuff I think it's
a lot more like that it's what I've seen
what's that like for you in terms of
your experience of teaching and circling
how does that change your experience or
desert well that's a good question it's
some ways in some ways there's there's
this experience of kind of like well you
have no idea like what you just walked
into right there's kind of that sense
about it I think I just have an implicit
faith right in in okay so we'll just
like you know whilst whilst let's just
withhold art like let's refrain from
making assessments and just talk about
what's here right so I'm gonna interrupt
I interrupt yeah so when I did arte
mm-hmm when I did arte yeah like one of
the central things that I came away with
which is it's it's a cone that I'm that
I'm still playing it's like thank you to
you into the art a team to Catherine
Williams
so through RIT I got really clear about
the experiential participatory knowing
difference between mark Lewis
the guy and mark Michael Lewis mm-hmm
the teacher personality thing
yeah yeah right and and you know I put a
lot of work into mark Michael Lewis Yeah
right to refine him to make him the best
tool possible for the purposes of
coaching and teaching and to like get as
much of him out get a much as much of
mark Lewis out of the way yeah so that
so that I can be with the people I'm
with from this perspective and yeah yeah
so so when you were just saying that
it's like one of the things that I got
from our attained from circling is is
the opposite of what you're suggesting
mm-hmm is like people come in for the
experience and then they get the logos
they get the the more you do this the
more it starts to become something which
is a tool which allows you to grasp more
such that you can convert more chaos
into order so you can convert more
reality into self yes yes you can
transform more by encountering more
things that you're unfamiliar than novel
yep you can be alert to novelty because
it's nutritious yep
I came in complete like tool tool tool
self as instrument yeah yeah in Roberts
language it's like and I got self as
presence great like at a whole new level
right right right
and and it's like it's like the whole
the whole thing it's like it's the same
thing again I thought but I got that 20
years ago oh but I just got it again and
then I get it again yeah and that oh
yeah that like I'm seeing with what I'm
like I'm seeing with what I like I'm
seeing with the thing that I now see and
that kind of trance framing if you will
or that part like that primordial ground
in that kind of transcendence yes um
there's something about there is
something about kind of putting a
constraint around the interactions where
you can't do certain things right like
that that kind of somehow invite that
ground to come closer and closer into
your eye in that moment of transcendence
is what I have faith in about it and so
so from that perspective like this is
that's what it's all about for me you
know on some level is the exploration of
the and I think specifically to be
oriented to that that's possible right
in the way that in the way that you the
way that you behold something and so so
for me a lot of a lot of circling is is
simply about how does one behold the
hold the logos right how does one relate
and all the distinctions around that
such that you have more to respond to
and to tuned to Ray
there seems to be something about like
that this is something about that in the
the I vow right there there seems to be
a way that we're open towards each other
where something like a lot of like
transcendence and those kinds of
insights people are still can have that
experience it's likely to cause like
people are still able available to God
seizures right in intimacy um that I
don't I think there's I think I think
it's well it's that's one of the few
places left that people can have those
kinds of experiences right without
having to have to having to have a bunch
of like propositions to believe in
because it's so experiential or
psychedelic spiritualist totally yeah
yes and then there's and then there's
kind of what it and I think I'm in these
conversations I've been having with
rebecky
and Chris and Jordan is I'm because but
you know I started having those
conversations cuz my idea was just to
start I was gonna start a podcast right
and and it was all I thought about was
like well but I want to do is talk to
interesting people and see if I can hit
the sweet spot between like a normal
interview and circling like and I didn't
know what that would exactly how that
would turn out but that's that was kind
of my only goal but what ended up
happening is this I'm still kind of
finding out what's happening with it but
it wasn't up happening is this whole
other thing right like like this sense
of the dialo goes and all these new
distinctions that seem to be kind of
coming out in part at least in doing
that with people who have never
necessarily done circling but in the
encounters go that thing that was just
happening what and then they have all of
their frames upon which to talk about
that that like are things I've never
even heard of right and then we have
conversations about that so there's this
kind of there is a there's there's
something more that's starting to
articulate itself
to me write me these conversations that
I think highlights more of the Trent
that like this the transcendent thing
about circling and bring bringing it
more explicit language that I've just I
feel like I'm in the middle of working
out right that I'm super excited about
what has it been like with you or for
for you
you know cuz you your whole life is
interesting conversations alright that's
basically what you do yeah so as I
understand it yeah and this particular
set of conversations that you've been
having recently yeah is with people who
have very well worked out models yeah
totally and and my in the conversations
we've had it's like I'm the person who
has kind of a well worked out model yeah
but you're confronting like person after
person after person with a very well
defined models yeah right with with
entire vocabulary yeah yep I what what
has it been like for you it's been it's
been fantastic watching them write like
cuz cuz you know it's not only
interesting fascinating conversation and
but
like I I I can I can imagine I'm you
it's a fair amount of right facility in
depth right how accurate is I don't know
but transformative yes yeah and the
conversations are just they're just
fantastic it's like I when I imagine
being you I'm yeah it's I'm in bliss
yeah in bliss and just like there's so
many things to respond to mm-hmm yeah
and you have your own vibe I've got
their own resonant frequency which is
which is coherent mm-hmm right the
melody the symphony that you are yeah
and therefore what you conduct yeah yeah
right the the the trans Jack t'v
relationship between your Symphony and
someone else's Symphony and therefore
what what gets
you you bring your melody mm-hmm-hmm the
thing and it just it's like fantastic it
yeah you know I watch I watch these
people in various videos they're like
boom and when they're with you it's like
mmhmm right yeah yeah okay so that's
it's like well what it's been like for
me is one is just well I can put it I I
think it exemplifies it Brianne my wife
is just head over heels he's like she's
like you have friends she watches and
she's like cries and joyfulness right
because she knows right yeah sorry it's
it's a it's it's long it's giving it's
like giving birth in in in that sense
it's very it's there it's like midwifery
right it's like a certain it's like a
birthing something you're being birds
but it's very much like that and you
know I think I probably has something to
do also I think with as as being a like
a masculine man right it it's it's one
of the ways that we give birth or
experience giving birth is through ideas
right and through this kind of exchange
right and there is a way where like for
example with Brienne we can have a
conversation she's into it you know brie
and she's like it she's got that cosmic
question in her heart right however it's
kind of like there's a sense she can be
just as into like cutting the things and
sewing the deal and like the our ticket
like she's so already it that on some
levels she's like yeah I could talk
about it but there's something different
that goes on with her when she talks
about it when we
talk about it it's like we're feeling
like we're like meeting the Big Bang
right and seeing it differently and it's
got this love to it that is just
profound that is that experience is
deeply encouraging like it grants
courage in it and it gives me a sense of
faith it gives me a sense of inspiration
it's got it has me feel a kind of like
love the so ecstatic in so many ways and
then it and then it it does you know
there is a way where these kind of the
the exercise of doing it and developing
relationships with these people have
them being ongoing that meet up over
time there is a sense in which I do feel
often like I'm walking inside it's
almost like there's like what we talked
about and the process of talking about
it
um shifts the way that I play music and
I played meet those who say my life is
playing music right and the music that I
have played is what organized the
current the current note that I'm
singing those conversations seem to
exemplify that music but in doing that
changing it and so I walk away from
those conversations and I see things
differently different things stand out
to me the way I respond my sense of
hopefulness its leading to its it leads
to a kind of faith of like a faith in a
certain goodness that those experience
that that that experience can happen
that kind of love can happen that kind
of shared sense of that thing that we're
gonna spend 8,000 years trying to
articulate but can't exhaust it I feel
more in touch with that right and it
spreads throughout my whole life and it
makes me want to have more conversation
like that and teach people have
conversations like it that's what that's
what the experience is like for me and I
would also say that it's
in encouraging in another way too which
is kind of finding out as you're talking
about it like with people have very
articulated models of things finding
myself inside of their models right as
I'm learning their models in the way
that I do that and then I come back out
of it and then they go whoa like I've
never had a somebody be in the my model
that way which has me seen the MA and
I'm like oh really and so there's this
kind of way where all of a sudden they
start modeling me both explicitly and
implicitly so I've learned more about
the way I am right because I'm kind of
heating you could say a different
environment or a different sense of
intelligibility and then I start to
learn a lot more terms about what I'm
doing or have been doing that I didn't
even realize so it's like it's and then
in doing that they they express
gratitude to me which I'm already
fucking grateful because I'm getting so
much out it's so it's so deeply
encouraging yeah
do you feel seen in a particular way
in a sense I'm actually actually let me
own more of that I think I'm wanting
that for you yes I do
yeah I do I definitely do mm-hmm
yeah because it's a little bit like this
it's a little bit like it's a little bit
like I thought I thought what I was
thinking was true I thought that's what
it did right but it's it's um however
you know how this is because you are one
of the friends I've had that like we can
talk like that right we can talk like
we're talking now and we have and we
will however that's been kind of a rare
that's been a rare thing to be with
somebody that's so into deeply into it
right to the level that we're into this
conversation if you will so there's been
an element of like I'm seeing stuff and
I think I'm making sense of it this way
but it's it's not like everybody's that
interested at that level right so having
people who are in some ways like much
deeper into it that have terms for it
that then I come into and they go that
and they recognize that I'm like I
thought that was really cool yes I think
that's I've been trying to say that so
it's like it's there's a there's like
guys saying stuff as a person feels
grateful and feels feel seeing but also
more than that it's like what I've been
into and what has had my attention and
what stamp will calls to my attention
and what I've been paying attention to
is being revealed as being wise right
but there's wisdom in that and it's and
it's not
I was questioning whether or not there
was right you you you get feed you get
feedback yeah totally on an almost daily
basis but you get feedback on an ongoing
basis that your way of being yeah and
your way of articulating and asking
questions and paying attention yeah
profoundly impacts people yeah yeah but
this is kind of a an intellectual
academic verification stamp of almost
like a stamp of approval I mean I'll
tell you that's I experience that a lot
watching you play I mean I've said I've
sent you notes and like I totally it's
just like I'm like yes you know cuz I'm
watching the videos in bed with my wife
right I'm like yes yes yes he's earned
that yes he's done the work for so long
and just grateful yeah it's um
and I think one of the things I would
say is that I think part of as you're
saying that I'm starting to kind of I
can put more language to it that there's
uh there's a way in which like in
circling you know there's not like we
don't explicitly talk about philosophy
right most often right or the realm of
ideas like encircling I mean I I always
have in words right Oh
however it's it may be but I but it's
been in ways that have been attuned to
the people who are there too right okay
just go off on things so I so I'm a tune
but there's but as that hasn't been that
super explicit right because it wouldn't
be an attunement necessarily for where
people were at so what and what I've
discovered if people are like man like
they and they're all about that that the
say that that there's very so much
about the same way of being on the
personal realm that like when you bring
it to the world of like these meta
conversations that something very
similar happens like the the debt where
it goes from dialogue to dialo goes I
would say there is that that whatever it
is it has someone open in intimacy with
each other is that like that the the way
that one holds it the way that one's
attuned like the the openness to be
impacted and to share that impact all of
all of those things that kind of create
these these and risking right that
create this intimacy that creates this
third thing that's greater than the sum
of the two parts that there's those same
dynamics like when applied to that level
seem to do something I would say not the
same right not the same I would say
trans transcended it transcends it and
and integrates it so kind of like this
sense of just being aware of as we're
talking right and like we're getting
something and then noticing how at some
point what we're talking about is what's
talking and then you bring that
attention and then they're like then it
drops it into this level but we've had
but we're now different people than the
way we started through talking to this
idea facing each other and then we can
go notice that and then that we can look
at the underlying logos of that and
begin to articulate it and different
people impregnate the conversation with
different things and it starts to have
this kind of autopoietic sense that
seems to be really transforming so like
I would say that's a bit another thing I
have really gotten out of it is like
realizing I think that's part of the
thing I'm like I thought I thought just
you this wasn't just this write it but
it's also it applies here so that's been
really encouraging yeah
it's good to see you
you
and I'm reminded actually of this
experience with you we're like well we'd
be in your office in the white board
and we go off on something like weed BAP
get into it and then a certain point
you'd sit down and we look at each other
and we were just just like that right in
and then we would just go I fucking love
you this deep sense of intimacy right
would be there and then something would
come in and we go on the whiteboard this
kind of sense of the personal the
dialogue between like the transcendent
and the personal and how the in
relationship I'm very much reminded that
[Music]
this has been really good mark
and so much more to talk about
yes I really want to get into or Vikki
and Chris's mark yeah so let's let's
continue this conversation okay let's do
it in the future this is a good this is
a good reopening thank you
much love my friend okay give my love to
Bri I will and and min sends her love
you got it okay she is she feeling
better by the way guys pretty warped
okay she's a trooper yes she is
alright go back okay I slept on bye