all right good morning and welcome to
8:30 during the pandemic where I go live
for an hour talking about what we can
create together 1r able to come together
I am part of a technology cooperative
we're working to create it's called
together tech we're working to create
the infrastructure to be able to come
together and create any project that a
single individual can come up with but
it's very much under the umbrella of
bringing your own your own project that
is what together tech looks like right
now
and my project is figuring out a process
that actually works with and for the
people who are creating the solution and
the people who are affected by the
problem so instead of having a small
group of people coming up with a
solution they have to sell to everyone
else having a large group of people
coming up with a solution that they
actually want to be a part of so what
that looks like right now in its best
incarnation is solution raising so a
solution raising is an hour-long
conversation that generates actual
possible solutions that we could
implement right now if we had 10,000
people and $100,000 after holding six of
them I'm gonna be looking to hold at
least one per week live during this time
slot and if it ends up that that's
successful
maybe we'll hold two or three a week to
showcase that people coming together
five people talking on camera actually
can come up with real solutions to real
problems that are tangible right now and
part of that is of course working
through a figuring out a process that
10,000 people can actually participate
in and so what I would love to do
besides there's many options during this
hour
that is going to probably go on for
weeks and months is to because the
pandemic I'm happy for this to go on for
weeks and months it's the statement side
for everyone that maybe is less less
enticing so after our conversation
yesterday for our mastermind projects I
was give
and I took on that during the first part
of this I'm gonna have a more succinct
pitch this was clearly not it but it's
my first attempt so that people who are
tuning in it takes a while for people to
comment realize someone's live and and
join them you can kind of miss the first
couple minutes and then if somebody
comes in part way through and it's like
hey what's this all about they can just
go watch any of the previous broadcasts
and watch the first two or three minutes
to understand what is a solution raising
and what is it that we are doing during
this time period I am reaching out to
one of the other game be people who is
interested in doing a solution raising
on mental health and emotional support
especially during the pandemic then I
went stuck inside with their loved ones
and so I'm gonna reach out to her and
we'll figure out which if it worked any
of the day's work for her what today we
are doing that live online and what that
will look like since most people
probably have not watched the solution
raise it so grow them together tech
channel is for 15 minutes we talk about
what is currently being done what works
and what doesn't work about that what we
would like it to look like and that was
sorry 15 minutes of that then 15 minutes
and what we would like it to look like
in our ideal version of the future they
don't need to match several many
participants there are there can be that
many different versions of the future
and then we talk about what is something
we could actually implement right now if
we had 10,000 people in hundred thousand
dollars so what is a solution that we
would want to be a part of creating we
would want to use if it was created and
hopefully have it be a voluntary
inviting solution so that we're not
focused on creating new power dynamics
that were the new elite for right that's
not what we're looking to do we're not
looking to create a new hierarchical
paradigm that just replaces the people
in power with new people in power it's
how do we how can we solve solutions
without there being people in power the
governments are the best we have right
now to deal with our collective needs
and at the same time especially since
we're leaving it up to them and we put
for better for worse or like so my
problems I think they're never gonna
make us all happy they're never really
gonna make anyone happy the only one who
could make us me the individual happy is
the individual is to say you need to
come for the perfect solution for me
that I can't find any fault in is a
ridiculous childlike thing to do that we
all fall into from time to time but
having an actual process that we can
follow when we have 10,000 people that
care about an issue instead of just
signing a petition that says hey can I
can't even think of the most recent
petitions that outside because I signed
a lot of them but cancer even right like
that we want give me money I'm gonna go
run run a marathon for cancer and then
it's like well where is that money going
in is that actually going to solve
cancer what does that look like we could
have 10,000 people sign up to say hey
I've lost someone to cancer it's a
shitty shitty disease are we going to
solve it with 10,000 people 100,000
dollars of course not but we could have
a system that supports people going
through cancer we can have a system that
actually votes on what funding we want
to do because the pharmaceutical
companies the for-profit companies
aren't going to study the same things
that we want which is how do I prevent
cancer how do i cure cancer so even
something as big as cancer we could
tackle with a solution raising we only
have the first step of the solution and
now what I'm looking to do is do the
process raising so what does it what
could it look like because there's
infinite combinations what could it look
like to create a solution of 10,000
people that could look like a show of 5
people working through the process
themselves and having the rest watch and
vote on the features and the benefits so
that is
kind of how I envisioned it but when we
even measured it together it might look
very different is there are 10,000
people funding it and who get a say on
what the solution is going to entail
there's going to be a smaller number of
those 10,000 who actually want to
participate more deeply on camera or
voice in a conversation that generates
solution it's for some people that's
going to be fun and enticing and for
other people they just want the solution
so out of the 10,000 people that are
funding it that are like yes this is a
problem I want to put $10 to words and
either I'm gonna participate in that
process as much as I want or I'm gonna
hand that off to the people who want to
participate in it and I can take a back
seat you just get a more of a spectator
hopefully with voting involved once I
mean there's tons of voting out souther
so we can have that involved from nearly
the beginning this won't be a
streamlined it won't be as easy to it
for it to all be in one location what I
would love to do during this hour is
like I said do one or two solution
raises a week and then have one to two
hours dedicated to like a board of
directors meeting on the process itself
I'm looking for other people who want to
co-create the process and doing it live
on camera the solution raising so far
have been on camera on YouTube they
haven't been live we haven't had people
participating what we're doing it's the
point is to have the conversation not to
have an audience and so during those
solution receives I will see how it
works with the audience watching but to
bring in more and more people to
showcase that this is this is possible
like I said that the conversations
themselves I don't know how enticing
they are for an audience
I enjoyed rewatching them but I was also
participating in them but they are
enjoyable to participate in so to
generate enough of an audience who wants
to participate in solution raising so we
can go off of YouTube and on to zoom to
focus on generating more than one
solution and honestly with five of us we
generate more than one solution but once
were more focus like that we can so
anyone's there's a broader base of
people too who want
despite the solution raising we can
break off into groups and come up with
like a feasible solution we then present
back to the group in some way and then
we can vote on which one we think is the
best idea and then if we were going to
move forward with that idea we'd move
forward with the best idea then we'd
probably have another round on how can
we improve it whatever those various
rounds are like we're having the
solution raising is really to generate
ideas for a solution I believe the next
step is something along the lines of
brainstorming and voting on like every
feature that app could create and then
as we know what's more and more
important to people because we can't be
everything to everyone
so as we find out what the biggest
impact we can have is if we're doing a
food app and it's um a recipe card
recipes for sharing recipes what was I
saying what was I saying oh the joy the
joy I have try to save the world but my
brain is on its own on its own mission
it's just a surrender surrender to the
brain I have once we get enough people
who are watching who want to participate
in the solution reasons that we are
going to be showcasing live on YouTube
but once we have enough people who want
to participate not live on YouTube we
will move over to zoom when we will host
one to two solution raisings a week as
each solution raising timeslot becomes
more and more popular we can open up
more and more time slot but generating
the solutions like we already generated
six solutions to six different sectors
there is definitely a way to improve the
process of solution raising so that we
note taking and with that there's a way
to generate a solution and then put it
up to the community to vote part of it's
doing a solution raising on those kind
of things but not everyone who wants to
do a solution raising on education on
healthcare a mental health wants to have
a solution raising on the process itself
so as my brother kind of called this pet
project it's a process raising so having
the conversations about what could it
look like to create solutions with
10,000 people we need a smaller group of
people who are willing to work through
that process
preferably live on camera so that people
can see the process trust in the process
and get as involved as they want to be
one of the ways that people can get
involved besides just watching is for
these meetings
comedians it's a bit of a stretch when
it's only me but once it's more of a
meeting having somebody who can take
notes as to what exactly was discussed
during jury during the the hour what was
raised if we're doing a project raising
what just a note-taker basically is what
I'm looking for for someone who doesn't
want to participate on camera what I'm
also looking for is - - for other people
who want to participate they don't need
to be 8:30 to 9:30 every day we will
find one to two different time slots
whatever works for the first one or two
people and we will stick with those time
slots so let's say it's it's Tuesday and
Friday we go live on Tuesdays and
Fridays we're hosting the meeting here
on maybe Wednesdays we hold a solution
raising itself all the all the other
days we can hold solution raising
because once this becomes more popular
people want to participate on camera and
I'm posting the links that you can it'll
be whoever the first four to five people
who show up and if there's only one to
two of us that's fine too you can have
the solution raising with as long as
there's two people one person I could
run a solution raising by myself it is
basically what I do but that's not
something about the same it doesn't have
the same impact as showcasing that
basically anyone can come up with a
solution any group of people who is
focused on just the problem and that's
where we normally focus that's why we
only devote to 15 minutes to discussing
the problem if this was a new problem so
I should ask the content go up at 19 we
spend we would spend longer than 15
minutes talking about what it's like now
and the the ends the odds and that might
be well we work through the process
raising that we don't have enough
information the solution raising so part
of what's generated during a solution
might be here are the here's the data
and the information we need we actually
need a research team to go deeper into
this before we can do before we can hold
a solution raising on it as effectively
as we'd like and so there might be steps
before the solution is a like homework
that we give to ourselves so that we can
have more of an impact in the solution
and then how do we actually create a
solution with 10,000 people
once you have 10,000 people everyone
puts in $10 and you have $100,000 but
getting the 10,000 people and so after
my conversation with Jordan Hall this
week what was I liked the idea the
suggestion he gave which is to figure
out a process although when we're
talking about it we want to figure out a
process for 10,000 people we're going to
create the process in a very emits the
word like hands on manual way for a
thousand people let's say so using
spreadsheets using which honestly might
be overwhelming for even a thousand
people even clearly it's overwhelming
for a thousand people that's like 250
groups of poor people each but again if
it's under the same assumption but
jordan's assumption was that those
thousand were people that were we have
different ways of tackling so he's
saving the world
Jordan is all about kind of finding he
would not use these words but the elite
right the people who are Havoc's like
really good personal sovereignty really
good sense making skills and my approach
is a little bit the opposite but it's
like find a group of everyday people and
find those people amongst them they will
emerge whereas like finding the elites
is not it's not the thing I want to do
because I think everyone can participate
in this process everyone can create a
solution everyone can have a
conversation if they want to that
generates solutions and it's about it's
not about creating a new a new elite
who's gonna be the like positive
Illuminati of the world again not Jordan
in any way
but it's my being not a type-a
personality in the world and feeling
like the world doesn't work for me my
whole life was a little bit shadow wound
and a little
but no this is not that's not actually
how we empower humanity to save humanity
isn't by impaired by employing elites
it's by employing the masses and so so
with the ten thousand hundred thousand
to ten thousand in his mind you find a
thousand people who are committed were
committed to this project and want to be
more instrumentally involved and then we
invite ten people each and although I
love that idea if I see someone just
gave me a hundred or a thousand people
that were like yes I want to do a
solution raise aid I work through it no
problem but by I would rather kind of
find the people who are super committed
who I guess is kind of like the elite
the people the elite 'no siz their
interest in creating solutions together
and working for a process that could be
possible for ten thousand people then
finding whatever thousand people those
are it's fine but not all thousand are
going to want to participate in the
conversation there's gonna be a
percentage of those people who just want
to give their money and have other
people work through the process and
because they could witness the process
they could watch it live they won't but
they could then they are going to be
able to have more stress to the system
and the more we're able to but I I don't
I can't think of a better word were Dean
but like meet people where they are so
if they don't want to watch an hour a
day no problem you can read the
description that that encapsulate s--
what we spoke about if you don't want to
do that either that's fine that certain
degree of what we are creating in the
world is transparency and Trust so that
you don't have to if science is
open-source truly open-source and
anybody can access it you don't need to
have it it's not behind a paywall it's
not behind an intellectual wall now do
you get invited to the conference to
have the conversation and how we cure
cancer
maybe not you could have access that
information so that because everyone can
have access to the information you're
going to be much more likely to trust it
to be like okay well I might not
understand cybersecurity but if the
cyber if the tech experts say yes this
is safe enough to try this is as safe as
we can have it under this current system
then I'm going to trust
because it's not them behind closed
doors being like well in it for profit
and they're trying to sell me something
and with that they're trying to sell me
trust it's a very different culture when
you have people who know they can access
the information and therefore they can
leave up like the specific areas of
expertise to other people who are more
of an expert I'm a little bit of a
jack-of-all-trades so I understand a
more broad range of a lot of topics but
I don't feel like I'm an expert in any
of them even though I'm probably better
than your average person at all of them
like economics I have a minor in
economics but I know I'm not an
economist I have a Bachelor in biology a
Bachelor in any science is basically a
four-year education you paid for and
everything you don't know lets you
graduate with like okay mm-hmm now how
would I actually actually do this if I
was thrust into a like a society that
didn't know genetics or didn't know a
lab could I create anything from scratch
I love in the I watch a lot of
apocalyptic drama and when it's like
some random doctor is the best they have
so they're like working on a cure like
good luck I don't think the doctor could
actually do that yes that's exactly what
I want to do is Shiloh and so I'm
reaching out to sukira this week to find
out if she's available for that mental
health that solutionizing
and then I will invite you as well
Shiloh and then whoever else wants to
Joe and I'll put the link up and anyone
can kind of join on that day that might
be a bit of a super but we'll see we'll
see how that works because I don't know
if I want people mmm that's actually
true it's not I'm a little less worried
about society people showing up in a bad
space like people do weird things with
things wrong video and things are
auditory it's like on periscope oh wait
there's that but there's also just this
is kind of an hour-long show so popping
in like like periscope and YouTube allow
right just like oh what's going on here
and and trying to try to catch up
doesn't really work when you're
participating in a solution raising
so having people pop in but then I just
don't I guess I don't allow people after
the first five minutes to join and we
just explain that so that would be that
would be fine I'm more worried about
yeah people following the link be like
so what's up well we're in part three of
the conversation I'm excited for what's
procrastinate I mean this is kind of my
um my process is although I my
personality is I like to have everything
planned out and I'm a perfectionist the
world that's not allowed me to retain
that part of my personality I'm also a
very somewhat rigid person like I need
things to go according to plan I need
and so I get very agitated when they're
not like when people aren't acting how I
want them to act we thought that being
conscious like without it being like
you're not acting as it's like a
subconscious piece of like I can feel
the agitation in my body and then I have
to figure out right you don't get to
rule over the world you don't get to how
people do it you want once I knew that
that was a part of my personality I
could let go a bit more and same with
this now that I know I can let go of
needing a plan because whatever magic
the universe is it's God it's magic it's
I don't know what it is but there's
something absolutely amazing that
happens when you like surrender to it
and although my personality is not what
its surrender my life lessons are and so
now I'm like okay I don't need to plan
it all out I know how we can save the
world and I don't know how to
communicate it and how freaking perfect
is that because otherwise I would I
would have written out the right pages
and it would change the second after I
wrote them this path yeah what's funny
there is responding to this comment the
people need elites and in my body I like
I said I know I'm not an expert on
basically anything and yet I know I know
more than most people most people and
that's a weird company should have in
your body it shows up like I know
doctors went to med school and they know
more about medicine than I do
however they also have one area of
expertise and I have my body is my area
of expertise
and they don't know my body they don't
know my ecosystem they don't know and so
I look at the world and I honor the
people are experts but also that
basically no expert has full spectrum of
information my doctor doesn't understand
dietary restrictions if they're my
neurologist they don't understand my
circulatory system if they're like they
just don't they seem to focus on one of
them and that is what you get with
elites and you also get people who
society already works for and I love
those people I want them on board too
and I think this pandemic is gonna show
us at least a little bit the world has
flipped a bit who all has flipped a bit
and it's gonna work for new people I
still don't want that to be to be
focused I still don't want it the more
elite you need to be for society to work
for you the more we're all paying that
price right now that looks like being
charismatic being articulate now being
pre-pandemic having a high risk ratio
like me being able to take on a lot of
risk and we get what we got we get a
very fragile system that's very complex
and when anyone pulls their djenka block
outta tumbles because people who are
high-risk aren't like me they don't
foresee like okay but what happens in
pandemic is what we need three months of
savings to pay our staff to pay our
lease if there's a catastrophe to stay
in business that is what a non risk a
more risk adverse person would do but
they would never be successful in the
business world because you need that
money to be circulating in and growing
and growing so these that you have two
blinders on to the risk so that you can
take the risk and because society only
works for a certain percentage of people
it's like you can't you can be brilliant
but if you do you're not charismatic and
articulate your idea is not going to get
out in the world or you can be
charismatic and articulate and have a
subpar idea and you're a really good
salesperson for it so it gets out in the
world we're not getting the best ideas
the more we can create a world that
however Italy you are that's its own
reward if you're part of the top 5% of
runners if your needs are met you don't
need to be being paid a million dollars
at your run
you're gonna run because it's something
you wanted and if you don't want to do
it you're not going to be the top 5%
then you're not gonna do it and I'm
gonna read your next comment now because
I'm like totally just so focused on
finding paid employment
you can hold together I don't we all
fail although I'm not looking for paid
employment because I and that's also
part of what flips like I'm on
disability my dad is on retirement and
so we have fairly guaranteed income
during this time period
they aren't lucrative any homes were
still able to pay our rent or still able
to put food on the table if we don't go
through hyperinflation so we're in a
better position to take care of
ourselves than other people then like my
sister who is the family risk taker
entrepreneur and therefore also the more
wealthy one has had her business go
under from this and it might never come
back I think she's also taken hurt alone
which is like more risk I'm like this
isn't coming back like this isn't as a
finding paid employment like right now
to get through this this time period
there's all of these people looking for
in a very tiny section of people who
like if you're willing to work in the
food industry there's work for you if
you have them or if you're able to work
this is just gonna shake up a lot of
stuff it's showcasing the people who are
essential to our local economies people
who work in grocery stores the people
who work in restaurants the
transportation people construction for
some reason why they need to be doing
construction on Saturday I don't know
but anyway my own peppy people need to
be employed especially right now um you
have a lot of people who are privileged
enough to have jobs they can do from
home and part of the problem is if your
job can be done from home and remotely
you can also probably be done from the
Philippines from India from places where
as long as they speak your language
fluently enough and there's enough of
them that speak our language fluently
enough that this is going to cost us
secondary tertiary jobs
down the line because if you're not a
grocery store worker we can outsource
your job so unless your employer is
someone who is just like our whole
economy you know it's like if they so if
if they're like listen no I want my jobs
through in Canada I want my jobs to rain
made in America awesome now they're
competing against everyone else who's
outsourced theirs and they will unless
as a consumer as a user you're gonna
only go after the ones that stay in
Canada and stay in the United States and
why would you because paying someone a
living wage in India or China or the
Philippines is just as important as
paying someone a living wage here paint
someone a living wage there would be
minimum wage here like it's like okay so
do I hire someone I can pay their what
they're worth in the Philippines or do I
hire someone in Vancouver who needs to
pay Vancouver rent out of the goodness
of my heart maybe I I start a tech firm
and I wanted to be in Vancouver so I
want the Vancouver people to come
together well if you're not coming
together again why am i hiring you
locally maybe we've come together once a
month
Mason maybe that is why but you can't
compete with the other people who are
outsourcing to other countries and that
is our economy nutshell
even if you want to do the right thing
what is the right thing again there's
both sides it's like why your Canadian
jobs more important than looking
Filipino jobs I wouldn't know but that
if what you want is for things remain
local and have more of a local
foundation which we're also gonna see
you might see we actually might see
manufacturing jobs coming back also out
of this but a lot of manufacturing jobs
especially if what you need to pay
people in Canada and America to work in
a manufacturing job is even $20 an hour
robots are cheaper than that they don't
take sick time and they don't ETI and
they don't need workers comp and they
don't need and so even if we're having
more manufacturing jobs it's not gonna
be like when we have manufacturing here
in the fifties sixties and seventies
where people were paid a really good
wage and part of that there's gonna be a
few people who are paid a decent
probably living wage and the majority
will be whole be robots and so it's not
that sounds very doom and gloom because
it's like if someone's like um
looking for has paid employment and that
is like on the focus of a lot of
people's minds right now right you need
to put food on the table you put a roof
over your head and the world hasn't felt
more fragile than it does right now
because even in the financial crisis of
2008 and it was hard to find a job and
that that what's the word that cohort of
people who graduated are still having
problems could not they have like a
everyone was was being graduated from
their school and they usually like let's
say 40% of them go into a career and the
other 60% to find something else because
if you're not hired right away you
basically just wasted your education yay
capitalism
yay survival of the fittest and supplied
beds so they couldn't find jobs because
everyone else was looking for them as
well and so it was like a lost
generation of people graduating but it
was a tiny fraction so if you were in
one of the industries that was very
impacted like the financial industry or
real estate then the chances are you
didn't find a job in that but you could
have found a job other places because
other parts of the of the economy were
thriving even if there weren't enough to
go around this is literally most of our
jobs aren't happening right now and
people still need to eat so we have to
pass things like universal basic income
we have to figure out not just am i I'm
in it for me
which is is not wrong it's what we're
raised as it's what our society kind of
props up is the way to be but if you're
in it for yourself just to put food on
your table and a roof over your head
it's gonna be a lot harder because then
it's competition right it's like well
one of us can flip the burger clearly we
cannot both work for this you know
unless there's two positions one
position of McDonald's that we're
fighting for because it's the only jobs
that are available whereas if we can
come together as 10,000 people and say
hey we don't have a job what am I most
concerned about I'm concerned about not
having a roof over my head because I
can't pay my rent I'm concerned about
not having food on the table because
food is expensive well if we can ten
thousand people would not anywhere be
enough but the number of people who
didn't pay rent in America on April 1st
even the number of people who didn't pay
rent here in Canada on April 1st in the
world over
takes our economy but it also gives us
it gives us some power that we could
have a debt Jubilee we could have a
mortgage and rent Jubilee where everyone
needs a home this is how important it is
for Humanity so if you're in a place
you've been there for six months a year
you now own it because whenever there's
a debt you believe we have to figure it
out for renters as well because why
would mine I don't actually know how
much of this place my landlord owns oh
right how much think owns but if there's
a debt you believe and then he gets to
own it outright but I don't get to own
it when I wanted lived here for ten
years would be weird but not under our
current economy right like it's like
well he bought it he took the risk he's
the one managing it and so what is this
together we have more power but shelters
a bit dicey because it's a lot harder to
figure out shelter when shelters so
astronomically expensive but there are
ways we could 3d print and and
manufactured homes ourselves together at
cost they could make it much more
affordable
I just wouldn't be guaranteed a space in
Vancouver right so there are things we
could do together the DIY little houses
join together in a community but but
food is a much easier problem to tackle
food is like can we grow enough food
together can we do my gender identity I
don't care it's nice today I'm
non-binary but I go by shear having a
world that works for everyone means
having a conversation with anyone who
wants to be part of that conversation
how do we create a world that works for
you the one thing we can't do is push
our worldview onto everyone else so if
I'm a vegan which I'm not I can talk
about how veganism is gonna save the
world but I can't enforce that on people
I could find 10,000 other vegans and
figure out how to eat more healthy and
then we can invite other people and say
hey if you want to eat vegan come be
part come be part come be part of this
not not especially I don't I don't know
no I don't need a bad thing I left
find that the absurdity of the universe
all the time I mean I can't have my life
and not have a sense of humor like the
biggest irony being that my nervous
system shuts down when I'm under stress
is somehow I have the whole weight of
the world on my shoulders is that stress
yeah yeah that stress that I checked out
I can't move forward and I have to like
this weird ballet of accepting my life
exactly as it is accepting my brain and
body exactly as they are so they can
work at their highest peak which is less
than other people but what comes out
well doing that is magic it's better
than anything I when I the world did
work for me before I had brain tumors
and brain damage I picked this one I
picked this life this weird hilarious my
guides are bitches and have really
extreme sarcastic sense of humor all of
it I picked this and what was my point
of that was oh that we can't
so my personality is a little like I
know how we can save the world and
everyone just needs to be me I've gotten
over that vast majority because that's
the one thing that never happens because
it's that sounds ridiculous why would
you want everyone to be you of course
everyone's not going to be you but
there's ways you don't know you're being
you that you think are universal but
then someone points out or not universal
it's like okay well where you think that
so having a small group of people create
something doesn't quite work having a
bunch of people part of that process
means it's gonna work at least for those
people you can extrapolate the rest the
population can collectively focus on
prioritizing food and shelter for all
like figure out a role for everyone to
play and restructuring our food system
yeah
and that is what we am so so again
10,000 people on $100,000 wouldn't be
able to do that for the world but we
could do that for ourselves right 10,000
people in Vancouver could absolutely
feed that Cooper could come together and
say okay well six months to a year down
the road we don't know what our supply
chain looks like so though there's money
in the supermarket there is food in the
supermarket right now we don't know
that's happening and we need to know we
have enough
calories and enough nutrition for our
population if you had just 10,000 people
figured that out for 10,000 people
that'd be great but it doesn't work
because the other people aren't starving
and when people are starving they're not
a better higher self oh oh there's the
over here starving well you have a
beautiful garden that I won't steal from
but yes if we can figure out shelter and
food we have it made and that is partly
what we might have to do is during this
time demmick no one's ready to do that
yet because we're only in like week
three or four but after three or four
months of this how cooped up in the city
do you want to be because the point of
living in a city somewhat is for
employment we already went three wide
bloom it's not a thing anymore and then
big cultural events right parades and
sporting events and to go out to
restaurants so the restaurants Wilson
still absolutely in existence we can
ramp up our congregation to 50 maybe
even 250 people but a lot of what our
society's based on is thousand people
10,000 people hundred thousand people
events and those unless we have a
permanent vaccine we might be done with
those completely so what that means is a
exodus from the cities because why do I
want to live in a city and I don't
actually don't want to live in a city
this was me before I'm like I don't go
out to the big events why am I here I'm
here for medical actually because
experts are all here even though I avoid
them like the plague and I don't go to
them if I need to they're here and and
my community and transportation and
other other systems are here that work
but the more we realize that this might
be our new normal we can design Dunbar's
sized communities that deal with this
new normal but we're not there yet or
not because we like in Canada we don't
really have a problem with that we have
enough space where we can look after
nature have small communities and look
after it's insulated like I have a
community that I am part of in Vancouver
and I love my community we did eat
together three to four times a week I
don't live there but they do I hopes it
every once in a while
somebody when they go away and have
their pet there but they've designed
this property I was part of the
designing of the property for to be
neighbors to be in and out of each
other's houses the kids are like in and
out of each other's houses constantly
and people just walk into each other's
houses knock on the door and go in and
although they're more equipped to deal
with this emergency because I'm part of
their chain so I can see someone will be
like oh does anyone out of the east and
so they're sharing sugar sherry good
stuff what are the people look like my
husband Panik bought 80 pounds of rice
of anyone needs any laughing because
there was this hilarious
I don't know this app that makes your
dog talk and one of the dogs I have said
for it was like did you include me and
because I could eat the 80 pounds of
rice just leave it on the counter anyway
that they're more equipped to deal with
the resource part of it but because of
the space was designed to be in and out
of each other's places the space isn't
designed for this so the kids who were
in and out of each other's houses and in
the courtyard in the playroom can't
really do that well their social
distancing if they were an insulated
community they could if everyone was out
of work and everyone just lived there
and they had one person leaving to get
groceries you know for everyone that
seems ridiculous
they had groceries delivered right then
they could be in and out of each other's
houses and it wouldn't be a problem
having that out and it's more rural or
urban but you still have an insulated
community because one of the reasons I
stopped going there before they
cancelled their dinners a week after I
stopped going because I'm trying to keep
my my dad safe is that there's four
nurses that work there live there they
don't work there they live there and
work in the community as nurses so
although one of them's in like kids ER
there's gonna be less cases but there's
definitely gonna be cases in the kids er
one of them's a nurse practitioner who
sees is like a GP and she sees a lot of
people in the more disenfranchised like
Lower East End and again gonna be very
highly susceptible to it the one who
lurks the ER has like a husband who has
cancer like this is just not a great
nurses are our heroes and they're also
our vectors of disease right
and our communities aren't set up for a
pandemic so the more were able to work
together to create solutions of like I
love that they're they're nurses they
have an actually essential job during
this time period which means they both
are gonna get enough money to feed their
families and even if their spouses
aren't working and but also it puts the
community at risk there's people who
live there who are immune compromised
there's people like it's it's um it's
hard to figure out what's the right
thing to do especially with the nurses
and doctors in this scenario like what
you want to be able to see your family
go home to see your family and then you
risk them getting it and if they're not
susceptible if they're not in the
high-risk category it doesn't matter so
much no no no no no no go please I'll
talk to you in a little bit okay
[Music]
oh yeah that's pretty cool right that
new thing exists yeah I agree but I
don't want you on camera right now thank
you
except for underwear I'm like
you
oh that was fun no what's going on why
is a new tab okay no oh my kid came she
was like there's any blacks I'm just a
black screen I think for what two three
minutes
hmm create a critique and proofread sure
Lia send me the I don't do the fact that
I'm for it
I do not contribute to many of the
patreon supporters even though there's I
have a ton of people in my life who like
whenever I before when I would play the
lottery I would focus on like who had
help with my family and like my house
they can and then I would save the world
in a very charity way right like oh well
I don't all start an orphanage er Animal
Rescue or something now I play a
different game in my head with the
lotteries there it's a game of like who
in my life would I give a million
dollars to because they are world
changers really help them know at least
two people who are they have patreon
accounts and they're getting less than
like $200 month and they're both world
changing that one who's Nicole she has
the transition org project which is
amazing and the other which is James
Jones Hume spawn for local manufacturing
she just means I believe her income to
live off of so that she can more
concentrate on transition org
he needs more he has a very much smaller
shot of no idea footprints on how much
like he only needs 20,000 to live off of
for the year but his project is really
expensive because it's 95 streams so I
say we I think I might have called Julia
I like to add a is on things we've had a
conversation before I'm not great at
people in names once I've met people on
camera I'm much more oh it was weird
it's funny how this stream yard doesn't
stop like when it loses connection with
the Internet I thought stream yard like
was down
together like oh I'm gonna have hours of
black screen just being there live
broadcasting on black screen well maybe
it's not black maybe it's this cool
thing
well maybe that's why they do it now so
these people could tell because it used
to just be black I wonder if they do
that now Stephanie what can tell when it
drops the call you're still broadcasting
for the was the climate March not are we
ever having a climate March or a women's
March again I don't know
it's like solidarity but for my living
room and that's like everything we did
under the new the old paradigm I mean I
went to a couple what's the word what
are those what are marches protests with
my kid because they were the big ones
they were the ones that it was tens of
thousands of people you know I got it I
look through it after tens of thousands
of people go to it and it's more to say
just like I was part of it because
protests don't get a lot done like I go
to them and they're like fifty thousand
people are more like change we want
change listen to us and it's like well
what change are we actually invoking
anything is gonna piss off somebody else
so like just create the change yourself
if a fraction of those fifty thousand
people I'm gonna say one in five ten
thousand of them got together we can
create okay again I don't have to solve
women's issues with ten thousand dollars
or sorry hundred thousand dollars and
ten thousand people but we could
absolutely create an app that made us
feel safe to date online we could create
something that was somewhat like a debt
you believe which doesn't it make sense
something behind the scenes where it's
like I'm reporting my boss and reporting
this happened when there was enough
allegations on one person then we asked
for your story and so people in
positions of power whether in business
or just celebrity we would be up early
whatever those are just my ideas for the
mewtwo movement but there's a ton of
ideas that we could create together with
with 10,000 people and $100,000 the
climate change same thing it's like well
we want industries to change we want
governments to pass and I'm not saying
that's wrong because I also want those
things to come to be but our system is
designed against it our system is
designed against like you look at our
elected leaders right now they want to
do what's right like
I don't think any of them want to either
tank the economy because that's their
thing they're usually in charge of
keeping together and how they're gonna
get rebooted in nor do they want people
to die under the the pandemic and so
right now they have to have a very
difficult choice of like which ones less
chaotic which ones less deaths which
ones less of a long-term impact for the
most amount of people and they're in
mercy
Christie it's what's coming out of my
head but it looks so my brain threw that
out through your name out oh my I'm
doing this every every morning at this
time though you're welcome there's a
link it's not on a periscope itself it's
not on Twitter today either but there
will be there usually is a link I just
didn't do one today I'm doing it on
periscope partly so people can find me
Chris periscope has random viewers and
then YouTube has more focused viewership
of people who subscribe and then they
they can his periscope like there's no
way to comment when you're not in the
scope there's no way to comment after it
you can do it on Twitter or I guess but
then you have to know they're on Twitter
another handle and go there so that is
partly why I'm on periscope doing it is
it it's attached to my Twitter account
and then people who follow me on Twitter
can see what I'm up to and be part of it
we're doing solution raising which I
know when Wes got you were part of the
idea cafe or coming up with solutions
for for that when I was talking about
solutions for that my language skills um
now we're doing solution raisings which
is like an hour-long conversation that
generates actual ideas on solutions for
problems if we had 10,000 people on
$100,000
so it's aligned with looking the food
chain cuckoo Cree and diversity within
connection and honoureth and friendship
we'll definitely check it out our food
system something we absolutely to be
doing the biggest benefit I've seen in
the game be space although there's terms
like food is complex and everyone needs
it
everyone needs enough calories to
survive we have different diets that we
need
there's a ton of people working on
solutions but like anything if we're
dissipated all over the place we're not
necessarily focused on creating the most
efficient solution and that word someone
triggers people but right now efficiency
because what we're seeing now is a world
maximized for efficiency and how non
resilience it is that it when something
goes wrong and crumbles and we we need
redundancy in the right ways we need
there to be ideas constantly coming in
to people working on new ideas but also
not taking away the energy and power of
what's what's currently happening right
so if we did have 10,000 people working
on a food app deciding what what that
would look like what would Sam G look
like with more people
once my dad roommates talking to someone
my kid was talking with someone that was
the funny thing is just some degree
although I I've done a little bit of
permitting over the last couple of weeks
which I didn't think I would because I'm
basically always a hermit and now
everyone's at home like I could talk to
me about Skype all day every day if I
wanted which I kind of was but everyone
was working so I developed my own
community or not my own but tapped into
a community of people doing that and
anyway my kid has kids messenger and all
of her like co-hosting friends are on it
a few for Windsor House friends are on
it and it's kind of cool because it's
kind of like they're all stuck in their
tiny apartment so our hot place is
actually bigger not able to go in and
out of each other's houses I'm talk
about the co-hosting people the hoods
are hosts people are all over the place
in fact one of them stuck in the states
right now unfortunately and yeah I know
but she came in like I was like oh I
turned my camera off because she like
look come and stand right here and be
like what's going on let me be on camera
and she's decided that she were a
clothing-optional host so I've had to
fight with her to get on door on let
alone I'm like no you can't you be
working on I'm trying to get
rhythm for like the new the new normal
because she's like I was panicking I'm
sure a lot of people do I'm like what do
I do during the summer right she hated
what we did last year during the summer
so I wasn't gonna put her into a day
camp again was that one I was like what
do I do I need you and now it's like
there's no possibility like it's like
they're aren't they count her to
anything and she's five months instead
of two months I'm like okay we're all in
this together
I can survival survival is what my love
oh she got excited for the five months I
know beans well think of a five month
project it's like leaving the house
daily doing that it would made a map of
the neighborhood this week we didn't do
anything else outside she decided she's
making a playhouse in the backyard we
have a fence with our neighbor and it's
falling apart I think there's the slats
it's like one section of fence that has
fallen down and now like we try to keep
the place because the people upstairs
with a cat I'm like the cat it's a giant
hole that any raccoon or skunk or catkin
or kid full-grown adults could use and
anyway she's making it she's like I'm
gonna make a tree house with there's
like five five pieces but I'm like I'm
it's exciting to see what you can do it
at that
not in a tree not in a tree oh yeah no
we've definitely oh it's at least ten
sorry I miscounted did you count them
oh you're estimating there's about time
okay
just a floor the ground a good teacher
origami teaching my child anything it's
basically a no-go
I need someone else a teacher anything
unless it's just a natural rhythm of
learning does she does not take my for
advice she's she's brilliant and she is
brilliant but even on things that I'm
actually an expert in it's like no I'm
not gonna trust you
I didn't hear that on YouTube yeah you
definitely know minecraft totally
teacher we're willing to be on video you
can teach your own video and I mean the
world we live in and we lived in this
world before like we do spend 90% of our
time inside turns out even this is too
much for me and my kid like I'm like
actually because I spent 99 percent of
my time either here at cohousing Isco
home saying this like home so I can be
there and it's fine I need that asylum
same over there more important
periodically and but that's between
those two places is where I was 99% of
the time and now that I don't have that
I'm like oh that's wrapped up but having
her what that's I was gonna say train of
thought stay on the track stop deep
raylene it's not gonna stop um that
we're kind of more included in the
community a little bit more than we were
before because a lot of its online and
we still can't participate in the leg oh
so is going to the story could you pick
me up X they actually have a spreadsheet
so that because I have everyone still
doing their big shop every week to two
weeks but they also have you know like
you forget one thing and you just pop
out to the store not the time for that
so instead it's like put it on it on
spreadsheet and one person when they go
out buys five or six other things for
other people pull the blanket for we can
absolutely the bling apart we had no
issue of like keeping ourselves occupied
it's just clean up after cleaning my
house in general which is always been a
struggle feeling figuring out what I'm
doing in sectioned blocks so that I can
live life outside of that around it like
I I spend a lot of time besides being in
live online an hour and all the other
conversations I had going on just
sitting there just sitting here hoping
the solution to the world comes even
though I know 90% of it like this is a
new problem I wasn't necessarily my
world wasn't necessarily designed for
but it works for the world I like having
a technology cooperative we all owned
together
there are powerful powerful things that
Google could have done during this
pandemic if our government and Google
were in cahoots they could have done
very powerful things and yet we would no
way trust them or would we allow that to
happen and so if we owned Google and it
didn't need to go through our
governments and we were like yes let's
share data let's share data even though
we think we're healthy so that if and
when we get co19 we know what that
looked like and we know who if you're
but if you have access to it you're
willing to share it your genetic
information could give us a lot of
information as to why some people are
asymptomatic and other people died from
this and there's a lot of things we
could do together because a technology
that we own together that you can fully
see the process it was created and the
finances of it everything as much
everything as you can know has more it's
both more powerful because we don't need
that Trust built in I'm not trusting
Google with my information you want
access to my thermometer information
uh-uh
whereas if it's our data pool and we can
see why and you can choose not to share
it right in order to be willing to share
it you have to be able to choose not to
share I believe we could have done much
more like I think anyone to pretty much
brainstorm if you knew this was
happening a year out instead of right
now what would you wanted to have had in
place so that people aren't at home
lonely and bored and I think we're
dealing with that fairly well there's a
lot of stuff going on right now but not
everyone's tapped into it not everyone
like you know you cameras name
picture his name it hidden in my head
something London London something
whatever that's not even probably true
but what is his name Oh anyway he did a
live with his I think his daughter and
his wife were there he's married I see
John Lennon and that's not right at all
it was not John Lennon live from from
his his a apartment anyway you don't
necessary know it's gonna go on so you
might be someone it's like when they
have those um pop-up concerts that some
famous person does and then you meet
over there you learn
and the same we're not gonna watch the
replay of his someone help me out here
oh he's a black guy but with fairly
light skin and he sings like a Moroccan
resident it's kind of in the Michael
Buble type stuff but whatever no why Oh
brain why are you fixated on it John
Lennon mister I can't think what is his
and I can't even think who has wife is
like I can picture her but I can't think
of like what she does I know she's also
famous but legend something legend John
Legend no I'm just gonna Johnny legend
no John Legend it's his name and somehow
even googling it sounds wrong John
Legend so I was so close with John
Lennon so so close and that was a lot of
like this why don't try to not be real
my brain it's like was that needed did
you really need to know the names know
what I was I was a good five minutes
with my brain being off-track and
needing to get back on but it was
something I could Google and a lot of
things you can't Google why am I in the
kitchen what did I forget
we'll be great to look at on that Oh for
at the hour so I am coming on for an
hour every day from 8:30 to 9:30 my time
to standard time I am going to be
looking at finding other people who want
to be on camera and want to participate
in this conversation what I would love
is other people who want to work through
creating a process they could be done
with 10,000 people and $100,000 so
whether that looks like a show that's
actually edited and looks better well
we're actually you know five people
having the conversation other people
watching whether that looks like having
actually 10,000 people involved in the
conversation the point is to work
through work through the process awesome
do you want to come participate
on voice I know you don't necessarily do
it on camera
but I can um I don't know or we follow
each other on Twitter because I can't
send you anything on periscope but I can
send you the link or anyone but I also
on Twitter not today but every other day
and in YouTube
do you follow YouTube YouTube pipe
easier is it on YouTube I in the
description I put the link to the video
if anyone wants to pop on and then I
also do that in the comments on my
Twitter because it's goes live on
Twitter and then anyone can follow those
links and come but on periscope it
doesn't work but you can follow me on
Twitter the same I cried democracy what
I want to do during these seven episodes
and Saturday's is a much shorter episode
I think Saturdays because it's only 20
minutes will be me recapping what we've
done that week two of the days I would
love to be solution raisins on camera so
are working through creating actual
solutions with two to five people during
an hour-long conversation and then I
would love one to two of the other days
to be other people working through the
process working through what could it
look like to create now that we've spent
an hour coming up with a solution we
could implement with 10,000 people and
$100,000 and we have dozens of them how
do we actually get 10,000 people
together what could a process look like
when we're doing this with more and more
and more people not in the old paradigm
of like yes now it's ours the five of us
created this and now we're gonna sell it
to you because that's not the point
what does come up with things that are
enticing that everyone wants to be part
of that are at cost that are like we're
all participating in this and you get to
participate at whatever level you want
to participate it feels right to you if
you don't enjoy being live on camera
then don't do that part if you don't
enjoy and again we can work around like
if someone is just alone be live on
camera but they're a human being then
they can they can be on voice jet no
robots we'll deal with that in five to
ten years one issue at a time no BOTS on
that on it but yeah looking for other
people and also possibly somebody to to
take notes and seven days a week is a
lots to take notes on so basically like
one person per day so someone can watch
and take notes and then send me the
notes and I'll put them in the
description
the video as well as the read read them
and then recap it for the next day so
what someone's able to do that that'll
be great YouTube and Twitter one less
cat my my youtube channel name if you
want to UM
follow me on there is jubilee saves the
world by meandering through life it was
proud democracy I changed it because I
just kept talking about how I know how
to save the world so it's well beyond
dream through life I'm not doing it in
any kind of it can't look like how I
want it to look cuz no one's gonna have
me ten thousand people I'm not gonna win
the lottery and have a million dollars
to work with so it keeps coming closer
and closer to right what can I do within
my space and I can go live on camera and
have a discussion basically anyone so
Jubilee saves the world by me entering
through life on on YouTube is where
these go live we also have our together
tech YouTube channel which is where we
are going live us together tech to work
through creating a technology
cooperative that we all own together and
can operate together my piece of that
and my piece of what I'm here to do in
the world is figure out how do we have a
generative conversation how can we
create a process that people can be
involved in instead of you know having
social media we're making everyone
jealous and broadcast in your best life
what could it look like to have social
media that's actually designed to employ
humanity to save humanity that anyone
can do anything just like you can take a
quick snap your your you know dinner and
make your friends annoying or jealous I
don't know you could easily take a
picture if like the food on your
conveyor belt when you go grocery
shopping and that generates data that
can help us fix the food system like
having simple really easy ways that
people can contribute that they want to
because if you're not good at that you
have to get something out of it and be
giving something to the greater good and
there are so many things that don't have
the individual versus the group
trade-off when we create the technology
to be able to facilitate that we can
create a world that works for every
single person it's not my job to create
a world that works for you as an
individual but you're invited as the
individual to come and make a world that
works for you be your voice say you
can't dictate what anyone else's world's
gonna look like but you can create one
that works for you and that is what
we're gonna do during these hours
so thanks for hanging out today and I
will see you tomorrow