all right I haven't posted in a while
I've been doing my own inner stuff and
the thing that inspired this video was
just being back at my house for a time
being before coming back to the
community I'm living in until tomorrow
when they're pretend ace and I've been
volatile for six years I was the only
one who wasn't able to move into the
community that's still a part of it but
we still participate and there was this
constant fear inside of me of like being
kicked out being ostracized for whatever
reason especially if I got into conflict
with somebody who was in the community
because they own or rent their houses
and I just visit a few times a week and
I realized over a year ago but that man
time wasn't showing up completely myself
it was like oh what if I offend someone
or what if some doesn't like me or what
if someone doesn't I know every area of
my life is I do that in and the more I'm
conscious of it the more I can let it go
and not do that and it's an ongoing
process I don't think I was ever gonna
be it full out not care at all what
people think or I don't even know that
you'd get there and I'm doing this
project this big world project and like
everyone's loved and every like everyone
needs love and everyone's deserving of
that and community and connection and
ostracize for what a bad word is
ostracize someone you kick them out of
your community when you put people in
salt it's like one of the worst pains
you can inflict on a human and I don't
even I don't necessarily think that's
ever the answer but what do you do when
if someone doesn't want to someone's in
a community and they want to cause pain
they want to cause drama and I don't
necessarily think that's what was
happening here
it was my interpretation for a day after
the event for sure less than 48 hours
later I feel like okay it's whatever 48
plus to 66 hours later to return to love
so I'm pretty impressed with myself
because it was a anyway this event
triggered that like it was like
oh I can get kicked like I got into
conflict with somebody and instead of my
fear being realized of like I'm not
gonna it did trigger that for sure like
the actual emotion I'm like nobody likes
me and nobody wants me here because that
was more or less said to me um I think I
have social anxiety of all these
negative thoughts that go through your
head like here's what people are
thinking about me and I'm just like it's
not your business overall but like in
this moment I was like oh this is like
it never actually comes out of people's
mouths like what you think people think
about you it did it takes a lot of
people smells this woman told me that
like I didn't have a disability and I
was faking it and that I was a
freeloader and not not pulling my weight
like beyond that like and then I'm not
welcome here and I need to leave and
ever come back and a little bit from
anger a bit more from a place of law it
was like you know like I'm as big a part
of this community as you are like you
might own your house and we might not
but like I don't know if that matters I
think especially is that some little
anti-capitalist and a piece of you did
think that mattered and now I'm like no
that doesn't matter so this woman in a
real way gave me this big blessing both
because I get to kill that piece of
myself that was like I mean I I'm very
honest about my my conditions overly so
and part of that honesty is that I don't
know how much of it is is physical and
how much of it is mental and even the
mental part I don't know how much of it
is physical how much of it is actually
from neurological damage and how much of
it is from like thought processes that I
could change like like stuff that I
could have control over and stuff that
could change or stuff that doesn't and I
realize it's not really my job to figure
it out especially with my health it's
more about learning from it and
releasing it and I went for an
appointment this morning that I had
medical appointment to get test results
for an ultrasound I had done a week ago
I was really nervous because there was a
possibility it was really horrible news
and it was nothing and that used to
trigger me almost more because it was
like oh this is like a fake and it's
like no my body experiences pain when
there's no pain that's what it does so
that's totally fine anyway I was looking
up cuz I've had this also this this
feeling behind
like what if it's my chakras I know
chakras when they open have more of like
there is pain associated with it there
are these these issues and even like my
my skin crawling on my head where I feel
like there's things or like actually
it's a side of your your chakra nobody
in a bike hmm well just I'm gonna switch
it to that I'm gonna say instead of
neurological damage it's my crown chakra
opening it feels better but this idea of
like villains and society and everyone
look Trump's the worst thing to happen
to the world I'm like I don't know I
think he's kind of the best thing that
could happen to the world because he's
the villain because he is bringing all
of these people into into the world of
like okay clearly no one else is doing
 we need to actually like get our
 together collectively and it's
putting a little bit of fire in for me
for that it's hard because can't really
deal with the fire under me I have to
just allow process and and the ongoing
and I'm working with this coach is
helping me come in touch with my
emotions and things good and even this
one incident where I'm like I the
morning after I woke up I hated this
woman might have been the day after even
that she left the next day and she's
gone for six weeks and I was like she
does so see all that and she is I'm like
okay that's maybe more about what I
blame because I was I was putting all I
don't know she is the sweetest nicest
person which is what I thought until
this incident happened and I'm like okay
is she truly a sweet nice person and
just happens to get into these horrible
things that I was not I then found it
I'm not the only one she's done this on
repeat to punch people or is it that
she's fake nights all this time and in
these instances her crack opens and you
can see her real true self and I don't
even know if there's a difference there
in a very real way of like even I don't
know if the correct term is like
sociopaths even people who want to cause
and conflict like chronic cause conflict
and extend drama and experience and
cause pain to other people even those
people are caught in exactly though
they're supposed to be like part of me
thinks there's a difference like I'm
like oh if you're just in pain I can
have sympathy and love you and if you're
like a sociopath I cannot and like but
that's my fault like that
me that's how me do not be able to love
that but how is this can we as a world
community do we deal with that like
people who kind of are unlovable in
society like sociopaths or pedophiles or
these groups that are like really easy
to villainize is it like is I don't
think the switch is off sighs and from
all of society I think it's that we need
to and I don't know is it is it Oscar is
it like with them let's say you do have
a group of of people that you'd like I
can all the nurses just live on an
island together like a willingly island
like you go I'll be narcissist by
yourself like it can't be that you're
ostracized from all of society you have
to still have love and connection it's
the only way we heal it's the only way
we grow and I think it's our biggest
wound and where most of our violence
addictions and everything comes from is
because we don't have that or we have
that more scared of losing it or scared
of being seen and people not loving us
the more we can be loved for exactly who
we are the better and so thank you to
this woman for giving me all of this
learning experience and sitting there
and plus having like that conversation
with a ton of people because in the
moment it definitely triggered all of my
inner and like oh and is everyone
feel this way about me and I mean if
that was true yeah I don't know if I
wanna be part of this community I don't
know like I don't want to be surrounded
by people who don't like me and think
I'm fake and think that at the same time
if there's people in there that are like
that like that's their not mine
that's I can tell you the one thing I am
NOT is fake I got some issues thickness
is not one of them I'm on the other end
of that spectrum a little too real
little too here's all my information
like word vomit
emotional vomit which is what I've been
doing like all these other people
haven't really been sharing it which is
why I didn't know this woman did this
run repeat they're like yeah I just
ignore her I just like don't talk to her
about anything anymore like that can't
be how this community functions like
that can't be how any community function
it's got a conscious community and so
the community is going to be dealing
with it and figuring out a process to
deal with it both for like the two of us
conflict resolution and the greater
Society of life with this person and
like just everything in general like
just like in general when something like
this happens when there's conflict
between two people how do you how do you
resolve it and I also got
we because I staying at this community
this time has been more than jealousy at
me because people are calling about
their lives and living them without
physical conditions and therefore their
kids are going on camping trips and
there they're going they get to go to
two events that my kid doesn't get to go
to because she has to kind of look
within my limitations and that being
said so I'm totally offered to put my
kid to like the PD and are sorry to
Playland and I it's like now actually
about daycare that she stayed home and I
we missed the opportunity but how
beautiful it somebody even like someone
offered that like yes do that
why didn't I jump at that chance when it
was offered at the Bourbon means they're
waiting but that the depth even when I
am I feel it's very weird to switch this
down so Bell feels like even when I
don't get to leave my house for it for
days on end and are dealing with the
real physical limitations of my body and
mind and my kid has to deal with that
even in that life there is so much depth
Iligan like there's so many more like
emotions to explore and and thoughts and
feelings and community and connection
and like dealing with that drama and
like oh I am I actually I said this to
the percentages of something tonight
believe / believed like what I've been
in relationships with people and we get
into conflict it's over
like I conflict because my body like
feels good can't get back to love like
it's so angry that it's like never gonna
get there and that's not true
because I'm already almost back to love
for this person like I can see one of
the for both like I'm like if it's this
then I can love her and if it's this
then I cannot and I'm like no even
though you need to love like even if
she's looking to cause chaos and drama
there's beauty being here like there's
beauty being that there's a villain that
gets to like um trigger all these things
I don't know like it I don't I'm still
figuring it out and still still working
through it of what do you do as a
community
and that's very much what I'm trying to
figure out for the project unlike this
world saving huge project it's like how
do you deal with that drama why is that
you kind of almost segregate yourself
from people who cut like if you just
don't like someone you don't need to
work with them there's tons of other
people and especially here is very
different is there's no choice for that
because people own their homes and live
there right like it's a it's a monopoly
on that piece of your life and even if
like I was able to have that same thing
in my life somewhere else
it's not the same people and so to be
part of this communities to have heard a
part of it as well and figure that all
out and so that is it was currently
we're done see you today's Friday so
I'll probably see you on Monday
or at some point actually
[Music]