yeah let's do that so I clicked on
record if you like I can upload it nice
hassle for you well you can send me the
file yeah yeah alright yeah because I
you are the host so I can't record on my
end unless I ain't used to me permission
so if you just yeah you can just uh you
know Dropbox or Google drive's the file
to me and I'll upload it on my channel
as well
yeah okay cool yeah let's do that well
what should we talk about well I'd like
to broach a topic with you because I'm
trying to enter into a bunch of
discussions around this topic and I
thought you would be a really good
person to talk to it's sort of the main
theme that you know my serious is
oriented towards and that my channels
building towards and of course i vouched
upon it in this series which you know is
the relate the modern relationship or
the current relationship moderns now
uh-huh yeah a question in terms so let's
call it the current relationship between
science and spirituality and I think
Heidegger has a lot to say about that I
think he does and I was wondering and I
know that you and guy have been talking
about that and I imagine that when the
three of us talk not that long and I'm
looking for after that this will give
sort of maybe some preliminary work like
we don't need to resolve anything or
anything pretentious like that today but
you know get the topic going and then
maybe the three of us could pick it up
how does that sound as a proposal to you
sounds good
yeah yeah um so one who I think sort of
relatively easy way to start might be
with Heidegger's proposal two proposals
perhaps that are linked in my mind
around this question and one proposal is
that the history of Western metaphysics
is basically the history of nihilism
yeah and and then the other proposal is
that this is not just an epistemic
ontology but it's actually woven into
our environmental ontology in terms of
technology the idea of the way you know
technology has convert has basically
in framed us in that ontology put the
world in a standing reserve and it seems
to me those themes are very relevant to
this relationship between science and
spirituality in the current time and as
you know i catched upon those at least
the first one a little bit the second
one but i touched upon the first one in
awakening from the meeting crisis yeah
so I wanted to hear what your your
thoughts are if you think it's fair for
me to bring those two points together
that they're relevant to this topic and
then what some of your initial thoughts
are on that yes I think very relevant as
you know Heidegger speaks of gish still
has the essence of technology which
often is translated as in framing or you
could translate also ask positionality
or precision ingore the concentration of
all forceful demanding positioning so
that everything is turned into a
standing reserve standing ready to be
exploited for the sake of something else
that's the will to will that kicks in
right a will that wills itself you can
kind of lemon addicts a positive
feedback loop like that kicks in here as
well and that's I was capital functions
like etc well that always runs in
parallels of people so Heidegger himself
says in an interview with we had mr.
Richard Wilson late 60s that he's not
against technology
he doesn't oppose it he if I'm finished
getting the Technic I'm not against
technology I he doesn't speak of the
demon in technology of the of something
evil that that's occurring there it
simply just tries to understand its
meaning and he actually also says that
he sees a preview in technology what he
calls a tightness to the event so that's
a very interesting quote that's
something we can pick up at some other
point too because that's weird
but anything that I'd ago when he sounds
publicly miss is also very important I
think then hiding it becomes a sort of a
public intellectual because the idea of
course of hiding as he sits in his Hut
he basically he didn't he lived there
when they were younger and they had no
money
but they didn't live there he lived in
Freiburg and with his family and then
later on back in mezquia in his hometown
but he did spend time in in the heart of
course throughout his life but he was
also very so as he starts working or
thinking through the meaning of
technology and its origin he begins to
be very public so he gives the talk on
the question concerning technology at
the Technical University of Munich to an
audience of engineers and he gives talks
on traditional language and on original
language and technical language to teach
us to high school teachers so simply to
professionals who will then go out into
the world and have to make sense of
what's going on but everything he writes
on technology in framing gift etc is
always in parallel with his writings on
the field which is a weird German word
it means it's usually translated as
fourfold or the four really mortals
awesome earth sky and gods which are or
remain unnamed
but there's that you cannot have one
without the other so in framing Gish
there runs almost in parallel these are
two different dimensions we can wear
kind of in at the same times you can't
have one without the other and this is
what you and you would say the
technological and the the spiritual are
right right okay that's interesting so I
I was taught to translate it as an
framing and that you said that's an OK
translation right right so the idea is
it you know the positioning you might
understand this that this gets into both
of these modes that you've described the
fourfold and the technological and
framing like I want to try and translate
that into more phenomenological terms
for people what does that mean for
people like to say that the like when
you say you know everything is put at a
standing reserve that's
like a purely conceptual thing but
that's deeply not heidegger's point
right yeah I think there's point is I
mean I take it to be something along the
lines you know sort of woven into our
cultural cognitive grammar in a very
profound way so that it's almost
transparent to us it's kind of almost
like the lens through which we're seeing
ourselves and seeing the world yeah is
that an appropriate way of talking about
it it's it's good so transparent I've
not thought of that
term before but it's it's so transparent
that we don't see it right right right
the trouble I think that's an
interesting way of putting it when you
say it's it's it's transparent it's yes
it's it is it has to do I think with
perspectives and it's not just so
exactly it's not about a concept so
Heidegger is not one to give as a
concept by which to understand he says
the way that beings now appear to us as
for example an airplane or a chicken
there's almost no dude there is no
difference because they both in some on
some different level just stand ready to
serve some some means so it's all in a
different terminology you could say it's
all yeah yeah and we do right you think
of like human resource departments at
the University right and your resources
right and there's all this idea and from
talked in a similar manner about you
know the marketing character how we
because we're sort of self promoting
commodities under neoliberalism we reach
you know we have our own brand and
because we have to play with that a bit
to get from within which is you can play
with that matrix but only I think if you
see it but if you purely think of
yourself as a resource you will be
exploiting yourself and that's violent
language so there's a certain violence
in that to ninety he says how else for
them so in opposition to and it this is
a literal opposition to me because he
wants us to come back to a primordial
understanding of nature which is as you
know is fizz's yeah yeah ignorin so
required to says physics group to stifle
a nature likes to hide himself
we can't see nature but the way we
understand nature is that we try to use
it as a tool for our means and that is
to do to come at this from a totally
different perspective from angle for
example that has to do with human
freedom so we are free to do so that's
kind of our emancipation the current
discourse on an Deep Ecology
environmentalism etc recognize that
there's something profoundly at odds
between us and nature what I think we
can read from out of Hegel and out of
hiding it is that nature must have its
own essence it must be allowed to be in
its own terms in its own right and to
some degree this means that nature is
not fully accessible to us and that has
is it that comes back to we can talk
about you know is that does that switch
the accessibility of nature does that
correspond to a switch in us what I mean
is we so we have in a kind of an
egocentric in which we are seeing where
we're thinking of everything of how it's
in service to us and rather you know and
I don't mean sort of at an everyday
level but at a deeper level in the way
in which we might be in service so let
me explain what I mean like Oh previous
cultures saw their you know their soul
their who they are a person who was
there ultimately their being in service
to God right in the direction of the
ontology the direction of service was on
toast centric rather than egocentric so
is that switching in the accessibility
of nature does it also bring with it
like an inversion or a reversal of that
orientation of service yeah definitely
it's that's that's the tragedy of
modernity as a whole I would say that
all of modernity is on that's that's
what so the you know people talk about
acceleration ISM capital whatever you
want to call it what what this is there
is a certain explosion that takes place
in just in knowledge knowledge
production yes and and also a little
explosion in terms of human beings and
and also in power I mean
mystic power our ability to exert power
on the earth it's tremendous now yes but
every time we exert power we we deny
that there is something that remains
hidden and concealed and I at push back
that that'll that'll come to haunt us
right it's like the outline is the
underworld that all of a sudden will
flip and the sheer horror will begin to
show itself
modernity begins and you can call
whatever you call this it has to do with
power an explosion of power and
intelligence yes and that explosion
kicks off I would say when when the key
loss is abandoned
so teleology they can explicitly gets
rid of the Telos yeah yes it was an
impediment to the sciences for 2,000
years so he blames every soul I haven't
come up with the and everything explodes
right so the call there's a wonderful
book by Alexander query which is not
much read today which is from the closed
world or from the cosmos to the infinite
universe right yeah and of course the
multiverse so you can see these
explosions in all directions were
exploding to war see you know infinite
multiverse is but we're also exploiting
exploding further and further down into
the subatomic level and whatever levels
so that explosion goes in all directions
we can mash up everything and it's I
think there's the day cup kind of
articulated is that the ego is at the
center of this self referential ego that
it simply is is holding on to itself and
only in fact is only on itself right
that the contact with the world is so
central in the Aristotelian worldview
has withdrawn into the cogito right kind
of fat exactly so it goes it totally
it's exactly this right it's just but
when you read the meditations right not
an ottoman from from a scholarly
perspective but simply as from a common
sense for even from a common sense
perspective you read it it's quite some
of it is really violent right quite cool
as I'm looking outside I don't even know
if these people are real they could just
what do I know
and then only way that he can come back
outside into the world is because God
guarantees that there's interdependence
between concentrates extensa that's
ultimately even putting God in service
right God's ultimate function is an
epistemic function right gods there to
guarant guarantee or of my truth claims
ultimately which is like again there's
part of this huge huge inversion yet
rather God rather than God representing
the inexhaustible nosov the sacred death
God is now this perfect guarantor of my
assertions which is like yes sir huge
inversion it's yes yeah okay yeah it's
good yes yes because when you look the
way we can look at this now and coming
back to quorus book from the close world
to the infinite universe is something
the book ends with an anecdote from
Napoleon and Laplace
yes % to Napoleon his model of the
universe which is a pure like a
clockwork yeah yeah Napoleon asks the
Laplace but where is God and he says I
no longer need this hypothesis need that
I bother and in is a hypothesis the mass
of the clockwork in Descartes and in
bacon it's already there and that's
simply that's perhaps also an issue
first when he speaks of the death of God
how were we capable of doing this is
precisely because the inexpressible or
the inexhaustible at the exuberance of
the divine
that's totally gone hiding its nest
somewhere the god of metaphysics
I mean you think you point this out as
well in in some of the lectures the god
of metaphysics is not a God you can sing
and dance for yeah it's not a god you
fall down on your knees and all its like
how's our soui
that means the self causing cause it's
just a hypothesis it's nothing that that
could inspire there's nothing dangerous
about this card well there's there's
nothing that will give you an operatic
challenge to cause you to aspire to some
transformation and I mean it's if
there's a couple points I want to make
here and see what you think about that
one that seems to me to be the
culmination right of the idea that we
can do theology talk about God without
have without having done to go any kind
of deep transformation then the next one
is well just list these and then you can
respond to them at length um you talk
about this explosion but it seems to be
inherently bound up with this this
exploitation that we've also been
talking about so while we're getting a
quantitative increase there's kind of a
shallowing going on I was I think I was
thinking when he was talking about that
I was thinking about Hans critique his
Krukow is that you don't need huge
oppressive systems because we have we
have an framing in which self
exploitation is our fundamental way of
being you know he talks about that whole
achievement we just we're just working
to work because things work because
that's how they were because technology
works and it's all that sort of spinning
and I thought that way I thought that
was something you might want to talk
about and then maybe gather that
together back towards because I feel
it's now looming on the horizon of our
discussion which is the history of
metaphysics is the history of nihilism
where that doesn't mean the coming to
the fore of a particular ideological
position it means something more like
this you know this modal emptying of our
capacity to get to the depths of
ourselves and the world things like that
so what does all this refer three points
you can play with have fun points I love
to play with it because meaning first
point was so we can talk about theology
yeah yeah actually that's what we've
been doing right yes yes very much so
what I mean by this is the explosion
works on all levels yes notion of
knowledge and an explosion of historical
data yeah we get access to everything
that's extremely odd because except
while while we have this extreme access
to all kinds of data points and
information at the same time we seem to
be cut off from something rather crucial
which is genuine experience of something
divine religion so we can look at all
the different religions across all
civilizations we'll okay we can find
more and more and more
it seems like we can less and less
access to the divine a short story I
sometimes like to mention by Ian Foster
is the machine stops which describe mind
I think yeah people live on the ground
and all they do is they're connected
like us now online and and they talk
about ideas the word idea is all over
the place it's so they talk about ideas
of all the for example music and in
Aborigine Aboriginal Australian culture
now all of this can be very interesting
and enlightening on some level but it's
never a it doesn't get you and this is
why I think why he makes you know gives
the metaphor of some people living on
the ground it's because they're no
longer even on the earth and there's an
allusion to Plato right there's a I get
to be an allusion to Plato's allegory
there exactly
it's that's okay you know if I would
just I think that we live basically
through the cave right you need to show
itself right that there's truth to what
philosophy is trying to tell us and so
we and the same counts of course for
philosophy itself but we've never had so
philosophy is it's not dying actually in
academia
so yes it's be getting defunded all over
the place but there are more
philosophers probably now than ever
before and there's all kinds of
historical engagement with any kind of
philosophical school ever that there
ever was but the question is is there a
genuine access to these experience this
is something Heidegger says again and
again is you can read all of this but
you have to have made the experience
even the experience is lacking then it's
kind of a simulacrum of the of the real
thing and this was part of how those
critique - right I mean I think that was
one of his main ideas sorry for
interacting but I thought that was a yes
what it's so and this is something that
I think hide again meetcha meetcha
himself just by the way he lived
I showed us that it needs if without it
being genuine where we begin to do is we
begin to look back and and just applies
this kind of isn't or is it that kind of
isn't there's a very short note behind
again in a book that I think it's
volume 14 or 13 I'm not quite sure
anymore
it's just five sentences and it's an
introductory remark he added to the
whole city to off the beaten track in
the 50s or 60s and a short paragraph he
says something very weird he says the
history of metaphysics has not you know
as fulfilled itself has come into
fulfillment but we're now only just now
we have to come to terms with it so we
are now facing what metaphysics has
tried to grapple with and I think that's
what we're living through but because he
says technology is an extension of
metaphysics yes and this is what we're
trying to make sense of and I think
frankly that this is why people come and
and watch your stuff for example is
because it's it's it's it's it's not oh
you know is it this kind of ism or is it
that kind of isn't but no it's trying to
read from all of what's coming there as
a wave that's coming from women from
it's coming back at us and we're trying
to make so meaning crisis what's the
meaning crisis there there's something
at stake meaning itself that means so
that the question right the question of
being is the question for the meaning of
be there with you find reconnect and
we're trying at the same time not just
to look back it oh they could argue this
and think they can I get this no we're
trying to make sense to what is coming
yes yes yes yeah and good I'm sorry I
told the other I'd let you play but I
just I want it so I mean I think yeah I
guess there's a point here that I think
that should be emphasized right this
this isn't because some time here this
our computation of a dagger and I don't
know if it's serve Heydrich it doesn't
seem to me it is but regardless it's not
fair to my thinking so I want to state
that which is all of this argument is
not an argument for nostalgia it's not
like we some people are somehow just oh
I'll just reject the scientific world
view as if enough like they don't get
how permeated like we've the way we've
been talking about how permeated it is
into our oncology our way of in framing
the salience Landscaping review our
concepts of identity notice that's the
level we've been talking about we
haven't been talking about this at the
level of all I just won't use this tool
all right
believe in the theory of evolution we're
not talking about science at that level
we're talking about it as you said here
as the culmination of a particular
metaphysical history yeah and you page
it you can choose Oh Alex let's just
reject all that that's not being argued
for here that's what I want to claim at
least yes and and I mean that that would
be that would be the the very violent
project of the futari small future
futurist movement out of Italy from the
early 20th century they wanted to cut
they wanted to burn down everything it
was left of Rome and kind of buried yeah
bury it under a little concrete and make
way for the future but but science
itself then that the scientific
worldview is just that it is a worldview
it doesn't it's not absolute it's not
total I would say presuppositions of in
hiding for example says science does not
think he says that's not a criticism
that means science itself is just a
methodology as soon as the scientist
begins to think for example a physicist
begins to think about certain particles
that physicists it's a metaphysician yes
never it begins to be philosophy and and
it's not about certain believes do you
believe in evolution or anything like
that no I think it's what are the
presuppositions of and what out of what
is something arising and and without I
think without knowing where this comes
from
that there cannot be this revolution in
thought or consciousness to speak with
with hangul that people I have to at the
moment
mmm you see where what I'm trying to say
i I think I think so I mean and that
sort of I mean for me that point in the
point the second point I gave you to
play with are deeply into woven I think
you know Hans critique to be that you
know this has permeated so deeply into
us there you know and and you know and
it's bound up with other things our
Protestant heritage etc but that whole
idea that we are we're in a fundamental
mode of self exploitation which I
thought was kind of a really profound
insight and how we've been sort of
tariff
and you know and this was it's it's so
short in the agony of ecstasy right
right there know the agony of era sorry
there's this little tiny three page
critique of Foucault but I thought wow
that was sort of I thought it was one of
the most brilliant things I've seen it's
like no no we did I mean we don't it's
not so much we don't he basically says
we don't need to panopticon's state
because all we have to do has deeply
internalized and identified with self
exploitation and we will just work
ourselves to death for capitalism right
and that's what I mean about you can't
just sort of say oh well I'm not going
to it's in the way we work it's in the
way we like it's in the way we think
about ourselves yeah that's how profound
it is yes so it's not coming from the
outside that's right that's right
so the panopticon is us yes watching
ourselves we're objectifying ourselves
an experience becomes real when we put
it up on Instagram exactly that's a
perfect example and then ultimately for
all that technological connectedness the
loneliness and the radical discontent it
breeds within people yeah that's that's
a perfect example of what I'm talking
about
and that's why I think these weird
conversations that were having online
yeah learning - yeah because people
because this is not scripted know we've
talked once before for an hour which
wasn't recorded and we'll have other
conversations but there wasn't we didn't
I didn't email you anything no nothing
there's nothing it's just happens or it
doesn't happen yes yeah and but there's
something about so experience and so
looking at Hana this kind of this you
know this is a positive but there's also
something something the self
exploitation is the self doing it to
itself there's nothing coming from the
outside this is why you know and framing
yes that this is us doing it so it's
it's decision so what is being being is
very simply ends clients that's Latin
beings as beings being is the ass being
is just in the ass so beings show up as
standing reserve that speak meaning is
not some magical
entity that's odd like in floating
around doing something it has to do with
a hermeneutics that is historical that
is larger than us that overcomes us
we're born in throne as Heidegger would
say thrown into it and then have to make
sense but and and as for you read so we
cannot you know as a not like a toolbox
we can reconfigure beings being itself
at will but we can see that there are
other dimensions other areas within
being right within this interpretation
of beings and all of a sudden it no
longer just is a standing reserve but
there's that has to do I think with
accepting death and finitude because the
this logic of self exploitation for the
sake of self exploitation etc etc what
that always blinds out is limitation
finitude exactly flames that oh I just
wanted to just again because I'm ready
because I'm I want to be careful about
the uptake of certain these terms I
think it's completely right to use the
word hermeneutic and interpretation but
again you're not describing something
that is just just or even focally
cognitive it's not that kind I mean
there's a cognitive dimension to it but
we're talking about this like this
foramen UNIX is in well you know sort of
the the your the grammar of your
existential moding yeah it's not well
you know what it will well you're why
would he meant there when he talked
about hermeneutics is you know I sit
back and I reflect and I think and I
come up with and when I'm talking about
that that's not what we're talking about
we're talking about well something that
if you'll allow me my language and I use
Dreyfus as a bridge from Heidegger to
this language I think this you know this
gets down into the guts of our relevance
realization machinery now fundamental
process by which you know our agency in
the world and salience landscape and
what stands out and how it stands out
for us as you said the way things are
you know beings coming to be as
particular beings I think that I'm
talking about that level I'm not talking
well that I think and I think you are
too we're talking about that kind of
funding there hermeneutics that
constitutes our agency not the
hermeneutics that is out but after our
agency is sort of established and we do
some reflective stuff because that her
yes because this is what hiding already
points out in being in time as as you
know is that
a hermeneutic circle isn't sitting down
yep
writing something and then
reinterpreting some texts no the dot
design itself right the openness to
being to that beings appear as something
right but the tree can be a source of
energy the tree can also be the Tree of
Life in the Bible these are totally
different on ontology almost that the
hermeneutic circle is the way that
design is in the world
exactly exactly exists and exists has to
do with time and all of this comes in
but yeah it's not is it's it's much
deeper than just the reflective right
good what modernity wants us to do right
that's what Descartes wants us yeah
exactly I everything and put everything
into doubt methodologically
life at some absolute certainty and that
is what Heidegger pulls the rug under
from from the beginning that's what he
pulls that away and says the only
certainty das eine can have his death
yeah it's a bit of a you know brutal
maybe but he I think so the cogito ergo
film which takes takes modernity on its
trajectory it's counted behind ago and
he says so Mori bundles I am because I
am towards my death and this being
towards this ultimate horizon gifts is
what then grants meaning because when
you begin to see the finitude of
anything but that's the word I wanted to
pick up on yeah yeah so when people hear
this they hear just the finality of
death they don't hear the finitude
of mortality and those aren't I mean
they're not disconnected from each other
but they're you shouldn't reduce the
latter to the former right the the fact
that we're in the finitary predicament
as Chania talks about it is really
really fundamental to the I mean I in
fact argue this extensively that's
fundamental to our capacity of making
meaning at least meaning in life kind of
meaning that we don't have that if we
weren't in the finicky finitary
predicament we wouldn't be cognitive
agents at all it's it's right it's just
it's in the very guts of our ability to
make sense yeah
yes we couldn't simply because there
there would be nothing to protect the
death establishes this ultimate horizon
and against which
rise ins just light up and begin to make
sense and this there's this this there
is something the weird thing is to get
across that it's it's not morbid it's
not not mystic or anything like this
it's it's to say that look look at the
wonderful moment
that's just so a curse a red LED today
is the pretty say yeah that just occurs
but it also occurs because bound up with
it is already it's it's its limitation
its ending its it it will end this day
will end and then it becomes a memory
but it's it it isn't nothing that who
would just extend out forever
yeah there's a new stance of standing
now could have this kind of exuberance
Beauty
I tried to get into that when I brought
I tried to bring in in one of the
lectures that Buddhist notion of you
know the horror of immortality oh I want
to know you don't like a real challenge
because it would just it would just it
would like I tend to think you know of a
salience landscape almost topographical
right and then if you stretched it out
right you would sort of lose all the
topography and you would get the
absolute flatness of kind of an absolute
nihilism because why would anything
matter more than anything else why would
you do one thing all of this yeah
exactly
all of it all of it goes away and so I
mean I wonder if there's a because I
know how to get it and pick this up but
there's there's a there seems to be a
little bit of a I might be over reading
so some allusions until it towards this
that there's a there's a deep complicity
between sort of the you know the project
of immortality and and and and and this
kind of forgetfulness that we're talking
about right there the idea that you know
well you know well this project is the
ultimate project is for me to live
forever and that right and so you see
what I'm suggesting I this is not a well
work there thesis but it's we're talking
here there's an idea here that there's a
there's a there's a there's a hidden
complicity between the immortality
project and nihilism emergence of
nihilism that's what I'm suggesting
absolutely I think it's yeah I think
that that's that that's more work more
brainpower needs to go into that that
suggestion that idea that trajectory
because that's absolutely the case
I think I what we're trying to find out
why immortality and and increasing
nihilism of the crisis of meaning
collapsing is there now why is that we
could come at it simply from from from
Hegel for example we could say you know
life that is that doesn't face up to
death is just sheer immediacy your
immediacy is that's excessive in the
phenomenology sheer immediacy is just
sheer givenness and once you live in
sheer givenness and there's no
resistance is there's no opposition to
you then everything becomes again flat
right and Nietzsche says something goes
because we're riffing off for you but so
Nietzsche says the last man lives
longest he threatens the earth so this
idea of flattening oh yeah and life
Hegel says the full life life that
breathes itself subsumes death and
strides through death because that's
negativity so without negativity you
don't even live in sheer immediacy but
immediacy must be mediated and it's
immediately through negativity it you
can also say that education something we
both care about deeply very much nation
is not something you can consume there's
a struggle and struggle means there's
something that that's resisting there's
something that you don't don't
understand that you are that's
negativity so you have to strive through
what you don't know and then you get to
a place where you begin to know but
that's not something you can just
download into your brain
because you know the advocates of of
transhumanism for example who want to
live forever have digital itseif or that
everything is just a given is like the
matrix Oh
neo do you do you know how to fight no
will just upload it to your brain
um you can like that's that if there is
no struggle there's no push back you
won't would you learn how to walk yeah
you need to learn how to walk by getting
up and falling back down and getting up
again and until it's if you know how to
walk okay so there's two there's two
riff points to come out for that one is
because you know I'm doing the work on
the after Socrates project and we lost
the role of the operatic right we've
lost the importance of aporia right
we've lost the importance of aporia
so that I think is points direct and how
central that is to dialogic reasoning as
opposed to mana logic reasoning because
you know we sort of we keep doing this
we sort of get to them and like we even
have these little momentary aporia's
that there and then they get folded back
in yeah and then well sorry I think I
lost my other point what oh jeez it was
a good one too there was the a pyretic
the loss of that and I was trying to
think about something you said oh yes
and then the decades that now I remember
thank you um dis dis brings because I
alluded to Tillich until it has that
idea right it's it's a hey Gillian but
it's also posed to Gillian you know that
the God beyond the god of theism is the
God that always is taking on being back
into himself right and that and that and
I thought which is like III don't think
that people get how radical I mean I
think the kyoto school and not they saw
they got oh wow he this is really this
is a really radical thing he's doing
he's proposing a deep kind of non-theism
right because he's he's he's saying i
think right that we should give up a
perfectionist model of god that god is a
finished completeness right and that we
should we should stop trying to achieve
you know you know that kind of
everlasting completeness
perfection that that is a fundamental
inappropriate framing of the divine you
noted because he was dealing with
demeaning crisis I mean that's clearly
the case and the courage to be and he
was saying like we've got to
fundamentally break out of that way of
thinking in a deep deep way so I give
you sort of two things to play with
there on that one we still have to get
back to the history of metaphysics as a
history of Allen which kind of doing it
yes
so a Portilla yeah gratz a key notion
and this is I think it was important
just as an aside on hiding it hiding it
is not deep I think doesn't I think of
these does not deconstruct does not want
to get rid of metaphysics or our any of
the texts no it's just reading and
picking up on something that's lost in
the tradition yeah we have to do with
this forgetfulness and the oblivion of
being there's much like so much that
comes together and he says for example
in a letter to one of his friends that
Heraclitus is right behind him yeah yeah
and I don't think that that's a metaphor
but aporia is a wonderful nurse because
it it can mean of course you're being
perplexed by some logical argument is
something that doesn't really conclude
or it just means what it means which is
roadless yeah no longer a rote yeah and
that of course just by association is
reminiscent of heidegger's holiday give
well track of going into the woods so
finding your own path
so the road listeners isn't just the
perplex perplexing collapse of all
meaning it actually is an invitation is
an emanation she's fine you just like
being in time ends on a question some
people read this book and then saw it's
all collapsing I don't know why didn't
he write the second version when I
finished reading and I thought wow it
ends on the question could it be that
perhaps time right because he doesn't
conclude he'd leaves it open and by this
leaving open in this aporia in this road
residents one has to go off and find
your own path so you have to not repeat
anything that someone has said but you
go off and from out of what are your
reading you you begin to find you pause
and I think the meaning crisis itself
or nihilism is that sort of on the one
hand is this meaning itself disappearing
but in an invitation at the same time
for for it to make a comeback if we
respond to that current situation
appropriately oh and there's lots of
people I'm in discussion with not just
philosophical discussion but people who
are building communities of practice
yeah who are taking that up I mean they
might not articulate it technically as
clearly as you and I are doing right now
and that's not meant as a criticism
though at all
they're out there real time and talent
like no no there's an AA or okay I know
fundamental transformation a
reorientation
you
you
there we are I hope the hell yeah what
happened there you lost
oh no I think so yeah sure sorry I hope
it was real okay we'll just edit that
out you know sort of you sort of come to
a complete shock there which was good
yeah
I was trying to also I was just saying
you know there's people out there that
are doing exactly what you say they're
they're sensed the Cairo's they're
sensing the opportunity and they're and
they're responding to it again not
primarily propositional II but you know
much more existentially pervasive and
profound since I also wanted to know it
because I see that like like you know
wrapping up Sarajevo Robbie's book on
you know Socratic wisdom and platonic
knowledge and the role of aporia for
waking people up for bringing them from
making them sort of remember the being
mode remember that they are the beings
who be who's being as impressed should
remember that they in addition to all of
their knowings they have this they have
an awareness of themselves as no words
and like and this sort of profound right
that that are you still there yeah yeah
you cut up for a sec that sort of
profound realization that we write that
that we have a well you know how do
there seems to talk about it that we
have a kind of responsibility that the
other things we encounter don't have
because we are the beings whose being is
in question yeah so what I'm trying to
say I guess clumsily is I'm trying to
say that what aporia does is wake you up
to the fact that you are the being whose
being is in question and that puts me
that means to me that it that's I did I
think there's a deep connection it's not
just happenstance or it's not just
historical there's a deep connection
between aporia and dialogue alright
because we are dialogue is a much more
powerful way for us to bring ourselves
into questioned right because of the way
we can question and quest we can
question each other and quest together
beyond you know our sort of stable
conceptualizations so I think there's a
deep there's a deep connection between
in Emporia like they I think they sort
of really need each other because you
you see that right you've sort of the
Socratic conduction of aporia of like
people have all of these they have this
machinery that we've been talking about
throughout our conversation that
protects them from waking up in you know
in kind of a pernicious manner right and
you right yeah exactly right and and uni
and one of the things that dialogue does
I mean I'm sort of riffing on the
opposite of idea that hell is other
people but other people are openings
right go ahead go ahead I've gotta you
can you said kissed because that was can
you say a bit more on on what stopping
people to wake up I want to like I said
I think well part of it what we're
talking about yeah no and I mean there's
this long argument and Awakening about
this deep historical cultural cognitive
grammar that kind of in frames us and I
and when I do that in my mind I'm
thinking of by analogy right you know
things like the nine dot problem where
we have a framing of the problem and it
fundamentally yet it prevents us from
seeing what needs to be seen I'm using
it in that sense and so we yeah it's
kind of profound cultural cognitive
grammar and our way of being in the
world and we get its monologic it's self
exploitation itself speaking and I'm
ultimately talking to myself because all
that I touches myself hajikko it's all
this yeah what dialogue can do if if
it's deal logos and not just discourse
yes it can induce aporia because that's
what the Socratic encounter is in my
mind you get this person who comes in
looks like they're gonna do this course
with you and then he goes aha
right he does this thing where and then
suddenly there's a pouria yeah wake up
to who it like who you wake up to the
aspirational challenge you wake up to
the fact that you are the being who's
being is in question
that's the Socratic moment par
excellence in my mind that is that I
take it that Socrates claim is bad and
that alone can motivate you to true
philosophy anything else is kind of an
intellectual curiosity or desire is
following like it's a desire to
manipulate or win arguments
but only then you wake up to the you or
the being whose beings in question then
and only then can you pursue wisdom in a
deep fashion that's what I mean about
the deep connection between dialog the
Ilocos of waking life and I would say I
would add to that language itself is of
course at the at once the greatest
danger and on the other hand also the
what could lead to an awakening there's
a wonderful quote but I which I only can
paraphrase from awesome Mandelstam was a
Jewish Russian author he wrote on poetry
that you know speak speech and every day
in everyday situations is automatic we
just say certain things how are you I'm
fine you know bla bla and everything's
kind of just automatic and we don't
really question something he says poetic
speech interrupts this
yes exactly teaching so many students
I'll say I don't oh we're gonna do some
poetry oh no no don't don't be poetry
what I want you to do for the next week
is Carolina journal and catch all the
metaphors you're using and also catch
all the metaphors you're enacting with
your gesture yes instead of it being
let's go back to our earlier language
instead of it being transparent to you
step back there's they uh that's the
Socratic moment step back and see it
rather than automatically seeing through
it wake up to what and what is it
reflecting back to you about the kind of
being you are that your language is
permeated and afforded by all this
metaphor both spoken and enacted and
then then they wake up to the
possibility of poetry because if you
just have them start reading text it's
just oh well you know what did the
author thing write what they do and oh
he's writing in Victorian England he's
clearly representing yeah but you see
that's that there's something there's
something very profound you mean it's
kind of funny because we're talking on
the same kind of on the same plane right
because it makes us laugh I think
because what we're seeing is that
there's no thought that goes into this
and we can very quickly say like
so this is 18th century German poetry
this must therefore mean blah blah blah
blah and this was written in 20th
century America this must mean
bah-bah-bah
so it's already formatted that's already
a format and this is everywhere
everything is a format so there is this
I live in London the places here that
you have to go visit when you're in
London because they're all on Instagram
their Instagram Abul there's there's a
road in Edinburgh in edit mode which is
now people at people who live there
actually now I've started petitions to
get people banned people from even
entering the street because it's overrun
because people go there because it's you
have to be there and have to get that
Instagram shot so it's already a format
now I mentioned before the red LED today
a day that just so occurs that in its
finitude reveals its beauty its unique
beauty for just one day for all times to
come we can now buy in the UK I think
for from some company red LED today's so
we can buy the format it doesn't in the
next step of capitalism is of course it
you don't even do it you just pay for it
and then why why would you even do it
right it's and it's everywhere be
romantic weekend in the countryside you
can't plan for it to be romantic you
know either first or it doesn't like
arrows itself but you mentioned harm
spoken on arrows arrows is this not
fully revealed 'no snap full
transparency there's some concealment
there's something hidden this mystery
and that is other is with frosted arrows
to some degree right the other is always
beyond your grasp or it's not genuine
arrows it's just it's just rock
consumption yes yeah and you mentioned
the word Kairos before yes
Kairos is the algún bleak the blink of
an eye then you cannot will for it to
occur no you just anymore that you can
will an insight to happen you can do
things that increase your receptivity
for when it might never right and you
can afford it but you can't you can't
manufacture it and I think that's not
something else we've lost we've lost the
distinction between affordance because
you know
Heidegger ah Allu uses a lot of
cultivation metaphor
and we have completely lost it in the
notion of manufacturer right and there's
right like we can afford we can afford a
lot right we can afford a lot and we
confuse that with a waste of whether I
think you're alluding to that we can
manufacture things yeah I have to go
soon
so the I mean well I think let's let's
let's pick this up well when the three
of us yeah when I had guys tense talk
talk there you know there's a lot here
I'll let it out any of the parts where
there was a gap yeah yeah but I think
well I'm gonna use my own language yeah
we afford it a lot the return to that
final question about the history of
metaphysics as the history of nihilism I
think we've laid a lot of affordance
down front we could pick that up and
extend the conversation with with God
because I think he would really like
that I think he'd also like the stuff we
were saying towards the end about the
deep connection between aporia the
interruption yeah Louis's as opposed to
just pronouncement I think I think I
think that would be excellent yes let's
do that
oh you know we're gonna push keep
talking up this was such a joy such a
pleasure I hope you enjoyed it very much
very much it was it was thoroughly jazzy
for me it was a it is like jazz isn't
there it should be are you a musician do
you make music oh it's one of the great
longings of my life because I've often
um you know I've often been in
relationship with people who are
musicians might be his gifted musically
and it gives her a capacity for
connecting to things I get us I mean I'm
a poet I write poetry yeah that's that
that's it there's something musical yes
and I'm a Tai Chi player and that in
Chinese it's the same verb is to play
music you play Tai Chi so I have a deep
sense of it but are not myself a
musician so yeah but there's there's
something poetic it was awesome thanks
very much I'll send you the file that
yeah and I recorded I recorded it here
too okay perfect perfect oh cool I don't
have to send it to you actually well if
I got problems on my end but we've got
redundancy and if you want it to like we
each have it and if the other needs that
we can send it if they need it
perfect to see you in a couple of nice
yep
I'm looking forward to it this was so
exciting thank you very much sir thank
you excellent conversation deeply easily
be fun yes I very much enjoy it thank
you so much thank you thank you