[Music]
were the ones that were the Wanderers
between worlds right and we somehow
found each other but it's interesting
because the finding of each other seems
to be contributing to like a deeper
sense of wondering we're like wonder
well they would like we're wondering
together right where there's a sense of
huh wandering and wander the two words
kind of sound the same right totally in
we're peers right it's like there's a
sense of like peers like is the to be
appears to peer to stand together in
peer right you're deeply and there's a
way that where I feel more fearful when
I I get done with these conversations my
ability to peer into things and to
wonder and to to attend to things so the
we for me is I have all these kind of
people on some level that I walk around
with in my head hmm
like so these conversations open up a
door and it's not just like I'm actually
thinking about the person having a
dialogue with them it's more like the
dialogue is in the the the question
marks that these conversations bring up
that might my thought my feelings and my
observations and my tracking of things
hmm attract right you know and and I
wonder and added these open questions
that I sit with and ponder about that
have all been that's the we all the
people that have contributed to that I
think my whole life but it just in a
very concentrated way lately in this
last year what's yeah there's an
intensification of this process that
you're talking about I think yeah and
also in my life it feels like it's
taking over my so I could you know I
could look at myself and in two ways I
could look at my job and you know and
the things I do and and
and the things I do for money or you
know whatever things I I do just to
survive in this world which is not
always you know simple right yeah and
then and then and then and then this
kind of passion in this interest and all
this stuff and all these people which is
taking over that like and and I'm I want
those two I want I want I wanted to take
over completely in some sense you know
uh I want the whole thing to just take
over my life
right right you want to be fully
possessed not partially yeah yeah that's
awesome
yeah like that possession is just you
know just can be completely you know
swallowed up by meaning instead of
wandering around in the zombie light
state doing things that are not fully
you know valuable ER yeah its own and
you're you're you just you've just
recently recently moved to Paris right
no I've been here for ages now actually
oh you have okay I I just I just
recently moved outside of Paris I'm kind
of on the edge of Paris I'm in Avalon
France which is next to Fontainebleau
which is I don't know do you know Gege
Jeff oh yeah III it's it's right next to
his his grave you know I moved down here
because I wanted to be next to dagger
Jeff's grave I mean that's all man that
reason you're right
that's awesome like if Kurt Jensen like
it he may be the more I understand her
Jeff he may be one of my he may be
probably one of my heroes I think yeah
me too we have that in common as well I
guess yeah yeah yeah yeah I know a DC's
influenced a lot of well it it's uh it's
arguable but you could say he's the he's
the the first inkling of the east to the
west facism into like exactly idea like
a mystic could be somebody who's not a
mystic but somebody who's a walker of
this world too I think he was the first
person to even conceptualize it like
that yeah like the Fourth Way
seems to be like that's that's what
everybody's reaching towards on some
level Gurdjieff's 4/4 way I think and
somet in any way C was the first one to
bring language to for this together so I
would imagine I can kind of almost feel
like if we're talking about I could kind
of feel his hand right underneath
underneath underneath that kind of made
that possible I mean I read some of the
stuff that he's in what people have said
about him for one it's like depending on
who's describing them it's a different
Gurdjieff which is fascinating hmm right
and and some of the stuff oh my god this
is really kind of out there and strange
at a Content level but like but just
this notion of that that a person who
works and is in the world he can
actually treat transcendence in
meaningful ways if that wasn't even a
consideration before like it seems like
he was a part of the category right that
allowed us to think we could or couldn't
right and so I feel I can it's funny I
haven't thought about him a long time
but like that's I can kind of feel his
hand underneath all of this yeah all
right I think you are you moved right
next to him yes I had had to be next to
him I had to be I'm not a Gerty Afyon
practitioner or anything like that but i
but i but i also it's a very beautiful
place and it's on the edge of paris so
yes so it's it allows me to access to
Paris without having to live in the big
city right and there's a big forest all
around which is which is which is nice
for our family right totally in the
family and I heard you I want to hear I
want to hear a little bit about your
family and like I heard you say in one
of your conversations something about um
this is the most adult I've ever been
yeah well I I think I didn't even grow
up till I was about 40 I think I just
spent my
that my early life fooling around yeah I
was interested in two things fooling
around and spiritual practice probably
those two things
uh-huh but i but i but i I never say it
took me a long time to settle some well
I've been I've been in uh sin and in a
good relationship for some time right
now so that's that's not that true
anymore but that's what's that what
makes it good well what is what is the
phrase you used in one of your
conversations with Jordan I think it was
secure attachment mmhmm yeah that's good
yeah and that's that's that's novel
again that's like something I wouldn't
think that that could happen to somebody
like me yeah I would imagine it it's
funny because he talked about being a
walker between worlds and wanderer and I
said I can't help but think of Hermes
right like Hermes is you know the it
Hermes is this kind of unique God you
know herb you nedick's like like the you
know the kind of God of language which
which is this in-between world right so
Hermes isn't like is not completely a
god and not not completely human but
this this between worlds but like it's
home is the place where they
paradoxically come together so language
right so it's on one level it's like
language is very paradoxical obviously
because it's like the word isn't the
thing that it describes yet it makes the
thing available and it couldn't be
without it
that whole home homelessness kind of
thing and I think I think it was I in it
I think it was Hillman pointed this out
I think it was Hillman where he talked
about it's interesting he talked about
that Hermes I think mythically is wedded
to Hestia or one of the goddesses that
is the goddess of domesticity
right and he and he talked about like in
his clinical practice where how if home
if Hermes goes manic and like divorces
his wife you end up with these kind of
poo air yeah like you know boys you know
or Icarus going you know flying too
close to the Sun and then falling right
you both but when hermes is in right
relationship right it's interesting how
like how this this this homelessness
right it's is wedded to domesticity and
so when you said truly yeah that he's
very trying yeah my life it also made me
think of you know the Buddhist teacher
took him trippy he talks about you know
if you become a Buddhist you take refuge
in being homeless so so there's this
sort of like was the sort of paradox is
is like is like okay you're not going to
be attached to some place but at the
same time you're making a commitment to
something yeah um yes say that against
it so that kind of hit me being refuge
to how did you put that well you take
refuge is like a traditional Buddhist
thing right you take refuge in and you
take refuge in being homeless right and
not being attached to you know there's
different levels of it not attached to a
place but also not attached to an
identity or not attached to something at
the same time it's it's a strong
commitment so so I guess that's the did
that when I thought of the domesticity
and the let's say the wildness me being
and creating something that's kind of
alive does that not make sense totally
well I would imagine in some level you
know there's you know if I look if I
watch you for example like all of a
sudden kind of hearing I get the sense
of like oh yeah but maybe the right cuz
I know
for me marriage and this whole thing
never had secure attachment before yeah
no well yeah I didn't like until I had
it I was I I started to experience it I
was like whoa what the hell is this
right this is what I used to what used
to look like prison to me feels like the
deepest freedom in the world right like
you know and one of those so it's so
simple but but I kind of got this sense
of oh yeah like the right thing goes in
the center of the mandala and then the
whole mandala yeah I think right and so
I know yeah I just kind of got that
sense of just like here you are like on
some level one at least my experience of
you is your things are gathering around
you like your channels right you're
right there's a stability in your
presence at least not lying and what I'm
hearing you talk about like there's a
get you as a place where you there's a
some kind of stability that some
gathering or it's coming yeah well I
seem to have the knack for meeting
interesting people that's for sure I
think it's important to be a student and
to have you know on some level right
yeah I think that's one of the things
that's missing in this culture is is
that people people who you know people
don't look for older people you know as
models models for them and I've always
done that so I've always I've always
almost met very powerful older older men
usually yeah uh-huh and and learned
learned that way what happens in my own
family situation it was very let's say I
I spent most of my teenage taught tied
with my with my mother right yeah you
know and I and I kind of experienced the
feminine world very very intensely as a
younger person and I I didn't I didn't
relate to the masculinity and the same
time I guess there was a search for for
like cosmic father figure on some level
and
oh yeah totally so that there's a sipper
there's a way there's a way where I
would have met for one as I late to that
right I relate to that sense of what I
personally had people that have been
just really really deep and smart and
wise and multiple dimensions um
throughout my life that take me under
their wing and and and in some way one
of the things that they did is they
taught me how to learn I think right
like the Emmy stories they relate to me
in some way that would have some wisdom
right and I they they on one level I was
learning everything that they were
teaching me but at another level I think
I was they were simultaneously teaching
me how to be taught how to learn mm-hmm
and I think that's got really deep in me
made me think of you you mentioned
Heidegger and I remember there's a quote
Heidegger saying the bet that the best
teacher is the top learner like he's
learning all the time and people are
just being lifted up with him yeah so
it's not that he's teaching people he's
he's learning and then he's lifting up
everybody
right totally yes exactly letting learn
I think he's so so being around somebody
like John Verve a key or or Alexander
bard or another guy who I know isn't
nobody knows him name tract om Kapoor
who I study tantric Buddhism with this
is there's there's this incredible
there's incredible demand at the same
time there's a kind of sweetness that
goes along with it it's
homes yeah there's a sweetness and I
think that's that sweetness so I was
just thinking about it you're like yeah
I'd somehow attract these really like
intensely almost intimidatingly wise
people right so I would imagine just
there's this kind of like there's a
there's a way that you probably listen
right and attend to those relationships
that draws out
I would imagine like bard for example
probably just draws out all this stuff
that he loves to talk about right like
because there's something about it's not
it's like it's not just it's not just
him right there's you speaking
presupposes eliciting right there's no
speak you without listening in fact if
there is it becomes really really worth
speech sure there's a kind of that
there's a a just imagine like that like
a like the respiration or of the lung
right there's a kind of like an opening
right the draws in and I and I think I
think about the people in my life
because it's really something to be able
to listen to somebody's story right mmm
like to listen to a story in fact you
gonna listen to a story over and over
and over and over again like I think I
just exhausted my grandfather like all
the stories and I've listened to him my
dad like and I would just want to listen
to him over and over and over again
there's there's something about that
kind of dwelling with somebody in story
and inhabiting it that we want to be
part of a narrative we want to be part
of a grand narrative you know that's
what we're longing for us to be part of
this grand narrative right yeah yeah and
yeah and what do we love more than
anything else that's that stories I mean
that's what we love the most
mm-hmm I mean that's what's most
compelling to human beings is is
narrative isn't it mm-hmm
yeah and trying to situate ourselves
with it within that narrative and yeah
yeah yeah
situating and and and then what just
bringing it back to the very thing that
we need that you brought up in the
beginning of being a walker of
between worlds mm-hmm you know on some
level that's kind of I would say it
would be is the that's what we're doing
constantly right now we are the
Wanderers right or the her munetaka like
you know at the edges of the at the
borders of things is we're continually
situating ourselves right but the
situating is is a verb right it's like I
think that we have to I would imagine
like for baekje what he talks about is
like you know on some level he's really
really it seems to me that a lot of his
work is he's really trying to put the
propositional in the rights not get rid
of the propositional right now get rid
of the definite certainty but but reveal
reveal the knowing upon which those
certainties arose out of so we can stand
on them to to to dive deeper in the
mystery in stick because he seems to be
to me what it seems like is he's like
like look we got a look at what's
emerging we have to look at the process
and the intelligibility of the process
right and not be blinded to it by our
heed for certainty and all the all the
stuff that goes underneath that so
there's a I would say that that there is
a commonality of all the people that
we've been talking to that have this
quality of being a walker of two worlds
and and and and our so our home in some
way is continually deepening a that
which situates right you know which
seems to be more or less of a period and
more of a question mark right you want
to restore the question and yeah you
know as as you were talking about I had
about 15 different things coming through
my head like I would say I would be hard
not you know to know which which which
question to ask you because there was so
much there
so I was thinking about your circling
and I was thinking and I was also
thinking about dialo goes yeah and and I
was I was wondering what what John has
has contributed to your circling how oh
you're working with John what's what's
what's what's emerging in your
relationship mm-hmm oh yeah because he
said something like circling 2.0 and and
uh you know I wonder what that that is
yeah well I'm curious like deep so I I
have a sense of your sense of something
yeah I mean I don't I don't I I don't
know a lot about what circling is I'm
just coming at it from a point of view
of intuition what what it feels like
what's your intuition about it well my
initial intuition is like for your sense
of it
endless psychological Ajay zng
california-style people talking and
getting nowhere and and that then I met
then I listened to you talking and and I
realized that way there was a lot more
than that and I think the fact that you
mentioned Heidegger probably probably
keep clued me into that there was there
was more going on with that well what
you talked about like what you're like
the the the things that that the
psychology and all that stuff I have to
say that stuff is the stuff that drives
me crazy about what when people call
that circling I'm sure it's not so it's
just a bit just but that I don't think
it would be that right right no anything
about it it is that a lot like there's a
lot of people that have done circling
that are a number of generations out
from the people who taught them that
taught them it and the thing that
worries me right bugs be and I'm
inspired to shift right thumb is
is that strange sense and I don't think
anybody's like you know there's like
don't things like there's no bad actors
or like you know I think just people it
says something about the world that
we're in mm-hmm but what people kind of
come in already with a set of
psychological assumptions and use these
terms that are these kind of
psychological terms there have become
more about signaling a social in group
of some kind of some kind like mmm like
lots of words like trauma right or force
or or like talking about emotions and
shame in these in these or like
vulnerability or yeah got really no need
in these kind of psychological sets that
presuppose that all those things have a
particular meaning yeah don't the Dunkel
on being questioned and so what the
thinking is not happening right it's
it's like what Heidegger would say
thinking the thinking is not happening
it's just it's kind of yeah it's a kind
of salon activity yes yes yeah yeah so
it's like that so you're you're like
like the like that like the earth around
it is I think it's intelligent I think
it's really really intelligent because
there's something else available you
know which i think is we're circling
there the circling for me and that
historically like how it started at my
grappling with it in the in the in in
the trenches with the people like as we
were discovering it it wasn't really the
essence of it wasn't about it had
nothing to do with even personal growth
the notion of personal growth it was a
about evoking a wonder right a in the
phenomenological that there's an that
that there is at all right like kind of
this sense of I think that's what we
were all
at the beach around the fire that as we
were circling what what were we doing
when we were doing all of that like this
irritable was is like well I kept
feeling like that fire kept circling
around that fire together and like going
through this and talking about our lives
would lead to these the presence of life
in the moment and then trying to
describe it and then realizing it would
go away in the description but something
would come come forward and it's going
away and then bringing language to it
and that sense of kind of like
philosophical intimacy right that sense
of Ray exoticness that constantly eludes
you but yet constitutes you at the same
time yeah so that to me that's the heart
of circling right I think I can feel why
you are so influenced by Heidegger right
and in doing that when you're talking
about this this sort of getting
underneath concepts right getting
underneath everything and keeping it
keeping it all dynamic and alive without
getting fixed in some kind of way no
keeping that like as I think everything
in Heidegger should have moves towards
poetry at some level but poor time
between people absolutely absolutely
totally yeah so that so on one level I
think
because then I really heard you when he
said like keep everything alive it's
it's more like keep noticing how how the
how I how I don't recognize the
aliveness right it's like it's like it's
like revealing that everything's alive
right it's like there's a that there is
something alive and that there's
something about our time that seems to
take that alive this and make it and
extract it Montag arise make it you kill
it make it dead dead you know we're
walking around with it with corpses
everywhere I mean yeah and we're you
know so it's it's it's the zombie image
right yeah so there's and we have this
inside of ourselves where we slip into
kind of a dull State yeah we're not as
alive as we could be yeah and and
there's a lot of reasons for that one
reason is it's just that we're all so
hyper socially conscious and you know of
our role in our you know our job and you
know how can we be ourselves how can we
flourish as our you know well ourselves
but how can we just you know yeah within
the the actual work like I don't want to
I don't want to make it sound like just
being yourself being authentic is the
point it's it's more than that it's it's
it's a discipline and a work as well
it's supposed to things and we think
about this notion of authenticity right
is yeah his is yeah if you think about
it psychologically it usually means
something like alright so thing inside
you know he matches the thing outside
inside matches outside I'm being
authentic you know which is is it
usually can can turn into like like you
know I just keep revealing myself review
myself revealing myself right however I
think that's a on to flop gray
authenticity is something I think more
primordial than that I would imagine
right I mean more like it you're like
it's right there's a discipline to it
like when I think about you know
authenticity like author right it is
it's more like if you're well you're in
touch with the muse on some level it's
not you yeah it's not it's not your
personality yeah
why it's not even your it's not even
your multiple you're not even your you
know Gert chef says or something man is
legion we have all these millions of sub
personnel is it's not even those voices
it's on link something coming from
beyond right that multiplicity I think
and yeah being being be having a
coherent tonality to it or yeah nato-led
a Co hate Co here this is the thing
about about I think authenticity if we
say authenticity is something like on
concealment and in authenticity is it is
something like concealment right there's
something about those two things right
um so so like authenticity I think
primarily has to do with a way of
tending and listening to what is most
primordial right and I think in our
times it's like listening to that which
is most near right that which is the
horizon that that I'm seeing with that I
don't see right that and so on some
level yeah I think I'm some level in
acting authenticity is more like not
just like if I wanna so I want to like
if I want to like if I have to bathe in
public public or like right now it's
famous Greek philosopher I forget yeah
totally that's craziness you know that's
it but I think it's more like taking up
a role in the culture right and
and not just doing what I want but
really taking it on is like similar to
reading a text right it's like reading
the text so deeply right so like reading
all of it right so we've kind of tried
to read it like where the word if the
where you're waking up the dead author
because you feel you feel so right to
the point where you read it so fully but
at some point you turn the next chapter
and do you find yourself writing it
right in that sense of that sense of
authorship is well you have to be a
that's why I said about being a student
right that's probably the beginning part
when you're reading the book and you
keep reading the book and you keep
reading the book and keep it and all the
different you know nuances and shades
and colors of the book kinda you know
and until you're actually yeah you are
you are you're writing the book that's
yeah absolutely you're you're you're
you're you're the one writing the book
absolutely the book of your life or
whatever yes yes and so I think you like
it for example in in the practice of
circling and so one thing I just want to
say it's like I there's there's
definitely circling there's circling and
then there's guys saying stalks and
they're definitely not the same thing
right in fact I think if anything I'm
always I'm always the one at the edges
of everything kind of listening to the
whistle istening to circling and
listening to what what's beyond it and
what's under it right so I I'm probably
more disruptive to circling then I think
it's always just been my proclivity the
but I think one of the things that when
you learn how to circle right it's very
much that listening that's really the
thing you're practicing it's the booby
prize is connection right the booby
prize is intimacy right yeah but it's
like it's like what it takes to be
intimate or all of these deep things
right and you because if you just think
about it if you're I mean if you want to
get closer to the cosmos right if you
wanna if you want to really know
about reality no you might as well look
in the most complex part of the universe
right which it seems to be the human
face and probably talk they probably
want to look at the part of the universe
that can actually talk well I was
thinking about when you were talking
about intimacy I was thinking about my
wife and I and our intimacy it's
something that you can't really define
and in any kind of way and it's it's
very different than what you would
imagine it would be right it's very
different like if you're a young person
and you're looking for a partner or
something and you're you you have all
these needs and you want this kind of
person and and and then you you you you
know you meet this kind of person and
then you meet another printer that
doesn't work out and you meet another
person and you kind of and then then you
discover intimacy yeah that's that's
that's it's completely different right
it's it's not it's not the same thing as
whatever it is you were desire ignore
whatever it is you wanted that you
thought would fulfill you in its in some
kind of a way it's it's something far
deeper and and I don't want you to - hmm
it's almost so wantable what its
unwanted oh yeah it's like because to
get it to experience intimacy is to be
transformed by it so it's like if I say
want intimacy yeah it's almost gross or
something isn't it it's almost like yeah
it's almost like you're imposing on on
on Hunt's on something yeah that is
right it's already there or yeah already
the case like I would wear like it seems
like it's just yeah that there's
something primordial we primordial II
revealing about being our being my
existing and that's the comes in in and
through the intimacy it's it's and and I
think Jay people genuinely want intimacy
right but but there is phenomenological
quality of that when you actually get it
there's this experience of like oh my
god this is there's no way I could like
whatever I was thinking about it was
fright it is way more than I could have
ever even have wanted or known to watch
and in order and through having it I am
now somebody that can I'm now somebody
different right that can actually have
it and that's the thing about intimacy
it's like it is very very man it's like
it's it creates it generate constitutes
ourselves right like those moments if
you think about I really appreciated the
way that you talked about that like that
yeah if I think about like what I was
doing talking to my friends over here
maybe dating over here and then I had
this intimacy with my wife and it's a
completely different universe yeah but I
heard you say oh I was thinking about we
the product we tend to be interested in
the product and and it's not just it's
not the process that that we're looking
for the intimacy but it's you know it's
just it's just the living texture of mmm
how would you describe actually what
when he when you look at that contrast
right as you said how would you describe
the experience of yourself it with with
your partner that is surprising what is
the phenomenology of it like what does
it look like feel like how has it
transformed you if it has what is the
tone us and as you recognize it
well it's love but love us it's such a
it's such an abused word right so I
don't want to I don't want to say that
even though that's what it is and it's
also
again although all of these words are
just are just words right so I the other
word that came to me is divinity or
divine or you know I was listening a jar
of aching he was saying you know that he
was wanted to talk about the sacred
uh-huh and I would say no it's not
sacred it's divine and in other words
it's it's it's just completely divine
it's not sacred sacred is something a
little bit outside right it's something
that you bow down to are you you it's
it's it has an aspirational quality yeah
but it but but intimacy in its ultimate
sense is fully divine isn't it I mean
yeah well what I think what I am
imagining when I hear the word divine I
get the sense of something behind what's
there and shining through it has this
quality of like mm-hmm encountering you
right it's a and yeah there's a divine
meaning it's like it situates it's
clearly greater than I am right yeah so
the main the between is is is is is is
is larger and deeper than the two
separate beings who are yeah and
whatever they're up to yeah why would
imagine it's kind of like I just what
strikes me is we're talking about here's
the so here's the dialogue oh right like
like it's just like it's just like all
of a sudden I'm starting to something's
coming to me that I wasn't a whip I
wasn't thinking about it like that so
some you know you can kind of fit I
could kind of feel the like there's that
this relationship
like and then mmm kind of it going up
leading to the slick sense of going ah
something's transcending because now
I've never quite thought of the divine
or the difference between the two in
this way but I think that you're right
it's like there is this sense of what
I'm experiencing in
this intimacy with my wife does have
this constant experience of recognizing
that I I could I like I couldn't have
wanted this like I couldn't do I
definitely couldn't have earned it
I couldn't have even tried to earn it
because whatever it is is so present and
breaks through that's so beyond what I
did or it didn't do or all that kind of
stuff
like it's such a it is such a and it
does it feels like it isn't coming from
me is it coming from her there is there
is the divine is the is the is the
relationship itself somehow it's
revealing itself to you yeah and it teen
undressing reality if we could talk
about you know yeah
erotic yeah terms mm-hmm it's hot it's
deeply humbling yeah also here that's
part of it like I get but it has a
demand to I think I think that the
divine has a demand to it on some level
right right but it yeah yeah I like what
like crazier when you look out like like
when you when you look out and you're
like like that where am I looking
no point in the room looking character
who's the grave Gurdjieff you're just
yeah yeah yeah cured chef is like like
looking out there but when since we've
been talking about intimacy and I've
been like you can feel the presence of
your relationship and your wife like
that when you look out it's like the
gaze is like more like it's less it's
less peering and it's more like that
you're looking out but you're looking in
at the same time aren't you the double
the the Zen arrow
they points outwards and inwards at the
same time yeah yeah yeah absolutely
uh-huh nice to meet you my friend you
too yeah yeah well I think it's like is
it fair to say that like there's
something about um that things are upped
in the space between us right like
things like that it seems so in
something grabbing that there something
about the the conversation seems you
evoke those things and you're finding
yourself they become really salient yeah
exactly yeah yeah and the propositional
stuff seems back rounded yeah yeah no no
that's the sense I'm getting is just
like my only intention was I was I was
I'd like listen to podcasts and stuff
like that I would go like oh my god
there's so much more possible in these
conversations with these people I'm like
Jesus like it was so much like so many
things that were missed and they were
giant kind of driving me nuts and I
thought it was like somebody said guy
you ought to do a podcast you'd be a
good interviewer that's like okay so I
started thinking about it and I was like
okay well maybe I can justify doing it
out maybe this is a good way to to get
to kind of get the word out so to speak
and I was thinking like it'd be kind of
interesting just to try to have a
conversation where it was like it was a
sweet spot between like you could say
like a normal conversation or interview
and and something like circling like
what would be the sign not to beard
where people are like what the hell is
that right and it's so it's really kind
of hits that sweet spot and yeah well I
don't like I was talking to Bonita
Bonita Roy the recently a very
interesting person and the first thing I
said is I don't want to be formal I
don't want to be marketing I don't I
don't I don't want any spirit of
marketing to to infect a conversation
with somebody
III want to throw this whole you know
game sort of you know overboard right to
the right to the essential yeah right
totally
so like you don't need any effects you
don't need it I got a little bit of
music at the beginning of the podcast
but I make it very short and III don't
need production I don't need any of
these things I guess I get a bench
eventually perhaps if if this takes off
maybe I'll have to think more about
those things but the raw the raw stuff
is always more interesting yeah it's
like if we think about the raw stuff and
you're making a distinction between like
like oh yeah I don't want to do this one
thing yeah and I do want to do this
other thing
yeah this other thing I don't quite know
what it is but this marketing I'm
imagining is something like I don't want
to I don't want to like frame and and
then tell you that I don't want to it's
that I'm incapable of it of it you know
the question comes up for me and that is
what are you it what are you an
allegiance to or that maybe it was the
way when you looked at it he that which
you're an allegiance to is the thing
that you can't not be right you can't
not break and what are you in allegiance
to we just kind of I think this is maybe
related to that question about the
divine double right yeah I mean
allegiance to the divine double yeah
indeed well I would have to be because
it would be too painful not to be it's
not because I'm not be cover because I
have some kind of it's not because I'm
particularly okay authentic or you know
I would I would I play music and it was
always improvisation and I could never
play the same song the same way because
it would be boring right yeah it's it's
not it's it's it's problematic in
certain situations that in the world but
it's
but it's in other ways it's an advantage
right mm-hmm
yeah yeah and I'm I mean you've
obviously been able to turn that into
something that that gives you a unique
place yeah yeah I feel very fortunate
very very very fortunate about that like
because instead in so many ways I I'm
relating first of all I relate to the
clumsiness and the walk like they're
always ahead of yourself on some level
like you're always oriented to the thing
that you can't quite say right so you
end up kind of losing mid-sentence and
then nobody's understanding you but like
that thing's still glowing and there's a
in betweenness that is doesn't lend
itself to finished coordinated and
products like marketing right like
marketing is something like you go
through all that stuff so that you can
present something to have a particular
effect it's more of a transactional
right I'm saying this so that we get
there so well I worked in marketing a
little bit now as I was an idea I was
the I was good at concept generation
like I could think I was gonna you know
coming up with cool ideas yeah but but I
was I was definitely the back office guy
I wasn't I wasn't the guy out knocking
on doors trying to try to sell the
product yeah totally yeah so you're
totally get it you're the back you're
the bad guy you're the one that like is
oriented towards the chaos uh-huh yeah
so I would think so there's something
about like like for for for me I feel an
allegiance to that to that thing that I
doesn't quite have a word yet for it
right like I mean one of the things I've
liked I've really liked about the
practicing circling for like the last 20
years if I think about like them the
machinery it exercises mm-hmm
is listening to people like listening to
people like for just listening to them
and what listening is is so much more
than just in quiet and paying attention
right it's it doing that over and over
and over again I feel like I feel more
oriented to I think the revealing of
that which I continually find myself an
allegiance in which is something like
that more ness or the like that sense of
the inexhaustible intelligibility that
behind things that that's the body so
it's just like whatever it is just just
just having having your compass set to
that right it's just gonna is just a it
just seems like if you just orient that
way of like okay I really wanna like I
want to get you at the deepest level I
want to understand why you exist in how
you exist and and those things have you
go very very deep and like concrete and
right here right now but they
simultaneously like have all of these
deep primordial transcendental
contextual disclosures of the holes
right that I mean that's what a human
being is in the moment what the hell
else is it but like an awkward thing
together of of infinity infinite ood
it's like that's the human face that's
probably why when somebody walks into a
room we're like it changes the whole
moment right like if mm-hmm like it or
let's say afterwards you know that
you're gonna go to a shooting right
after this podcast this would be a
completely different moment right go
shooting what do you mean like somebody
like yeah he's like somebody are you
gonna go watch somebody get shots or
like or you're gonna go meet your mother
or you're gonna win a million dollars
play in
some way what's constituting this moment
are these are these these this
recognition of one time right temper
ality but also this sense of like when
were when we're in the presence of
another human being it's not just like
another object it's a completely it
changes the texture of the meaning of
the moment right if you know them if you
don't know them it's okay it's like hmm
so so you're looking at pure meaning
when you're looking at another human
being and if then if you look at what
what is meaning so it's like everything
is one of the things like when I really
got this when I was in art school I
can't I moved to San Francisco to go to
go to the San Francisco Art Institute
the sculptor in a painter yeah yeah we
had this like I had this life this
amazing teacher this life drawing
teacher right where we would you know we
would like constantly draw you know
they'd have like nude models and stuff
like that so we were constantly drawing
nude models and and to hear him talk
about it's really fun when he would do
his critiques because to hear him talk
about like what it was to render a human
being he's he would say that you know
it's weird you can get away with like
like drawing an animal you know in a way
that you can't get away with in drawing
the human being and he says because
every single part of the human being is
dynamic and expressive and I think what
I've come to understand that is that
there's not one inch of the figure that
doesn't communicate a world mmm right
there's not one part of it that doesn't
express right a whole culture a whole
world a whole lifetime a whole future
ever so if you if you render it either
realistically or abstractly in a way
that like if any part of it doesn't
speak or say it's
somehow doesn't really show its humanity
it doesn't show its figurative this
mm-hmm
and I just I wonder that maybe think of
is that when you tried to create the
whole of a person if you are sketching
them or drawing them you could only do
that if it was incomplete like the human
being is incomplete right whereas the
animal would be complete already right
there as if you're drawing a human being
you're drawing something incomplete
right yes yes it's like you're drawing a
being that every part of its being is
given by what it isn't right an
anticipation of its own death and all
the horizons that that ultimately Tsin
animates as meaningful and apparent like
we are that which we're facing right no
and that is a that is what we're looking
at when we're looking at a human being
but then if you say that
you're talking about we're looking at
all-time we're looking at we're looking
at like the one horizon you'll never
reach your that right and everything
that lights up so if you if you just
start talking about one part of your
life right if you just take that thread
and you follow it all the way down
you're gonna just gonna
you're gonna keep gonna find yourself at
the weave of the whole universe no
matter what it is it's just and there's
something about for me when learning
that and just having that orientation
and listening in that way that has just
really weaved me
leave to be into a into a into a person
that just feels better about being alive
yeah it makes the world so much more
interesting I see yeah hey I wonder I'm
a musician I'm music ISM is more my
world than the visual world so I wonder
I wonder the differences and wonder the
differences between a mmm visual sense
of like like you're talking about
drawing a person I don't know if I could
ever relate to that particularly I don't
know if I see with my eyes so much what
do you think like what what do you what
are you hearing about like what I'm
saying like if you were to Reese say
what I just said or what you heard how
would you put it
oh I was just I was just you're bringing
me into your appreciation for the the
depth of a human being or something like
that yeah totally so just I'm just
curious like so when and just answering
that question what was that like well
what was in answering that last
questions like we were like whoa how
would you say it like what what are you
hearing when you then hit that question
where did that bring you when I was
answering that question uh I guess I was
I didn't want to get the wrong answer I
didn't want I didn't want to say
something superficial or trite I wanted
I wanted it to be the right answer
yeah totally so there was a sense of
like oh yeah there is something there
that could be more on yeah right so you
had a sense of like that there was
something that you heard and that it
wasn't everything it was something
mm-hmm yeah
I have a feeling see I think I think one
of the things in terms of in it one of
the things I've just I've been been
finding myself went was like I was gonna
say it's like when I started doing these
conversations online that was my only
goal was just kind of like well let's
let's see if we could just do a normal
conversation and and and something like
circling and just find the sweet spot
right I wanted to see like I do that and
what I found out is that like I didn't
try to do anything I just ended up
engaging in the conversation and through
that I actually discovered that that's
what I do all the time
like in most of my conversations and and
and that's I could feel like those the
all the circling I've done through the
years and and how much it's contributed
to me and I've given it to it in this
this Anna gagik relationship I've had
with all the people involved
mm-hm Mike it's funny I could see all
that come out in this new context but
with people that have these intense
models right like John for baekje and
you know you know who else sure that
Jordan Peterson Georgia Hall sure you
saw he's like all these bit like um
Christopher all these people who have
this very studied yeah background right
and then engaging in these conversations
and and me thinking that this these that
they have these kinds of conversations
all the time and then going like whoa
this was all know maybe they don't have
those kind of conversations over
academics and you're bringing you're
bringing a sort of yeah it's like it's
like a I guess the image I have is
something like an African drummer to try
to speak to a you know classical
composer or something like that
yeah and totally yeah it's like they're
in it's it's it's been mutually
affording right it's been mutually and
very on agogic of where this back and
forth like what i'ma great because maybe
you you you you have been working in
this sort of world where you're trying
to I'm looking for a phrase which which
which Bonita was talking about she was
talking about education and she was
talking about how we have we don't train
the let's say effective self yeah or the
sensual self or other self that is that
is the sensual self I guess is the best
way we could say we don't really train
that in educated education right and so
then she she says that people get to
their 50s or something like that and
they realize that they haven't trained
that part of them and that's that's
probably you've been training that part
of yourself you've been your effective
emotional you know artistic life and
those guys have been training their
their intellectual training and refining
their intellectual life yeah more
probably the and bit less the the the
effective life so so they're probably
attracted to you for for your ability to
bring them there and you're attracted to
them for their ability to refine your
your sort of wildness into something
more coherent that could be expressed
yeah absolutely
absolutely and I just in its bit it's
been interesting to watch so I asked me
like what have I gotten out of these
conversations in Reiki and I would say
with Ferb a key and with Chris and with
all like all these people right that
I've been talking but I've been getting
tons out of it man I've been like in
it's one it's just deeply encouraging
sure like like I feel just deeply
encouraged me to you
I just feel deeply encouraged in the in
the thing that just called you forward
like that thing that spoke right like
bitch animated whatever that is I feel
that too I had I had a chat with
Kristoff master a Pietro and it started
with a letter conversation and he had
this way of writing and I was like wow I
thought I thought I was talking to
Herman Melville or or or Henry James or
or Edgar Allen Poe or something it was
like wow nobody writes like that anymore
nobody writes with that kind of
elaboration or I kind of poetic
elaboration it's almost like I was
talking to a person from the 19th
century and and then we had a
conversation and I just I felt like okay
you know this is I feel at home here in
a way I don't with most people I here's
a human being I feel like I'm enriched
in his presence and in this discussion
and and that's where I want to be all
the time you know I want to be in that
kind of enriched I want to have that
enriched feeling when I'm speaking to
people you know all the time otherwise I
mean I don't want to put down the you
know just the the modalities of life but
yeah do something so it's like you made
a contrast yeah like I like what I like
what's being bored in this conversation
here like there's a I like what you're
preg made in the conversation with right
so like now Chris is here yeah in a
certain sense err or or your experience
of Chris in what so Chris I mean like
Chris is something else like Chris is
just he is he is I whatever whenever
I've watched anybody talk about Chris
they always pause and they're like
there's like just that they go he is
poetry right
yeah he's a poet on some level like and
so that that's easily it's rare to meet
a poet I would say and I would say
especially now because people don't care
about poetry you know and most poetry
has just swallowed up by it
by the Machine right right by that by
the endless discussions and yes there's
a way where he just dwells there like
the way man the way that language loves
him right and it habit is just so when
he cuz when he talks he just gathers
like he he you can literally watch him
speak and he he's he has a wrestling
match that somehow comes out like you
get the woven tapestry of a wrestling
match of just something like where he's
like yeah it's fuck it's like the idea
bucks of intelligibility and he weaves
these two things of like the deft hand
and right that which be holds is that
which was beholden and he just there's
this world coming on and there's a way
which I currently get with them there's
a ton there's it and he's so young at
the same time which is so odd yeah odd
to talk to somebody who's thirty years
old who has that kind of ability to
speak I guess just speak words you know
in that feelings you did you notice that
feel like for me it's like I there's a
it's almost like in a way that when as
we're talking with it up talking about
Chris there's a way in which I feel
we've just evoke to spirit of some kind
I feel like a context in his in a in a
room of some kind or a different space
and just a bulking his name and I would
say that like
but I think what I feel it evoked by
right and invoked into it is I would
imagine would be something like that
whatever it is that calls Chris into
being like I'm wondering about that's
another thing about the text I'm still
trying to get this notion of the divine
double right yeah like one of your
questions was what is your divine double
aspect man it just seems like whatever
if I could answer that question it
probably isn't it probably isn't it
there's this this mmm the thing that's
beyond the horizon right I thought of
the quote by Rilke you know he says
every angel is terrifying yeah that's
that's not a divine double and so let's
um
yes which can't be defined and it also
destroys us in that in some sense and it
does a currently disdains to annihilate
various trains to annihilate us
exactly yeah oka is pretty so there's
like there's something about I think
this is this is part of the thing about
Chris is what are you folks and me and
it sounds like very something very
similar for you is is he he evokes
whatever it is that calls him to
language it's like it but it goes beyond
Chris right there's this quality of that
there is something really transcendent
in just a voguing his name he's
transparent to something mm-hmm that his
language calls in and comes from mom I
so I just end up really just like I
really like him I just really like that
guy a lot he's such a such a well I
guess that's the thing
those likable is is allowing yourself to
be open to that transparency yeah which
makes somebody it makes you feel like
you're talking to somebody who's not a
persona who's not a mask who's not a it
was not mechanical in this his way of
being somebody who's like he was like I
guess opened up to that
Oh on some level yeah me almost and I
think to share in the way that he does I
think one of the things maybe that gets
communicated for me in that sharing is
there something Trent yeah there is a
quality when he speaks so lyrically and
poetically and espouses in this way and
how it is like rolls off of him that
there is there is a way in which he
because he talks about Simba symbolism a
lot about even the way the Tillich does
um where a symbol is transparent you
look through a simple right it's like
the symbols like speaks to what's beyond
itself in some ways embodies it but
beyond it so you actually live a symbol
to you an act to simple right and as
well as complex it's not opaque and so
when you imagine like like Chris is
speaking symbology right but he's
pointing to whatever symbol it is that
would speak symbology at the same time
and there's this reverent saying that
that is fills fills you up and I've
noticed that with Kristen with people
like Chris mhm that there's something
evocative yeah he's evocative that's
interesting yeah word I know I am non
contrasting into other people who have
another kind of quality which might be
more fierce or more like extreme clarity
you know Jordan Hawes is extreme clarity
about them it's almost fierce what are
we doing what is this thing this quarter
of the internet like these conversations
that are gathering around in which you
seem to be one of the places that a lot
of its gathering together right and so
there's a way in which kind of talking
about these people in a way is is in
some level is talking about on the space
I live inside of
great now and being that you could say
that that finding our homes in that
which is homeless inherently constantly
situating ourselves right but kind of
attracted our home is in the question
mark right so that there's a there's
always a way in which I feel I feel a
kinship with you in the in the finding
constantly finding home right constantly
finding it so so talking about this
notice that I talk about Chris one is
I'm in at Verve a key and there's a way
these people just deeply impacted me
right and contributed to me mm-hmm
I can kind of feel moved you know ISM my
heart open is I'm just talking about it
Mike yeah Mike and it's so good like
it's such a good way like like just they
why feel the sense of like when I talk
with them like they just what they want
is good what they're looking at is good
what we're hearing together out at is
good and and did I just don't like it's
just so clearly it Spence I think it's
good faith that emanates from that for
those people you know completely right
good good faith there's there never a
feeling of one of somebody you know
gaming with you or playing some kind of
a right you know right
sleazy game of some kind it's just it's
just just good faith right tonight you
know when all the marketing is gone and
then maybe that's what we really want is
to communicate with each other in good
faith yeah yeah totally totally yeah and
I think I find myself as we're talking
it's a great word good faith
well I yeah I find like I find myself
having faith in it
and then there's talk about it it's not
like I'm
it's not like I'm present necessarily to
having faith I live in it and so as we
talk about and I see it I'm like oh yeah
I bet on some level what I'm talking
about is like something about the the
authenticity of these dialogues and what
what we're all up to and how much kind
of faith that there is that I was like
so I guess sincerity is very powerful
has been yeah you know sincerity is
almost something that the cuts through
all that bullshit which which but it's
even more than that it's it's it's I
guess I'm coming back to it's just
revealing what's true more and more
revelation more and more consciousness I
guess are more and more like just even
if it's just a little bit it's it's it's
it's making making the world alive again
I guess yes as we're walking through the
this field of corpses you know yes
totally and it's and it's doing it in
such a way that it's actually okay he
revoking I like a voguing Heidegger
right the and the Greeks and the
pre-socratics right which is this kind
of notion the original notion of truth
Mme which you know look I've heard it
said it I probably pronounced it wrong
cuz I just haven't heard people say
Alethea okay yeah right
oh thing that I just to get the context
for that I my understanding is so so
that lay Thea was a river or sometimes
it's also portrayed as a lake in Queen
pathology right in the river or lake of
forgetfulness which is really
interesting when you think about this
because I realized I didn't really quite
croc Alethea four years and I thought I
did
which is very Alethea in this way but so
it's like it'd be something like if you
were to if if you're walking along if
guys walking along any trips and falls
and he falls in in Lake Lee Thea
mm-hmm it's not like people are like
wake up in the morning and they don't
find guy but they're like where's guy no
he's completely forgotten it's it's it's
it's it's missing the guy's missing
right like it's it's it's missing that
he's missing so it's not even it doesn't
it's completely concealed so if you
think about ah lay theá--
the truth is concealed you mean yeah
yeah and well the truth is when it goes
Alysia so it's the the AH is the event
right that's the first time right of
that which is veiled or concealed is the
moment that it's concealed it's
concealed this becomes unconcealed
uh-huh so that's her right there there
was a little bit
aha yeah people uh-oh oh that's right
that you could say that that is a local
manifestation of things reveal ah
and it's interesting is it it isn't
cognitive necessarily no bottom-up right
who's bottom-up that experience of
revelation right that's what's drawing
us back for for the taste of half their
each time yeah mmm so there's this
quality for me and I thought for years I
always thought that was that what what
the truth was was what was revealed
right the Alethea like no know what
though I get it it's like what yeah
there's no work yes
the the what is something like the
proposition right it's something like
that it's not like oh I just found the
Holy Grail here's the Holy Grail all
right more like you you found something
that something that is unfolding into
something else and yeah it's process it
sort of endless process yes and I think
what unfolds
because of what I think that what what
Heidegger was was reeling was
remembering in going back and in into
the the notion of truth in ilithyia I
think what he was pointing out was
something that that got lost and I which
is what Heidegger I think kind of does
and that's what's so cool about reading
him is that you walk back into these
places and it's a complete to do that
even if you don't understand what the
hell he's talking about just the attempt
to as you do these acrobats that are
just like my to be deep deeply evoking
and transformative almost you know and
Alethea I started to realize that I
don't think it's it's about what's
revealed
I think what's actually the real thing
that got unconcealed is concealment
itself is the is the revelation of that
being right for being to be disclosed is
it is it reveals that it was disclosed
that its nature is concealment that when
it reveals itself what it reveals is
that there is concealment and that being
is that thing which you can never become
completely CLE clear about the vision
itself health quality maybe being is the
last concealment yeah yes and like in
revealing it right it it reveals and in
a certain sense conceals its revealing
right kind of like light like light
lights up everything but yet it it
withdrawals in its disclosure right so
it's like and win it withdrawals it does
something but animates everything that
we are and the thing about it so so like
like a good example of this would be see
it's funny it's like you like these are
the things that I I II
this is kind of very ilithyia Nazz I'm
talking about it because I've been
talking I've been grappling with
ilithyia my whole life but I don't have
this experience of like because that's
because it's a genuine idea isn't it
it's a genuine idea because there's no
there's no end to what it can reveal
about itself yeah exactly so just sort
of get close to it it's like it is
intimate like I'm like I I've probably
said this over and over again but what
has me say it is that I feel like the
more the closer I get to it the more
withdrawals and reveals at the same time
it's very much pregnant with what it is
but it's it's interesting I think the
movie that exemplifies this is is the is
the movie The Sixth Sense remember that
movie with Bruce Willis yeah it wasn't
he wasn't he was dead yeah I see what
you mean yeah yeah he was dead the whole
time right and and so you're watching
the movie and he's dead and he doesn't
know it right and in none of the
audience knows it either so we're all
like it's all kind of weird something's
kind of strange or something there
anything in the movie I don't remember
exactly what happens but somehow like
out of the corner of his eye he kind of
starts to get and then as he gets the
whole audience gets there's this moment
of Alethea it starts to become revealed
he's dead and like and as it's revealed
you can kind of feel it go through the
movie theater right this revelation he's
like oh my god I'm dead
and then like a moment later once that
recognition the revealing comes in then
it goes back to the very beginning of
the movie and if it flashes these like
the main frames of everything that you
just had watched and you can you can you
see that it was obvious the whole time
yeah right hmm there's something about
that like that revelation of concealment
in it's obvious in its nearness right so
I think I think one of the good faith
like wonder what are we what we're doing
what draws on this good faith in these
conversations right is that there's a
desert that we're all oriented towards
truth but in this Alethea sense that
that that that there's a kind of
implicit understanding or quality that
we embody right in our search which is
the sense of like that there's something
that were it's not like we're trying to
dominate or get clear about something
it's more like looking and loving truth
and to look for truth is to look towards
concealment right so to be oriented
towards that which is is yet unveiled
and I think I think that's why a lot of
the conversation is about the times that
we live in and as I think as Heidegger
would say is is is is that the time that
we're living that technol framing age of
technology that we're in is not
technological devices and it's not
technology itself it's the UH the way of
understanding everything at all
everything that's anything at all by
virtue of which we understand it as a
kind of standing in reserved fully
available right you optimized to be
extracted to be ordered to fungus the
death that you're talking about it
annoying yeah yes in what it conceals
and what he would say is the danger and
he also said this is the saving power
within the danger is the same a bonus
folder in there right is is is is the
danger is that this is what demarcates
this understanding of everything that is
the understanding of being of our time
is that it is what it what it on what it
conceals is that there's anything
concealed right okay optimizes so
everything's available everything is
including ourselves we are now part of
the standing reserve in
which if you just look at our attitudes
about ourselves is like we look at her
bodies like it's something dislike look
let's hack the shit out of this thing
let's let's extract all of these things
and make and release all the potential
out of ourselves so that we can
harnessed it and order it and that is so
deep in its both outside and it's him
and I think what what verb a key is is
talking about with the meaning crisis
what Jordan Hall his determination is
sense of like deep urgency right all
like fierce urgency and like systems
thinking so all on some level it's it's
it's through harkening this sense of the
concealment of all that is right then
get fullness of me right and in that and
that I think this is what really
Heidegger brings to for that I really
resonate with which is like we're in a
time we're being is present in its
complete withdrawal and that so if you
want to read if you want to reveal like
being notice like look at where it's
withdrawing because that's where it is
Jack Stein was saying in alchemy or
something is it is that you have to look
at the Putra fication or you have to
look at that at the at the image of you
know the most the Sun you have to look
where it where it's impossible to look
where you you cannot look because it's
too much of it's too shocking it's too
terrible it's - yeah and it's it's it's
it's too it's too you know you could
almost use the word evil for it or
something you know this dehumanizing
force yeah yeah yeah yeah absolutely and
and that's the question I think that
we're on some level whether or not we
can conceptualize it or
not like like there's a I think one
other thing that is gathering this we
that we can somehow call a week this
corner of the universe is it's like real
orientation to listening right to that
which is no longer calling like we can
hear that that good objects and people
in our lives and the structures of
institution that they they're no longer
things don't have any sense to them they
like hmm they don't hannah and sense
right and and I think this is I think
that a lot of a lot of the symptom but
symptom ology is why we're like people
are getting so moralistic because on
some level they're trying to bring sense
into this deprecation of things not
making any sense
morality then you get shallow morality
instead of genuine ethics or genuine
action or or you know yeah the schools
make you stupid the money makes you poor
and medicine makes you sick that was a
quote that grades aqueduct was a quest a
yeah so it's weird so it's like while so
people are so for example I mean you can
see that the the you know people's
moralistic responses to things that
cannot be penetrated by any kind of
rationality or reason right it's like
they just go is that where religio comes
in to use to use John's phrase or or
religion because mmm-hmm all you have a
shallow morality if you don't have a
deep religio I think yeah it's one of
the things I think that implicitly is a
vocht
in relationship right which is basically
religio I think my I I don't know if I
understand it completely but I think I
think what he what that highlights is
the enactment of the religion its thee
so so date you familiar with David
Bentley Hart we heard yes sure I really
like a lot of people really irritated by
him but I think he's this really funny
and he's he is so
smart like the guys just he's really
really smart and he's very pompous I
keep meaning to read his book actually
because he says a lot of again yeah he
has a sort of offensive yeah comes on in
this offensive way but then he always
says something that sticks with you yeah
and he's he's white he's a modern
theologian that actually grappled with
continental philosophy which is not not
that present in in theologian so he's
very living about his thinking he's he's
he like he's encountered Heidegger and
wrestled with it and he's he's still
grappling with his it's alive and one of
the things he said so a lot a lot of how
he's become popular amongst you know
non-academics is is through writing
books in response to the to atheism to
the you know the new yes ran and I think
and I really kind of got this and I
think this exemplifies real did you um
when he was speaking to a claim by I
think Dawkins is like well like how can
you say that there's a God how can you
prove it like put like how can you prove
it like you know that that whole thing
I'm sure they're gonna be like well okay
so if we were to run like well if we
were to run an experiment what we would
need to do mr. Dawkins is you need to
like in the way that he's talking about
God right the way that like I David Hart
in the crook like the Christian at the
deepest sense of the word the theistic
sensibility about God is like well what
you would need to do is he would need to
probably spend two three years going to
church praying going in contemplative
prayer doing lectio divina going through
the river right the ceremonies the
confessions the he's like and then like
two three years later right then we can
take a look then we can have a
conversation about religion right yeah
it's like like then then and then we can
start to talk about the presence it the
proof of the presence of God and I think
this is what I think for Becky I'm my
understanding of her Becky
is when he's talking about participatory
knowing that there's participatory
knowing is part of what it's knowing
through being presents and so the
enactment of participating in the
religion right is so intimately woven
with God right so you can just get the
sense of like if Dawkins went and did
that for three years it's very feasible
that he would come out at the end of
that you'd be like yeah whoa the
presence of God right is you can't
devote you can't uncollapse it from the
the knowing of participation yeah and so
I think for Becky's kind of basically
coming along with like religio is like
well perhaps perhaps what we just need
to do is not pretend like we can have a
proposition that's unscientific like lo
let's you can't kiss you can't that's
already happened we're so imbued with
science and technology that we
understand ourselves in it right you
can't just decide not to be so I think
what what what Verbeck he's doing is
he's not trying to piss in the wind of
history he's basically kind of really
taking our fate and seeing and this is
what I think is the right way to respond
to this age of technology is not not
being again but like developing it
beyond itself mmm I think I think I
sense that sensibility in verb aching
what he's doing is he's he's not trying
to start a religion he's trying to
disclose the the intelligibility of all
those practices well actually that was
Birds kind of criticism of him that's
like oh you you're actually what you're
talking about is religion you know yeah
that is a religion well the rest of it
is the what your credits what we're
criticizing what Dawkins is criticizing
you know is it a dead religion you know
so we don't have to believe in the God
that Dawkins doesn't believe in right
either
but there's something we're talking
about we're talking about the
fundamental sort of
communal aspect of humanity and and
that's that begins in the first stone
yeah that you that you build of the
first temple right yeah totally so yeah
that's what we are sort of so so right
so so I don't always but I wouldn't want
to go we don't want to go back to an
Iron Age
really yeah but but we wanted as you say
disclosed and this is where I think the
essence of it I think with bard and in
response to bard
first of all bark like bard it i I've
been listening to bard everything I can
like all the videos that come out in his
books a bard is like he's something man
I like him a lot
yeah in in a he's I just get this sense
he's on fire like there's used to be
he's Nietzsche with the hammer
yeah he's exactly exactly what you do
with the hammer in the same and the way
that John is Socrates are you know
Socrates with the question you know Bart
is Nietzsche with the hammer it's nice
actually we're gonna we're going to get
those two together in Toronto and I'm
looking I'm looking forward to that
April yeah looking forward to that and I
have a feeling that there is something
paradoxical there yeah right cuz it's
like when he says so for example in in
bards response to it he's like like no
it's not that we don't want to get rid
of the religion and like and do this
kind of weird kind of emergent sense of
you know you know he talks about when he
starts breaking things apart right
hitting with with the hammer actually I
think when he says no we need to be more
religious yeah right - I sense an echo
of that is I think that there's a way in
which they're actually I don't think
they're talking about the same thing but
I think they're talking about that which
has multiple aspects to it
MMH right but there's something that
there's something there wedded to and I
have a feeling that C so the phallus
right and I don't know if I understand
exactly what he means by that but I
but based on what I do understand or my
misunderstanding see it strikes me is
like it it's actually very penetrating
to like there's a penetration quality to
it but the penetration right now is like
if for example we can no longer have a
proposition right that demarcates
metaphysics right like that you just we
can tweak we can't make ourselves
believe in that anymore like it's it's
that's our fate we are in a new age
right that even even deeply rather about
that maybe we can make ourselves believe
in that maybe maybe there's all kinds of
things that happen that we don't
understand exactly exactly
well that thing that we we can believe
in that we don't understand all right I
think what I think what it's that right
which is where the phallus needs to
penetrate right mm-hmm it doesn't need
to propose and make a claim right of
like this is it right then you start to
evoke all of the fucking things that
like historically have just made things
go to shit right mm-hmm
but I think the penetration is in is
actually being able to stay with the
mystery and reveal the ontological
mystery with to that which cannot be
proposed be housed in a proposition and
that that actually besides that that is
the thing that animates our lives