hello and welcome to this conversation
with Cory Anton this is the second
conversation I've had with him on his
book sulphate and authenticity so but
I'll give some context for this video
but first some housekeeping I will be a
few things
circling Institute has just announced
that we are going to be doing the art of
circling online which is just open for
registration to participate you can
links are below there's a weekend coming
up at a couple weekends and there's
events that we have every week so I'll
keep you updated on all that stuff but
links are below and if you're interested
in working with me one on one email me
my emails below okay so this the first
video that we did with on his book
himself an authenticity was had a lot
was really about his experience and
where he comes from in some of his
personal history this video we really
kind of go into the guts of the book and
the underlying distinctions and ideas
that's really reformulating what the
notion of a self is and then a start to
begin to ask what is authenticity from
this new or more fully revealed
understanding of self and what I really
like about it is it I had lots of
insights I mean it just felt like we
really owe as I often do with Corey
there's a sense where it's kind of like
you I feel like we're wrestling with
ontology or wrestling like getting in
there and the guts of things so I hope
you really enjoy this please if you do
and you're interested in his book
there's a link below on Amazon for it
and he's got a new book coming out I
think in a few months
it's about being and nothingness I
believe
enjoy yeah you're just talking I was
talking about my experience of of
reading it being it it's difficult to
kind of skim off the top because I it it
catches some originality that goes
really down like really deep and then
you were talking about like what it was
what it's like to look back on it
because this was your first book yeah it
was and it you know yeah you said it was
was my dissertation and I wrote it
largely from 97 to 98 it was defended 98
and then I removed the chapter and did a
lot of rewriting then when I got
published yes it is you know it doesn't
feel like a stranger wrote it I mean I
do feel like it's mine and I recognize
it but it feels very distant at this
point it feels you know so but so long
ago that I look at them like I was kind
of in a different ed space then right
because that it was part of your
dissertation go right which is like when
you're writing a dissertation that's
basically of the people that I've known
that who've written dissertations like
man that's the only thing they're doing
oh yeah it's like so I have hair pretty
long at the time and right when I was
taking my tree limbs I was sitting there
and I was reading I was sitting there
reading a history cause at the time to
basically the rough draft time and my
hair kept like irritating me and was
like falling in my face and I'm like
that's it and I went into the bathroom
got a scissors just started clubbing it
I shaved my head swimming and it scared
people tonsure shaving yeah I mean God I
just how old were you that but at that
point about 23 or 28 so at 28 so I'm
just to imagine it's like at 28
and you grew up in a small town in the
woods in Wisconsin great yeah you go to
college and then you end up in a PhD
right and then you're sitting there
reading Heidegger right the concept of
time right which is not an easy but well
nothing in Heidegger is easy
what's the hell like just rejecting them
there's a little tiny volume that he did
yet called the concept of time he was
like a 1924 lecture isn't like that
but the history the concept of time that
was the it's kind of like the rough
draft to be in a time where he includes
a lot of the stuff from being in time
but it has this for like front-loaded a
hundred hundred fifty page years worth
of history motion of intentionality how
intentionality phenomenology sort of see
yes
grounding his project in so much of the
ceiling and legacy he existential eyes
for rules notion of intentionality my
brilliant hyphens into all of his
expressions so it's relation that the
notion of important of directing one
southward lately he inscribed it into
the language rather than just explicitly
echoing but you can see it much more
explicitly when you look at so it's the
history of time and then there's been a
time and then basic problems of
phenomenology basic problems of
phenomenology is roughly I would have
been like something like division three
fields have been follows up yeah totally
yeah Division three I mean that like the
last division division two of being in
time it's fun it's it's funny - have you
ever listened to
dreyfuses lectures yeah yeah me too yeah
it's funny to watch him
don't listen to that whole thing he's
just stumped by it right um and he does
I think it's like from hit the way he
talks about it anyways he's like yeah
it's Heidegger had to like rush that
that into print right and so there is
like all kinds of orders right things
and this is where it's actually being
dyslexic it's kind of interesting you
know because it's like if you're
dyslexic if something's out of order it
seems to be you have to work through it
you end up learning it like really
learning it because you have to kind of
crawl around the edges and kind of work
it out and I was wondering about with
your book like I kept having this sense
I'm like I can't imagine just laying
this out right
I couldn't imagine just laying it out um
and then writing it like outlining and
you're writing it I just I kept
imagining like you wrote one thing and
you realize oh I got to talk about this
and I I just kind of imagined a
wrestling match and coming up with the
like the the meat and the arguments and
the placements and what was it like that
at all or oh you know it's there is you
know I've written so much what I write a
smaller piece it's like 30 pages or
something under that I think conceivably
kind of think it through and go for it
but still they go through a lot of
revision there's a book project it has
this kind of you know outline it first
and then you know you get going on it
but then as you get going on it
you you know this was the most recent
one as well it's sort of like there's
this huge boulder his is a huge boulder
and you're trying to move it in some
days you're just trying to get a good
clip on so he's hard to get your hands
placed in just the right but just right
spot in order to move it and get it
going forward and that's also you're
like little dizzy like oh look at this I
found the right place to grab your
grip slips and now you don't know where
to grab this you know some days are
absolute frustration and despair other
days are in a year on the top of the
world going
I saw how we get through from you know
you you're like I don't know and then
you see right you need the focused time
to you know I can't there's no way that
I could have written any white books
without you know this is my third
sabbatical without sabbatical release
without concerted effort you know I was
working on my dissertation that's all I
was doing was I was taking a class maybe
but I mean I was just just dissertate
yeah the way that you're talking about
it's really it's interesting is it that
gaining a grip on it right that sense of
like I kept having that sense as I'm
reading through it I'm like whoa some of
these sentences that you you there is
this thing where you're trying to get a
hold of something and then you you know
I just kind of get that sense of like
that really came through of the really
really in some concrete way thinking
through these things that have are like
you know so primordial did a video a
while back and Joe gemin had posted a
comment and you Joe was one of my
professors when I was an undergraduate
and you know I think he was mentioning a
Heidegger and the will has been in
Bakhtin and having no alibi in those
connections between and I think those
really were at the very forefront of my
thought at that time you know if you
look at the references a lot of the
pieces they were they weren't spin-offs
but they were drawing from other
publications that I was doing at the
time that I was doing work on Bakhtin's
know should at once occurrence and
no alibi and I was doing a lot of like
that critique of Heidegger butts aren't
critique of hiding on this issue of
dreamless sleep I still hold you know
that I think leaders appeal to death as
a principle of individuation
underestimates the role of dreamless
sleep kind of lead rounding the body in
a corporal anonymity rather than this
kind of radically you know vigilant
resolute serve design that yes anyway uh
I think that you know one of the
insights that I was having its kind a
lot to do working with youth there was
that you don't really discover what
you're thinking you created and there
was a certain point where you sort of
realize the the Creed of obligation they
either make this app and her it isn't
going to happen other books don't like
themselves and there's a lot of sub
playing and a lot of discipline where
you got to get up in the morning you
have to have a very routine sort of you
know again a discipline organization of
it but I think you know that that was
part of the the insights that I was
trying out like I said whose Bach team
you know social Bakhtin's sort of
flossing the act is just such an amazing
he says in there too of this you know
you say to somebody look back over your
life look back over all of your life
like right now you do the metro and
Inter take inventory of everything he
did now ask yourself of all the things
you've done when you look back could you
have done otherwise than he did so when
you were twenty you had a decision to do
this or do that and you chose to do X
and then when you were 30 other choice
between you and you chose P could you
have just as well just as equally have
chosen Z or chosen K or some other
alternative right and I think what party
would say is that when we look back in
our lives when we do that and I think me
don't you mean we say I think I could
have done otherwise yeah we're really
doing is we're pretending we weren't
there who you were there and that's what
you did now you take your future and
going here right now I'm gonna take that
nausea that I just got thrown at me with
his realization and you know spin that
out ahead of myself and I sentence
myself
- what's once I done something I now
couldn't have not done it and it's the
most energizing and uplifting thought to
really really get it could the Beatles
have not made Abbey Road no they did not
they were there they did that yeah you
bought it commit great acts those can
never ever be you know like if I say to
you and as we wind on down the road with
our shadows taller than our souls that
walks a lady we all know who shines
bright lightens tries to show how
everything still turns to go if you
listen very hard the truth when all is
one and one is all to be a rock and not
to roll how could we possibly know that
unless Led Zeppelin had written that
song is a decision well they could have
just as well not made stairway to heaven
yeah no no reality is this breaking
point between two kinds of past I think
most people this is whether the
Heidegger's concept of times or deals is
beautifully into Bakhtin's notion of
having no alibi you know you have no
alibi because you're here and what you
do you're sentencing yourself to forever
having done and notes so I think for the
hiding works are like this and this will
read that new tiny treatise that he has
called times at the time this look like
somebody do that
Harper Theological Seminary it's sort of
like we think of it like there's a past
and then there's the present and there's
the future and then once we've cast it
that way it's really easy to see the
present and decision-making that
squeezed out so it's like the past
suddenly it seems like it's this
unchangeable irrevocable like the past
already happened we see that's powering
the past it's set in stone and then we
were the futures like all future its
uncertainty who knows what the future
will bring us and there's uncertainties
and possibilities and consequences and
then you have this present and sake the
present it's squeezed and squeezed more
and more between a future you can't
predict and a past that's beyond your
control because it's already happened
and if instead you go that's all problem
there's just a bit of talking you're
going
yourself there's really just two kinds
of pasts there is there's the past that
was and the past that will have been
what we call the future is really a real
have been past and so you actively move
toward the past sentencing yourself to
accomplishments and deeds which once
they are done they now cannot be done
yeah I was like you know I need to write
this book or I don't
and once I've written it ever be there
yeah totally interesting interesting and
in the enlivening this of totally
getting it down to your bones seems to
be something about because if I totally
get that right all the way down to my
bones I mean what strikes me is all of a
sudden when I look to the future the
future becomes something really
different right then then then if I kind
of haunt myself with not having that's a
such an interesting thing to say you
think that it could have been otherwise
or I could have done otherwise
right it's judgment there is to pretend
I wasn't there you couldn't have done
otherwise you're denying my agency we
cover the agency you have your stomach
swing that out ahead of yourself you
know you can't as like moving your sails
or having good the sails themselves
yourself to a past which once you've
done it yeah Oh interesting so that I'm
wondering about if something like that
starts to get at high there is no notion
of
aluminous sure right like that sense of
yeah can you take can you spin that into
into things because that that's been a
thing of i resoluteness in the way he
talks about it in being in time isn't it
isn't obvious to me what he's saying
yeah but it starts to get more obvious
here yeah I mean I guess I I think some
of this gets ambiguous in Heidegger that
you know in some way I think it's about
responding to the call to conscience and
individually oneself out of das mom know
we in almost everyday sense we lose
ourselves into the public way of how
things are yeah when I think for
Heidegger in some way the the call
toward conscience is a contoured
authenticity and it's about resolute
with my decisions knowing in some way
they're all lived in the context of
knowing that I will die once I know that
I will die it means that all decisions
can't be just made equal because I have
to decide some of them rather than
others like if I was gonna die there be
a need to prioritize anything so I
always just do it later you have to do
that one later once you really get it
into your head that you would die part
of the fabric of yourself understanding
now life was a bunch of priorities and
what would you be here this story it's
like I'm it's really popular so I'm
embarrassed to repeat it but I think
it's worth telling but this guy telling
the story about time management this
guy's had this big glass jar and he
pulls out the glass jar and he they
pulls out this big container of like
it's just six big rocks to like the size
of a fist or whatever he takes each Rock
and he fits it into the glass jar and
then he says to everyone is the jar full
and people are like no I'm not sure what
you're asking he says okay very good
he comes up he pulls out a bag of gravel
and he starts putting gravel into the
jar and tumblin all are
which is the jar full and people like
yeah I think he goes okay
he boasts and whose plants and a nurse
and then he says isn't clear now and
people like I think it's probably pretty
full of water and he says a full mouth
and everybody goes yes it's full and he
goes very good what's the moral of that
story and so eager person in the Front's
like Oh point is is that there's always
a little free time you one make the most
of your time you've got to make sure to
look for the little nooks and crannies
to find the extra space to get it all in
there and blah blah blah
he goes no that's not the point at all
you're paying attention the point is you
don't start with the big rocks you never
get them all into the jar and so the
really big rocks first I've never heard
that that's great the so I thought it'd
be great just to read the very last
thing you say about authenticity here
first at the summary and then just start
to kind of look because this kind of
leads to almost to everything else
you say authenticity viewed in these
lights is not in any way a radical
autonomy or a total freedom to do one's
own thing it is not an egotistical drive
of personal ambition nor is it a selfish
profiteering but neither is it a slavish
competence to environmental stimuli and
situational impingements the middle way
most rightly characterizes authenticity
thus we must be ready to live with
paradox or else we may drown of thirst
in the vast desert of shoreless seas as
a habit of passionate and I love this
let this very last thing like this last
pit very very last paragraph of the book
as a habit of passionate responsibility
authenticity is the practice of openness
by which we are called to fitted fitting
responses authenticity
therefore reveals itself as a kind of
play it is an ordered request and
ordered requests and a blissfully
seduced obedience that's great it is an
or an order to request and a blissfully
seduced obedience more simply addressed
it is a duty duty full autonomy one
liberated by indebtedness yeah a fitting
response it's like a key concept in
strods writings where the fitting
response is an attempt to create a epics
that's not
based in some extra transcendental realm
it's not an ethical absolute the nor is
it a kind of willy-nilly we make it up
as we go along like moral subjectivism
it's about the hermeneutics of the
fitting response or trying to ask what
is the current social historical
situation and what is the most fitting
way to respond yeah and so what I do a
lot of stuff are you know that it's in a
dot it's an autonomy liberated by
indebtedness I think part of the hassle
is that I think so many people they
they're unaware of the thousands of
years worth of technological innovation
that was involved in their de tribal
ization and their sense of themselves as
a discrete separate individual that
we're much more community and
collectively grounded than we come and
you realize and I think what once people
really get that sense they realized that
their autonomy their their sense of
freedom has been liberated by other
people it's been by parents who
disciplined them who made them become
literate maybe you know capacitated them
in various ways by putting constraints
upon them and so it's it's trying to
find you know the space where we can
recognize ourselves as partly other
people as partly the world as partly
social historical players rather than
this sort of discrete anti mystic
individual which i think it's largely
money in literacy which fund the
illusion of the the self-sufficing
individual right which which too in that
illusion is illusionary precisely
because it starts thinking after the
history that created that basically like
it doesn't account for it doesn't
account for all of the historical and
and existential and ontological
relations that that
fashioned it up such that it can have it
can have those thoughts right in that
way I mean in some way to I think you
know that that ending is trying to deal
with the opening which you know I began
with Taylor and the Boosters and the
knockers so when when the quest of
authenticity surrogates thrown down upon
people as profound self-awareness is
settling in through mass education
systems largely the 20th century but
maybe a little bit before that but
completely in the 20th century we have
all parts of the drive toward
authenticity well then the boosters are
like yeah each person has a right to
live their life and the knockers are
like hey there's bigger meaning
structures you can't just you're
threatening you know a kind of
meaninglessness and ilysm and cultural
chaos and moral relativity in the
boosters like yeah but it's my life and
I think there's insights on both sides
and you find that is to realize that
there are larger meaning structures
structures like those collectives into
which we can have our sacrifices he made
me for but we want to safeguard against
the machine I mean a lot of people end
up feeling really great in losing
themselves into something faster than
themselves and I'm all for that but it's
what are they gonna lose themselves into
and that's I so I really love the cover
that they did on the book you know
because it has you see a person we don't
see his face we just see we're working
and that's how you take care of yourself
yourself by taking care of who you
really are who you really are is the
world that's opening by is your
replacement moment so I think what
happened is when people in like I think
this is sometimes it's part of like
blues rock culture but it's like I need
more me time and I'm not giving it up
focus on me and this kind of like this
me isn't me time I need to go have you
know like people pander to me and feel
like I'm being you really treated in
this kind of like self-indulgent kind of
that's been done under the flag of
authenticity yeah you know and I'm
trying to cut against that but it's not
like you know we all have to join the
military and we'll be part of the war
machine or be completely self
sacrificing I think there is a sense in
which you find you know your place in
the world by contributing to it's trying
to free up the world's beauty try to
help other people in their possibilities
but at no point is that your doing your
own thing but Nora you just thought
within the social machine that you know
is assigned in place for you I think
there is no way I think there is a way
to to articulate a space that has all
the hallmarks of social responsibility
and what we're going to call your civic
society and social goodness while also
it's not tyrannical to the individuals
freedoms and liberties in all the ways
that they want to accomplish a very
unique life for themselves yes yes this
is in this part where you talk about
this thing you say about indebtedness
more simply a dress is a dutiful
autonomy one's one liberated by
indebtedness so this clot this quality
of and this is this is something that
kind of I've heard you talk about it
rides through all your work right that
the this this I don't want say unity but
this Col relationship right of of a
sense of indebtedness that's right like
indebtedness and I remember in your in
your older videos right there's a dig
there's like this big debate was life a
curse or was it a blessing basically
right was it a gift right or was it was
it torture YUM and and you always really
kind of argued for the fete like the
fact that it's a it's such a gift yeah
that you couldn't have even wanted it
right it's like unwanted all right and I
don't mean just you know in Truman gift
is the same word as Voyager so it's not
universe
you needed one be really careful our
phrasing about the gift is the reference
to the radical asymmetry well you know I
mean everyone wants to call it an
imposition to the problem I had with the
imposition argument is the imposition it
makes it seem as if there is someone
being imposed upon well that's sort of
that is the problem with that I'll go
back to the indebtedness stuff so yeah I
mean well I was doing this at the time I
mean David K Reynolds was a major figure
Dickie Reynolds is he doesn't work in
Japanese forms of psychotherapy and he's
the founder of both mamita and and their
schools so malaria in my zone are the
two founders of these different schools
and Nikon is sometimes called the
therapy of indebtedness and gratitude
and it's about understanding how in the
sense of indebtedness and gratitude run
together and it wonderful lies but one
of our wonderful lines in there is the
day you were born was the day your
mother suffer and there's they do what
reflection therapy in maycon right and
my god and then they took a person and
they'll sit up in a room and they give
up it's like doing a diary kind of thing
and you for two hours
you write down you started your mother
and you start with your mother from you
all the way to six months and you write
down all the detail you started the
first question what does this person
given to you how did they provide it for
you what exactly if they have to do for
you write all that down the second
question is how how have you returned to
this other what did you give it back to
the so what exactly has been your
contribution when this person is well
and then the last question is how have
you been an inconvenience or a burden
for this other how is this other been
put out because of your very presence
and they say when night that is
performed correctly and people do know
that the six hours and you're doing it
use people it has a tendency to snap
people into a sense of gratitude because
they realize they have been given much
returned little yes
[Laughter]
yeah yeah beautiful playing ball I'm
running water water bears no stars the
handbook for kids way to take slip-ons
come on handbook for constructive living
that's a really great text those kinds
of thoughts were kind of in the backdrop
of some of them yeah totally well just
seems it seems so much to me like this
sense of indebtedness like one of the
ways like with meditation what I'll
often what I'll often do is just like a
meditation I'll do is well just get
really present to just the immediacy of
experience and then see if I could just
tune in to the way in which it it
already just happens right this sense of
like almost everything that I can
perceive with my senses internally and
externally has an immediacy that I'm all
I'm all it's already begun by the time I
encounter it right I've already arrived
in my already always awareness even the
awareness that has it I find myself I
guess is what this is that sense of
thoroughness right but there's a way
there's a way that if if I tuned into
the givingness like but more like a gift
you really do get this way this sense in
which there's an immediacy to that
indebtedness right like every single
thing if it's even goes beyond a little
bit beyond you know even the pain in my
knee right is in some way something that
I can't account for its existence right
that every single moment
I'm bubbling up into existence and what
I think I'm hearing you say as I'm
talking about this and then when I so
when I when I make decisions I make
choices and I start to to to live out
this already begun this right
I would imagine nice it's interesting I
would imagine like that
the fundamental difference of how on
some deep level if that arising right is
twisted in the sense of a I'm being
tortured right or like it's a burden in
in in some negative sense versus it's a
a gift that I can't ever repay right
that that's a real that's a real
fundamental difference in an orientation
and how everything else occurs and you
know I think to my own you know this
argument I was with people over
antinatalism they're all sort of
frustrating because you know I don't
have children and B I don't see it as
you know there's one question of this
issue does anything justify all the
hardship and suffering and the sorrow of
life and is it art is it purposefully
relevant we can have all this kind of
stuff but it gets pivot as if people
either think that you know truthfully
they are antenatal is that life isn't
worth living and no one should have
children they have a moral obligation or
everyone a party or something and I
never had I think either of those you
know the difficulty is that yeah life is
a bitch and there is a lot of hardship
and in justices and suffering but when I
used to freeze it's a gift I mean it in
the sense of it's not like I was there
and then received the gift of life yeah
well it's me my very existence first
gift yes as best you can is to take care
of other people to try to love other
people to try to help all the to to
realize that we're in this together
right right and as you say in the book
to free use this phrase a number of
different times to free others for their
possibilities right to free other
think about that sociality runs so deep
in in our lives
none of us got the choice to ask whether
or not we wanted to be born you know so
there's a students you know students
aren't like reluctant learners and
they're doing this grumpy I don't want
to be here and I do this you don't have
to be here you know this isn't high
school your parents aren't gonna get
arrested for you being truant you're on
be here you don't drop out of college
but you can't explain your parents why
you want here
you know let's cut stuff and I think at
a certain point you can team go look
none of us asked to be born and what are
you gonna do you're gonna sit and try to
make it worse for yourself you're gonna
deal with it as we would say well that's
that's one level of the question of how
does one deal with the fact of having
been born even though one didn't ask for
it that's again a very difficult
procreate you know David Benatar's
brother like you have been is really
just an absolute masterpiece because she
really shows I think in a robust way
that people have a moral obligation to
not procreate but they have a legal
right to do so and he's sort of saying
you're the legal through vacation of
trying to enforce this would be much
worse than it yeah you know is that
sociality wants so deep that there are
some decisions that only other people
get to make and our birth would be one
of those we don't get to decide whether
or not we're born that's something for
other people to decide now I myself and
not having children I don't have any
children but I'm not carrying a sign
telling people they shouldn't I think
they should realize that they're giving
a death sentence your issue with that
sentence we have a child it's fear
that's the dealer I think they don't
there's no other way to get the person
in the world that have someone make that
decision yeah yeah because I don't have
any with closeted religious beliefs I'm
not fearful that people who are going to
be born are somehow gonna be sentenced
to a life and eternal damnation or any
kind of stuff I feel like no matter how
horrible life gets and it can be a
or shelf death heals all wounds here's
an imposition it's a limited imposition
and I mean the stars come with the
Golden Gate I thought that was good this
is the gift this we get to the with
character again for the Stoics you were
born with reasoned and the ability to
reason includes the ability to take your
life the storage really drift away from
Christianity then Christianity
who's really against suicide because if
you kill someone and then you could beg
for forgiveness but if you kill yourself
you didn't have a chance to be forgiving
Christian advice against suicide is so
much against the stoic sensibilities
because absolutely are not slavery
they're an ancient but if life is so
nasty so just inconsolably bad off
yourself and you have the ability to do
so and we could go into the details of
his laws against it's not always that
easy
there are ways in which we could have as
a society don't better with these
problems but yeah I mean I do think in
order to really feel gratitude one has
to feel life as a kind of gift and I
think the issue of gratitude is just
absolutely crucial yeah again it's not
to say I love it because it's like it's
a birthday cake in a pony
it's to say that I'm dazzled by the
awesomeness of existence by its majesty
and its beauty it's that there is such a
thing as music and what do I want as a
price for that I mean you you have
tasted love you've tasted the most
amazing most beautiful you think you
should get all this for free without any
cost I think that seems like a pretty
fair price
yeah this is yes absolutely
absolutely and then it's it
because it's very easy to see as you're
talking about that right how much do I
want to pay for this right basically
you're basically saying if you just get
really present and you look at your own
existence
right you were already there like you
were given by like generations and
generations and generations right
accounted for you including all of you
like most of your capacities for
literacy to read write to think to talk
to speak like almost everything is so
imbued with historical relations all the
way down right that and that any of that
stuff is it all right is there is an
inexhaustible mystery like it's just
it's it's infallible so he says better
to have never been realizes that there's
a paradox that's sleeping better is
already assuming the rationality to get
the judgment but that's only what comes
given existence in life so even the
ability to recognize it is better but
the whole sense of you know to know that
there is such a thing as life to know
them I don't know what you know it's
hard for me to put a price tag on that
yeah it just seems like it's it's the
banquet of all payments itself you know
it's a spectacle of justice a hardship I
don't think we have to give it this
whitewash and this eulogy yeah we're the
rose-colored glasses whatever expression
you use I don't think that's what he
going back to this issue gratitude um I
fear that there are many religious
people they don't know how to accept be
granted to them they don't accept life
in gratitude because they're kind of
hunted out for an afterlife and that's
the condition that allows them to make
them say that yeah life was acceptable
well then all this hardship is going to
be acceptable to there I am you know I I
have I probably seen more antenatal
to some people and I sort of like having
that that same sort of crazy I think the
people who say you know the only way
that I can accept this world with all of
its and justices and hardships is if
there is some sort of God who's going to
ensure that justice is served in the end
and is gonna punish the wicked and you
know give treats to the righteous and
when people say that what they're really
saying is I don't have any gratitude for
this life until there's something else
beside it and I'm like you're creating
the conditions of just not even being
able to accept it with gratitude if you
need something other than life in order
to be grateful for life I'm not sure
you're grateful for life yes yes it's
like I think it's I don't know if I have
this right but even like my sense about
Christ was like at the end he's
basically saying in its absolute worst
torture can I still say it's good oh
right like that that sense of like all
the way down right all the way down into
the worst tragedy great in fact one
would say one could say that like one of
the one of the things about modernism is
the loss of the sense of tragedy I know
I know
Nietzsche talked about wanting to
restore the sense of the tragedy right
that's that sense of just and there's
something about the tragic it's so so
connected to beauty right in these ways
yeah I mean I think this you were sort
of giving it but in this sort of a
Joseph Campbell Campbell it's that yeah
Christ is the symbol for you take the
perfect person who did nothing wrong
who's trying to do good for other people
in a self sacrificial way and you
humiliate the person you torture the
person and you unjustly put the person
to death and the whole way through the
person says I can affirm even this I can
accept even this and joyfully
participate in the sorrows of humanity
as that's happening you know there is a
kind of transcendence and so I think
those simples those are
phyto for us to resonate into and said
you know to what extent can we open in
compassion and in love to the horrors
and the onion justices but the I mean at
the Christ even you know they're people
who they read it as this like atheistic
moment where Christ on the cross as my
God my God why have you forsaken me and
there's the sense in which even Jesus
there is so same I think I'm alone here
and I think for for some scholars what
this means is sort of the median thing
but it's that that the spiritual
significance of the individuals life
journey was destined to happen
Jesus is there as literacy setting in
some people are becoming more and more
self-conscious and it's sort of like
this person this the historical person
Jesus right it's like he achieved a kind
of spiritual enlightenment that was just
so radiant that it just dazzled people I
mean sort of achieved the storix dream
of you know grateful indifference you
know totally in the RET and the
rationale is is like the RET rationale
in terms of ratio is what I really kind
of get about even talking about this set
in the sense of when you were talking
about like you get the unfathomable this
of the ink the like the incomprehensible
'ti of that there is right in everything
after that right is is is is downstream
from this fundamental sense of
indebtedness to this right and that when
you look at it right there's something
about really getting that in your bones
where you're not I get this sense that
this is where I'm we start to get into
like what is it to be to be as you say
the habit of authenticity right I get
this sense of that you know in your part
of what you do in this book is you kind
of start off with looking at the the
modern conception of of authenticity
being very separate referential as if
you're kind of a thing that
then become fulfilled right inauthentic
and you're like well okay so let's first
of all we have to look at what is itself
and then you then you break it down into
into like four basic vectors right I
think one was one was embodiment right
the other one was Senora Senora sness as
I say that correctly yeah right language
speech discourse right and the other one
was um it's temporal yeah temporality
Association sociality and that like that
you're like okay look if we work the lip
we need to look at what itself is first
of all before we look at can it be
fulfilled and if that even by the end of
the book I get the sense of like I have
this sense of often and this is also
like true of my experience of
authenticity is less and less about a
self reflective orientation right and
more like this way I'm in I'm though
it's something about the way well I
think the use that you actually say this
it's the the way I embrace my concerns
right in others as an embody being right
is taking up time in a future in a past
right that there's all it's the way that
I you say a dutiful economy one
liberated by indebtedness I just love
that you know it's really like it's the
story of the two bricklayers at st.
Peter's Cathedral you know they're there
and they're laying bricks for st. Jude's
the people and this person comes up is
trying to figure out what's going on he
comes with a one bricklayer and he says
what do you doing here guys what am i
doing I'm laying bricks and he says the
other guy all right says hey what are
you doing here any guy says what am I
doing here can't you see I'm Billy and
there is this sense in which some people
they realize that they will die they
realize that they're not interchangeable
with other people and they realize that
what they do matters however humbly I'll
ever ministry
and it resonates within the quality of
the care and whatever they're doing
which I think there are other equality
of his hair or whatever you're doing
yeah yeah it's sort of like they've been
convinced that the world is a thing
they're a thing
they're just representing it and the
world goes on without them they don't
realize that the world is calling them
to give responses and that they're
derelict dereliction of duty is it's a
crisis in the world it's not you know
he's not like a predicate property of a
thing like this pen is blue you know
it's not like it just is like mean or
depend so it's something of me it has to
do with the whole overall way in which
I'm interacting and it has to do with
realizing that I couldn't have not been
that I am here and that I'm not
substitutable and you know it's I think
the sense in which but let's just go
through the motions and it doesn't
really matter is to pretend that when
one is in here you know you in a
squabble with your lover your partner
and you know there's a sense in which
you just feel screw it and you literally
kind of treat the person the way you
think anyone would treat them but just
really gonna resort to cultural practice
that's you know this is a relationship
that's never been before this is a
particular person I'm a particular
person and we don't you know address
this all of this the reality you know
like real like it is you said the world
right we show up in the world in a
certain sense it it it's calling our
response right so it's so we're always
in other in other words I think you'd
make it the point really clear it's like
there there is no me and then the world
and then I make and then I act upon the
world right
but rather there's the me world right
it's a there so there so you know as for
Becky would say there's the agent arena
relationship there's no agent and then
an arena it's the eight they co
constitute each other you've never done
anything is a response right and so what
you're saying is like authenticity is
the way I take up that response right
and it's not the content of their
responsiveness Nestle right that's
correct quality of the care it's the
quality of begin yeah as I'm taking care
of the world I'm doing so not with the
neglectful indifference but with a
passion that realizes that my presence
is exactly so that's that part of that
because I think that you know a lot of
people in when when they have that kind
of going with the motions like in depth
like apathetic indifference right in
other words I'm doing what I'm doing
because that's what I've always done and
that's what they do and right there's
that kind of sense of idle talk right
which I which which you know in a
certain sense it's easy to get
moralistic about this but my III don't I
I've actually come to notice like things
like manners and in idle talk is
actually the way that the culture keeps
its foliage in in play right but then
there's the this is what this is what
also part of what I think is so
inspiring
like innately inspiring I would say
about the notion of authenticity and
scary about it is that there's something
about that very same thing that allows
for the possibility of of responding
authentically right it's also the very
thing that allows for inauthenticity
right it's a there's a rule it's like
there's it's so open right it's so open
in some regard that it allows
misconceptions of itself right and so
therefore
this there is I think that's where the
individual seems to in this embodied way
to me seems to have I just feel this
kind of torque where it's like yeah if
you just let it go
right and let it be I mean your
environment will supply you with
interpretations and embodiment and stuff
and that you can just kind of bumble
along so there is I guess what I'm
asking I'm starting to realize I'm what
I'm asking is it there does seem like
that there is an ethical moral morality
in just the way that I take up that
response yeah very much I think it
forces the issue that when you ask
people get back over your life that when
you were 15 you took someone to prom do
you think of someone else whatever I
think they're like well I could have
done otherwise and they have that sense
I think they're they're trying to
register something like look I'm an
agent I make choices I make decisions
and I am to the great but they're not
realize you met they're coming over in
an inauthentic way the point is that
that was the past and you were there and
that's what you did and you know it's
not to say that they can't do different
now or do different in the future but to
pretend that I wasn't there and I think
that sort of feature that is the more
that people are able to convince
themselves that they're incidental bit
players and a word that goes on without
them and that because they just as well
could have done otherwise this isn't my
problem stop my responsibility this is
someone else's yeah waiting for someone
else to save us from ourselves right so
that call the calling of the response so
that's just that's always that that's
it's there's something
really rich and just that saying right I
know I think here card talks about the
Heidegger talks about that right the
call of conscious or the call of
response in this sense of you know the
the metaphoric sense of listening right
and I wanted to kind of go into this
with you a little bit about this role of
of listening right so in some ways for
example when you described writing the
book right and you were like COD some
days and you're talking about with tears
like Thayer said that like you know
philosophy these ideas you create them
you don't find them right you create
them and at the same time what I heard
you say right is like some days I
fucking could find it in other days I
couldn't and then going into despair if
there was something you were contending
with though right it's like right it's a
it's a wrestling it in some way this
sense of heat this this connection
between authenticity and genuine
listening right and genuine hearing
right I'm thinking about some of your
work that you've done with around Walter
all right and and that there's something
about there's something about when
historically when we became literate
right it seems it seems like it makes it
my understanding is that even today with
illiterate people they have a very
difficult time right abstracting out a
biographical self that goes across
context right right in this yeah and yes
I just wondering if you could say
something about this process about this
call in any way in on that is that I
think there are others as well like this
junior dogs the Greeks near a snorting
but there's there's a transition that
occurs in the drift from shame cultures
which tend to be oral versus guilt
cultures which tend to be literate where
you know shame is the outward people
telling you that
to do what you're doing is you to
internalize those others and you command
yourself not to do what you think others
would change and so there's this
internalization of the others shame it
becomes built-in and I mean like this
guilt in substantial sense is not at all
remorse over things that one have done
it's as much listening to the voice
that's calling me you want to do that
you know so whatever you're you're being
tempted by some other person you know
your your lovers your wife's not there
your partner's not there and you're like
you know I think to really go through
that exercise you know if I do this can
I just say to myself I just as well
could have not done it or if I do this
am I saying for all eternity I chose to
do this and you start to hear your own
call in that way yeah if I can do this
on a circle around the spin way but I
think it's a way to come at it but it's
I always find it in the same way that I
find it energize him to talk about
Bakhtin and having an alibi or to talk
about authenticity I'd love to talk
about high-performance people and how
the performance people have performance
organizations how do they get that going
on you so many people they want to do
great things with their lives but they
don't know how to get themselves to do
it they really want to do this they
struggle with make that happen
what is it that high-performance people
know or how do i performance people had
their problems or setbacks or situations
more generally and enable them to do
this so there's a lot of different ways
to I mean we could talk about this like
at length but it's supposed to be fair
but you know one of them would be like
take the the classic example of the
alarm clock right so I think a lot of
people all right I'm gonna get shape
this year's resolution go to the gym you
know every morning six o'clock you set
in July
like who said that I'm too tired to wake
yourself up to a hard to spontaneously
have that demand because we made it has
a snooze button and you hit the snooze
unless you know it's like right and then
I'm gonna put the alarm clock on the
other side of the room now I have to get
up call their friends you know you can't
beat yourself up I think it myself you
call me I'll call you to build me like
somehow into their accountability
they're trying to make themselves more
responsible if you watch really
high-performance people so be like this
they set their alarm for six o'clock and
they're gonna go to the gym and it's now
it's 550 and it's like it's not like
it's the fire alarm the fire alarm is
going off you're not going oh I'm too
tired I need to go back to sleep snows
News News you like fire I need to get up
and go and find out what's going on
I think people hear the alarm clock is
if it were the fire alarm right they
they go I have to I'm going to do this
and there's no excuses so I think this
whole question of how how does in
authenticity relate to excuse making
because excuse making has a lot to do
with the bleeding that I'm here and that
other people are relying on me that what
I do matters these solutions are like
well I don't really have to you know if
I show up and I went through my homework
in a half-hearted way and I love that a
half-hearted way and I just felt
emotions who am i hurting I think that's
sort of how people think it was they're
almost act like they're gonna stick it
to someone by getting away with more
with doing less and you wanna boy you're
end up with an inauthentic fake life and
you're gonna feel guilt and weird
feelings that you don't know how to
address because this was your one chance
and you know we're that only fruit that
can suffer the agony of not having ripen
you aware of the passage of time and we
can know anguish know one fruit that has
the possibility of knowing we have not
ripened God that's a yes that and I can
I can feel I can I can sense the that
being a call the difference the
difference that makes the difference
between that being a call to ripen right
or a call to somehow avoid but the sense
of that's where I can start to get going
through the motions right because that
possibility is still there but there's
that response that responsiveness right
you know I think many people will say
they want to be authentic they're saving
on an authentic life what better sitcom
on Fox in a furniture chip and more
comfort and convenience and they they
don't know the source of their happiness
and because that their food no there's a
great passage in the wisdom of the sands
by something super a where he says I've
always preferred men of the monastery to
the men of secular life not that the
people the monastery or any happier
because they had no possessions they
were so less likely to be fooled with
guarding the source of their happiness
there's people with a lot of outward
things they may not only their happiness
comes from there's people that very
little or close to nothing
they're very sure where their happiness
comes from because obviously stuff right
totally
so this is it's interesting as you're
talking I'm noticing kind of the the
Herman Decker magnetic circle right
coming around of like where it's
interesting it's like this this is
because it hurts to get up to the alarm
right if there's a there's a there's a
thing about
like if you want to be unhappy just like
live by your preferences right you'll
just end up being if everyone anywhere
just live by their preferences right you
just end up being and kind of an
isolated right entertained this the
sense oh so much of responding to the
call into the world is this the world
and there's resistances and so so on
some level there's a sense of a
relationship to pain and suffering right
yes that seems to be the authentic
response of America talk about they is
the way that I take up my concern it's
given to me knowing I can be a fruit
that has not ripened right I mean this
is you know back to the whole an always
leery of taking advice from people who
look like their lives or train tracks
you know this is the moment where I kind
of am sympathetic to some between
computers and stuff I mean strange cat
I'm not doing that well but you know who
says whatever so they're talking about
something I would see their closet well
she don't know they're you know if
they're ruling camp do they do the
dishes after they had there's a sense in
which learning how to just keep Eliot's
like oh that's the first shit together
your life together
get some self discipline your own self
discipline
maybe well of the person who gets you to
give to you the net cost of all kinds of
people's sloth and exclusives we all
innovate yeah yeah so it's it's
interesting you know so now here's the
question I'm wondering is my I'm
naturally my awareness is going is like
okay the difference that makes that
difference right like the difference
that makes that difference if I whether
or not I get up to the alarm or I don't
get a V alarm right whether I hit the
snooze button or I I
respond to it as the as the alarm is the
the fire alarm right has to do so it
seems to have to do with how deeply both
the temporality of the future occurs for
me right yes right how it occurs for me
in that that occurrence seems to be part
of the authentic response like that
there's some way that authenticity
brings forward and has me relate to the
to the future in that way and this is
what I'm thinking about like
relationship and community great like
how does that future become alive and
present to me in that way such it occurs
not just like a snooze button but yes
but the fire alarm I think these are
these are like million-dollar
existential these are just so wonderful
because I think there is a there's a
popular myth that whitewash is this
situation and they be this bootstrapping
and I'm not trying to give a
bootstrapping arguing you know so like
take something like when some person
gets hit with unemployment and then
suddenly again they lose their job they
lose their livelihood and then it
becomes like it's almost like it's
depressing right they don't know how to
get out of bed in the morning because
they're not sure about the future and
then that becomes like a spiral that is
the future starts to close off and then
as the future starts it goes off they
feel like they can't do anything and use
my mutually reinforcing things and I
think it's easy for people who are well
employed or who have a sense of a viable
future or their parents who you know
that they know they're going to get and
that's fine but a lot of people you know
it's larger social situations which
they're aware that there isn't a real
viable future for them there is they are
in institutions of racism forms of just
social ceilings and some people are
unaware of that dear they they can kind
of smell they can put their finger on it
but they know that they're not going to
have the same opportunities in people so
these are some people who because
a situation in an existential way has
lots of opportunities that they work
really hard and there are other people
who is going to amount to not that much
of a difference given the social
historical situation that they're in and
I think that's a remove Isis because I
think we like to make it seem as if it's
all about the individual psychology and
working hard in this kind of stuff well
you know there are some people who are
there literally caught their calling so
people collectively need to admit some
of these and justices they need to admit
social structures of inequality and try
to change not that they're getting
people free handouts but you're creating
the conditions for legitimate
opportunity to occur there's actual
possibilities they're not choosing the
switch I mean I think there's there's
rapid switch right and it would say that
that it sounds like in freeing those
structures in confronting those
structures and addressing those
structures and what I'm a hit what I'm
what I really got from your book is like
the authenticity right you could create
those structures right question those
structures and be authentic in in
addressing it right in the way that you
are taking up the concern and you can
just probably do much of the same thing
like similar outcomes and be inauthentic
about it right so that sense of just as
the conversation going on I'm kind of
getting this sense of like the condition
done conditionality of that if I'm human
I am already find myself concerned right
and in fact that's that's how the world
shows up is the via the call to be
concerned right that that sense of
thoroughness and so so authenticity
right and and it's connection to high
performance I'm really glad that you
brought that up because there's so much
there there is so much that can be
gleaned out of that right about like
looking at like well what is the
difference that makes the difference in
terms of really great boss a really
great boss makes
not only possible but necessary for you
to thrive and succeed a really great
boss is someone who's in the business
not just of helping people make money
but helping them create great lives to
create great lives that's I mean a
corporation that's grounded like
inauthenticity it's yes profits are
important if you're not profitable
you're not gonna be able to stay in
business in you're not viable but
profits aren't the end of the
corporation and global it's the people's
lives the quality that people's lives
are involved those are the real
stakeholders not just the shareholders
right now that here's where we get into
their like the role of authenticity of
the individual and what what are the
conditions that invite that the like
allow that to become present all right
or called
like is that it seems to me that I hear
the call it seems to be really really
really really in in the sociality part
of things right of I would imagine well
up here like this it's like Warner you
put you'll probably do the kissed order
the story Warner Earhart the guy who
started asked and you know the human
potential movement all that after he got
s going he he wanted to he he he was
fascinated by high performance and so he
wanted to study high performance and so
one of the ways that he did is he took a
race car like race car driving right
with the teams and all that kind of
stuff
and he didn't care about race carving
when you wanted to see like if he could
get to if he could get if you could
start winning races right and see if he
can distinguish the differences that
made the difference what what is the
thing that makes the high-performance
aces well you know when you first start
right you get out of the track and you
realize right that that there's the
front of the pack there's a limit on the
pack and there's the back of the pack
they'd always works that way right and
then he's like the first the first part
is like you get your coordination down
and there's lots of skills and drills
and a repetition and that kind of thing
and then you get into the middle of the
pack and the East is like that's when
you realize that there's the front of
the middle pack the middle of the middle
back in the back of the mill pack and he
said like every into the middle of the
pack every like threshold he broke
through essentially was about practice
and skill building practice and getting
better and better and better and better
and then he got to the front of the
middle of pack and it was like this kind
of threshold that he couldn't there was
no amount of practicing with his team
that he could get any farther and so he
so what he started doing is he's just
started like hanging out with the people
in the front of the pack and the front
of the people open from the pack were
usually way in front of the pack like
they were in a different world and so he
started hanging out with their families
and he started having conversations with
them going out to lunch and it was
interesting because in this in this way
he started to realize that the people in
the front of the pack had a completely
different vocabulary rather than the
people in the middle of the pack right
and it's interesting and he the way he
brought that in is he talks about that
is is he's highlighting how language
right but I actually think it's
relationality I don't think it's just
language cuz that because language is
always within relate like relationship
relationship right embedded but we eat
say like for example when people in the
middle of the pack right would talk
about an inch between the cars they
would relate to it like an inch between
the cars but the people up there are
talk about the inch between the cars in
there are all these distinctions within
that inch that are like metaphorically
like miles apart all these things that
you can do that that they their
vocabulary was it was embedded in their
vocabulary and he says like that then
that's when he kind of broke the sound
barrier a few willing started winning
races sure I mean that just I think that
just makes great sense I think that's
very true you know it's sort of like
really high performing students they can
celebrate by autographing one you know
those testing
celebrate autograph one I mean they're
in a different mindset of how they're
thinking about their performance you
know one of the things about performance
is that you are always separable from
your performance because you've never
been greater than who you are you've
always been greeted up past performance
by the time you get the grade it's
already a register who you were rather
than who you are so like like sometimes
you know student hand in a paper and
I'll give them a grade back and then
they struggle to read their own response
aloud in class whatever in there when
they change and so I think high
performance people are always looking
for their chance to be evaluated realize
that it's a register of the past and
they take it as a learning activity they
don't get in their future directive you
know you never try to figure out you
know why you got where you're at you're
busy trying to figure out how to get
where you want to get to go pop
psychology how do I learn to you know
accept myself as I am versus this how do
I get myself where I were a tional
rationality that's that sense of like
rationality is in the in the stoic sense
of the word right of ratio of like
rationing right so it's like yeah so I'm
looking there's a sense of there's a
sense of a possibility right living into
possibilities right and therefore how
I'm what I rationed for right if it's if
it's if it's given by that it makes more
sense like to go to the gym versus it
the alarm but that that sense of that
having that potential that future that
sense of being present in such a way
that I don't hit the snooze button right
or I respond to it like
emergency that it is yeah on some level
see this is that this is where I just
kind of get this is this is that sense
of where it seems to me like from my it
from my own experience I've been really
fortunate to have had people in my life
that have basically taken me under their
wing older men right and and and also
older women as well when I was like a
teenager in my early 20s right can
almost define my life in I could tell
the story of my life basically by just
talking about those relationships right
but I know what I'm realizing is that
that that I was really fortunate right
because that's no longer kind of built
into the culture this sense of
mentorship and deep relationship where
somebody really does take on your
responsibility in a way as if it was
their own right and being with somebody
and being with a mentor and spending
time with them right gets at this issue
of you know those habits by which were
liberated up you know in our autonomy to
the indebtedness to others I mean I
think the more as you say reflect back
on my life there were key mentors
whether they were friends whether they
were teachers whether they were bosses
just relatives that there were certain
people in my life who they made all the
difference in the world
and I think you really appreciate that
and you you start to go and am I that
person for other people how can I help
others the way that I've been helped
that's when were young we just want to
make it and the older you get the more
its shallow without you become more
interested in and see how others are
doing it in their lives I think when I
was when I was younger I just saw was in
the panic of wanting to to make it or
whatever that means and now I'm you know
I'm older and I I still have goals and
things but I feel like I'd really
accomplished so much of what I set out
to do and now my boys are really drifted
just toward teaching tip toward
see students thrive in succeed in that
and when you're a teacher and in that
sense of like the mentorship see I'm
wondering about if we have relationships
in our lives right if we have communitas
right like the sense of like the religio
sense of religion right the community it
seems like that the that is so huge when
it comes to being able to hear the call
because I think that they're in so many
different ways I look at my own life
it's those mentors in a certain sense
they kind of in some way whether or not
they are new that they were doing it or
not we're helping me hear the call of my
own teacher right in that sense of like
like we could see they could see
potential in me right whether or not
they specifically said it or not it's
more like in their enactment about the
way they were the way they sacked with
me through the quad at the time that
they spent with me though the way that
they were silent with me like the things
that they told me in confidence that
they wouldn't tell anybody else
and what that the self in me that that
called out to keep that confidence right
in that respect those kinds of deep
things right I I have this sense in are
more and more and more and more and more
that those relationships are becoming
almost obsolete right concern I just saw
a video of civility in US and and
another world and he was sort of saying
that it's the loss of face to face
interaction and interacting with it's
easy to be uncivil and lead to someone
who's at a distance and it's just kind
of an image an avatar with
all communications face to face there's
more of a demand don't go back to this
just sort of this piece you about
indebtedness and I guess I'm the height
of your frame maybe I want to
circle back yeah make this I mean I want
to sort of safeguard against potential
misunderstandings that are all different
listening because I think yeah what I
would want to be somewhat cautious that
you know I think for Heidegger the
beginning of the possibility of the
authentic self begins with the
realization that I am NOT everyone else
that I am me and I'm unique and I
uniquely held in the thrill of history
and that although I came to a
self-awareness through this anonymous
structure of language and of culture by
the time I found myself and realized
that I would die I realized that I'm not
everyone else that I'm uniquely me and
that claiming my life in a certain way
so stuff like I can imagine a culture of
high performance people someone who's
born into it who's never really known
any other than that I don't follow in
our cultural protocols are lost in da
smog where I think there has to be
something like this relief that where
the individual gets broken off from
others and is thrown back upon him or
herself and you know the questions are
about I think Heidegger would be very
reluctant to talk about contemporary
capitalist busyness
yeah sort of high performance so I think
he'd be like who sit and read a poem in
it under a tree and really engage in you
know being authentic isn't just self
mastery
it isn't just something a command over
once like the way one wants but it's
it's to actually go you know
this is you are there's never been
another guy before you you you know the
same person that is you you're not just
this position and situated within social
context it's about full realization of
that yes you know I guess self honesty
about what what is the point of being
adjusted questions what does it need to
be boarded to die and you know how can I
die authenticate not just how do I you
know open up my business and help people
be more productive and have the best
shoe factory in the country but it's you
know how do i how do i have
conversations with others in an
authentic way oh yeah how to have
conversations with others in an
authentic way so that's the point so
that's one of the thicket my like my
work right in in with with circling and
dialogue OHS and philosophy is this
sense I just it's funny because it's on
some level this is this is actually an
example of this on some level I feel
like my work has been both this
discovery but also this founding of
something this creation of something
right it's been so mutual like it's been
self disclose to them both ways right
yeah it's like it's been a real ride I
just I'm just I continually feel like
I'm on one level I act as if I know
exactly what I'm doing
right and moving towards but I
experience myself when I think about it
is discovering what I'm doing at the
same time it discloses both
had a student I had many many years 20
years ago and he come from a rough
family abusive family and it was really
struggling like almost flunked out of
college the first time and then we met
and we had a good time I think for my
classes anyway he's a motivational
speaker I just learned so much at a
certain point I was like well this but
you know I tried to give all of the same
stuff to countless students and then you
weren't able to receive it you know Josh
you're so moany to thank me would
realize that was you all along it was
you able to receive it and I think
really dawn on him you see the tape from
me to lots of people who receive it so
it's that sense you know lots of people
have maybe tried to give us things but
we were there able to receive it and
that's that it's both yeah it is really
full it's kind of like this and it's
it's funny because what you're talking
about it's kind of like what's love if
you think about look right it's like I
can love you with my entire being and I
can communicate it to you and words and
letters I can stand on my head I can
give you gifts I can do all these kinds
of things but the one thing I can't give
you is the experience of being loved by
me right there is this kind of there's
there's this way in which it seems to
get into into this both the tragedy and
the beauty right see on one level but
like when you're talking about it I
really relate to that being at a teacher
role myself there's often times I get
the sense that those kind of that kind
of thinks that kind of praise and it's
interesting what I actually experience
is this is this sense of I feel so
embedded and loved by them but for
precisely that because it just seems
like it's I'm so aware of that very
thing that you're talking about there's
nothing like giving your heart right
into a relationship
or teaching or what you care about you
know you you do this because you love
this like anybody watching this it just
tells like is you're talking about it
right
like you'll talk about this kind of
anywhere like almost any time because
it's you love it you're overflowing with
yourself with this which I've always
which is just such a manga and I just
felt like about it but I did that the
sense of like wow I had a super mentor
really gave me a leg over my class and
then it was like you know realizing
there are other people they had class
with and it's to recognize how much well
as you're describing that I'm noticing
how it's how it's showing up in me like
you you're both disclosed in that you're
both mutually disclosed in that event
right of you like so much he's given so
much to you but it also you're disclosed
and having gotten it right they both
wealthier images are really strong
mutually disclosed there and that's the
thing that I think starts to become
possible and authentic discourse in
conversation in relationship right which
is oftentimes in it I want a really
highlighting this really bugs me
especially in the in California but and
I and I and John were vacant I have been
talking a lot about this and and Chris
and a lot of the a lot of the people
that we've been having conversations and
videoing them about this this sense of
restoring the ancient art of philosophy
ah right and and in seeing that
not not philosophy in the academic sense
right not in terms of propositions it
stuff like that but like philosophy a--
in the in the enacted sense right the
authentic discourse right and in
dialectic you think about like dialectic
being kind of the logs or the
propositions that you bring and then you
start to go he's they start to relate to
and then it lights the logo slights
right into dialo goes where you start to
like think things that you never would
have thought otherwise
right and then you start to in knowing i
cannot know you without being known by
you and i cannot be known by like i
cannot know you with by being changed by
what by knowing you but that sense of
that sense of restoring what has been
for me i'm really liking it in the in
this last year or so having these
conversations with people like you and
and and this is what I really deeply
appreciate the internet right for this
and this is at least for me it's allowed
me to come into contact with people cuz
I I was basically reading all this stuff
on my own I'd never really gone to
school for this kind of thing and I
didn't quite even know why but kind of
working it out and then actually being
able to talk to people that have read
the same books and like kind of kind of
get it but what but we're talking about
this kind of comes back to authentic
discourse which is you know in John's
John is a cognitive cognitive scientist
in a philosopher at Toronto and he's
been kind of going into like embedding
himself in these different like these
different responses to what he calls the
meeting crisis right which is things
like the authentic community embodiment
community the different kind of
practices right that in some way as as
Christianity right it's things become
more secular how were people like
finding significance in meaning in it in
it in some kind of conscious way and
what annex he says is like he says that
one of the things that's missing for him
is this ancient Socratic sense
of philosophical dialogue in that he
like hit the world water we've been
talking about I really have a tendency
to agree with them here is that it's not
like it's it's it's not like it would be
nice if it were there but if it's not
there right if people don't aren't
aren't kind of engaging in conversations
that actually like reveal the
ontological ground that they're standing
on which it becomes possible in
conversations right that if that if that
sense of philosophy of dialo goes isn't
there it's not like it's not one of
those things where you can either have
the conversation or not have the
conversation it's not like you get to
just kind of go to a to emit like to the
you know to pick and choose things that
it's part of the being of our being
right and that if it's not there it may
not be a full response right so what
he's calling the meeting crisis right
and I'm just curious about like just for
for you you're like just your thoughts
about that like you like the the
relationship of your work of
relationships right of like
conversations of just one is kind of
like this right ones where like your
experience on YouTube and all that takes
is there a necessity there I think when
I first got on YouTube it was pretty
refreshing basically echoing what you
said that you know I found so many
people and it almost felt as if like as
if it were the ancient world and
philosophy were like building itself
again from the ground up of people who
weren't trained into the already like
blind alley ways that they're going to
come into if they would have had
training in philosophy but it was the
sort of raw just from the bottom up
people just philosophizing trying to
figure stuff out and that was so
refreshing but that said you know in the
decade that I was on the tubes and I
first started
just the proof the rest ility the trolls
the know that the cross message is a
certain point and a point I just prefer
the classroom I prefer you know places
where you're gonna have a conference
where people don't know listening to one
another it started to become very much
just ships passing in the night wherever
yeah it trenched into their view and
they're gonna argue and a lot of it was
like the scientists versus the atheist
kind of stuff and you know I never
really found a lot of those arguments
that persuasive like I really love to
eat hearty stuff see here this yes but
the hierarchy of heaven and earth really
choose my virtual background but yeah
this book the hierarchy of heaven and
earth you know it's just an absolutely
amazing book and I think does such a
good job of showing that any religion
that can't keep its appointment with
science it's probably not a religion
that's worth you know look too much
faith in that you know you're gonna have
to be able to reckon with all of the
ways that science makes a claim towards
only great things and it doesn't
necessarily eclipse all spirituality or
religion racism if anything you know
keep it from funding the team with with
all kinds of facts and that the party is
just so able to manage a kind of
theological spiritual speculation
there's fully compatible with science
it's just it's so fascinating and I I
just growing so tired of the arguments
where you know people would say all I
proved there is no God or I prove
there's no what do you mean by God I
always want to start with by it and I
just I've never been able to understand
atheist position I don't have any need
for sky daddy I don't
a creative God make judgments who's
gonna give it afterlife it sort of Alan
watch like movie well that this is
whatever this is it deserves its sacred
it deserves our in reverence and I think
there is just you know the mating of a
rabbit tied onto the mammalian brain and
I'm not talking about that kind of
actual compassion you've ever heard
music and just had tears all out of your
face because you are leaping over the
other injustice literally you like
you're almost crying in a prayer
thanking God to make the pain stop the
light well that's a kind of love that is
so different than chasing down somebody
who you're gonna try to have sex with
nothing completely unrelated but I think
many people have left humanity
throughout history they have felt the
suffering and the tragedy of life and
they have tears just put out of their
eyes going I don't know how to make it
right and they feel right that deep yeah
that deep sense of participation right
and I think that's one of the like like
knowing via participatory like that
sense of like the the real involvement
with the earth right and so just as we
we start to come to a completion here
one of the things that you start with is
it through the whole book and it is just
precisely that the earth right the sense
of the sense of and for me it you UK it
kept ground you all oh you always kind
of grounded this sense of what you call
the Earth's internal self negations
right right open like in its in some
sense we are the the Earth's project of
basically decompressing the earth
decompress
right that's right worlds through our
body
that's right our bodies are the way the
world worlds
you know I think we want to get this
issue earth a lot of times it had to do
with me I was trying to critique an
accountant cut against or counter in the
spirit through people have like when
they want to get it what they call my
independent reality is you only get what
is mine independent reality like don't
come at it that way you're just gonna
get in this sort of deep current kind of
quagmire of skepticism and instead move
toward the phenomena of dreams you want
to get what is earth as Earth no I don't
imagine the earth with the people on it
but everyone's really asleep that's what
I mean by earth as Earth it's a state of
dreamless sleep and when you wake up
that's Earth negating its non-existence
it's beating the suffocation of Earth is
waking up and that's when that duality
occurs of I'm over here in the world's
over there there's really this single
event of release pending appropriation
which has tutorials the world over here
in me as explore life yeah a battle
situation I mean now we might say well
the closest I can get to being in a
situation lessness is something like
dreamless sleep well then we say well
somebody who's awake is aware of in this
place this time yes fair enough but I
think read the book where they're
following the logic I think you know
what I mean oh yeah is a there isn't a
thick density of no distances or gaps no
lapses of time in those moments of
dreamless sleep and I sometimes think
like if you want to get what's what's
the world like the reality bonds like to
asleep I think awakeness and then you're
now dealing with that world of concerns
that you'll take to be reality what it's
just one portion those gaps relapses
where I not so it's like every in that
respond
it's just so and there's one of the ways
I just appreciated how like also in the
book you're taking on two basic you know
pulls of discourse right about this of
like you have the social constructionist
that right and then you have like the
like that like the naive realists if we
I don't know if we call it that right
and and you're like and you put you you
pull out right where they were really on
but you also pull out their mistake what
their mistakes and what they missed in
that right and how that goes and it in a
grounds like that really grounds it in a
very in a very visceral way and I
appreciate that's I think it is trying
to navigate between an overly subjective
kind of social constructionism and an
overly reified naturalism and what you
do is you need to appeal to a
phenomenological Constitution once you
really get at the phenomenology of the
body it becomes apparent that sociality
is already phenomenologically so it's
it's our body is called socially
constructed now we could do that we
could talk about those senses about the
ablest bodies and more or less ablest
societies disabilities but I think when
the social constructionist movement was
huge when I was in school back in the
80s they were talking about everything
being social destruction certain points
yeah totally totally yeah that sense of
that sense of that there's a way if you
know I wear with this it's it's kind of
like that the postmodern hyper
postmodern thing of where it's like you
could have any perspective on anything
like how do you value one over the other
right and then they kind of contradicted
themselves because that well you could
have any that's the nature it's like so
that sense won't make sense but there is
a wet there is a way in which it's like
well yeah that that is possible right
but actually is it though because I
can't not every story I have about
something will
work in my in my living on the earth
that there is a there is a place where
you hit something a resistance right
precisely in that resistance right is
the is that sense of embeddedness and
and and that just that sense of pain
right kalsi trance
sergeant also coefficients of adversity
you know I'm a Hilary Putnam you know
his critiques of Richard Rorty and
particularly his book on realism with a
human face is such a great sort of
attack on the old when he's socially
constructed I mean nobody problems just
a great scholar and I think he's able to
accomplish something like to get at the
constituted capacities the body to make
the reality of experiencing without
having this sort of free really making
it up as we go along nor is it just me
registering a reality that's their
independent of people there's a there's
a kind of realism of it as a human face
it's a dialogue between us and right
totally and incomplete in just starting
to complete this this this this this one
you know the one of the things I'm you
know as I talked about with you before
I'm with Chris my friend Chris were
we're reading the dialogue as the the
Platonic dialogues and I think the thing
I'm really appreciating about it is this
sense where there's a there's a deep
paradox always in it where Socrates is
coming from because there's this way in
which like you know you go you you go in
these dialogues and it'll present some
proposition and then like you never get
the thing if the thing just falls apart
right or it never gets quite answered
but there's this way in and it's so
frustrating and repetitive and all of
these kinds of they go on this right and
then at the end it's kind of like
there's a sense where like no one
answered the question right even
Socrates can't answer the question but
they say something like my but I'm
seeing clearer right I want to I want to
I want to send my kids to spend more
time with Socrates
there's this quality of love I think
what I'm appreciating is this that you
start to circle around the dialogue
actually starts to reveal that which you
can't put into words right but that's
present in some way right it's present
in some way that allows you to be able
to respond more fully right with more
more gratitude and I I just have been
appreciating this in this conversation
and like your ideas give me that sense
it's not like I'm left with with some
propositional truth I'm more left with
in getting it things are more acutely
mysterious in a way that has me more
want to look in models there was a time
of stories to be able to talk that come
precipitate the kinds of fairness to the
actual situations that's what we're
after
yes it's like well it's like more about
the process right versus the outcome
like this like that sense of what I just
appreciated where were you're talking
about where YouTube kind of devolved
back then for you was it's kind of
competitive thing whereas about winning
great this is like the sense of like not
not that there's not arguments but
there's a real good faith in the sense
that's calling it forward is that we're
discovering something together we're
getting closer to something and to the
degree that what my understanding allows
me to get closer to the mystery of that
which I'm trying to like becomes more
present to me it becomes this
autopoietic like life-affirming almost a
sacredness I would say in my experience
I think mystery and imagination of love
I think it's easy to Tegel insert when
to stick at these in our modern
scientific world these are two pretty
deeply part of a spiritual grounding in
the world following sense of aesthetic
sensibilities of mystery and
imagination imagination is just it's
amazing this has been really great
we've been going out I like the flowers
thank you so much it was always fun I
appreciate appreciate hanging out with
you too it's been really really really
great be this it I just want to just say
that like what I've received right in in
our conversations and this one right
especially is I just really appreciate
how much this does feel like a wrestle a
wrestling match out of fundamentally a
sense of love right like I hear it's
raishin I hear it in your passion I hear
it in your wrestling match very easy to
receive you're welcome okay so some
other time and then the next one will go
to you in the other book the the source
of significance okay sounds good all
right my friend