oh we are live we're live this is our
Roundtable we're gonna be talking about
what our projects are what we've been up
to since our last one which for us has
been since last week and who would like
to start what have you been up to
what is your project I guess I can start
jublia politely started the whole
meeting for us yeah so since last week
I have not accomplished anything okay
who's next no I mean I I have I I
created the actual website for goal I
bought calm which is a personality that
will represent my project reason score
since since people had trouble
understanding whose opinion the system
was showing and since it's showing
everyone's opinion and no one really
understands that I thought it'd be best
to have a character now people are
thinking that it's an AI and it's not
but we'll figure that out and then I've
been arguing with some people at in the
canonical debate lab about how to
structure debates and stuff like that so
that's how I've spent most of my time
and it wasn't very productive
communication which is funny you got a
group of people that are working on
making communication much more
productive and we're all kind of we're
doing an okay job it's just it's hard
naming things is hard and so next week
I'm gonna try and create some blog posts
and try and create some content for
gully bot and see if I can get some
people engaged in a conversation on
Twitter so we'll see
I forgot to mention in the beginning
parts everyone already knows but if you
haven't asked as well something you
would like yeah yeah I don't have any
asked I can always come up with one if
no one else can take the hot seat but I
think flame a flick area will be on the
hot seat today so we'll see
yes I can go while I'm unmuted um my
project is solution racing and process
racing working on coming up with ideas
that 10,000 people can do with $100,000
that are powerful for them and then a
process
what could we actually do to work
through a process with 10,000 people so
we met for our education solution racing
on Wednesday Kerry was actually there
and Eric and I broke it a little bit and
was like let's stopped it halfway
through this last part and actually was
like how do I actually do this how do I
actually create an education system for
my kid next year because we're in a
different world than we used to be and
so that's what's gonna be happening next
Saturday hopefully is looking at
creating a zoom idea Cafe meat solution
raising and still percolating but I plan
on having it figure it out by the end of
today and I met with Raymond to due
process racing we came up with a vision
and a mission that we're working through
and that is what and next week I don't
know what we're gonna do our solution
raising on yet part of me wants nude on
slavery after June 19th and I kind of
committed to who watching the 13th doing
one on addiction one on slavery and one
on I don't remember what else poverty
and so that is I don't really have a
question
unless someone knows where I get 10,000
people from that's what I would like
someone give me 10,000 people by the end
of this hour but that is my my update
what about to next week
adri√† you go first salt off the legs of
both knees all right that's good
so over the last week I didn't really do
much myself I yes but Matus has been
working on the prototype before I should
get this done with the prototype uh
early pre-alpha uh I guess you call it
for wiki election he said that over and
I did some review I still have to do
some of the testing for like actually
adding and editing records but it's a
it's doing good and then he and I had a
decent chat after yesterday's meeting
going into a bit more depth so I have a
bit of work to do there this weekend to
move that forward but that's nothing
along nicely
and you have something today later today
that I saw yeah I've got the wiki
election livestream on on politics in
three hours sure it's not science it's
okay oh okay okay
science all right okay and then Kerry if
you want to talk a legs up a donkey nope
right of the same time well with my
staff in the last week I've been home
watching everybody and fighting
synchronicities and ways of
collaborating and health in a being
abused and then even though kinds of leo
project has been on the back burner just
for now while Cove in nineteen because
what I was doing I was wanting to create
an organization called the third place
and it's basically I wanted to craft pub
because like there's nowhere to go if
you don't want to be drinking especially
in Scotland's usual drinking culture but
myself there's no way like all the
community centers your shelter five so
the idea without this club and it'd be
like a mash-up between an art department
and a wonky tea shop with the opening
hours and atmosphere of a pope so people
could just drop in and have a cup of tea
learn how to do stuff and but that's way
way in the future and I started off with
a free room because then we're talking
to people people liked the idea
obviously you don't have enough money to
buy a box if you want and so basically a
church give us a three routes or like
start hosting meet in from now so starts
as an arts and crafts drop is where
anyone can comment doesn't matter if you
don't even want to do arts and crafts
you can just go for a cup of tea so the
first week we did we add 118 people came
the second week nine people came and
after that Cove in nineteen and then we
got councils and also I was thinking
about doing a website and when with
green geeks and during the chat
yesterday about helping with a CRM
system and I decided to bite the bullet
and go back and fix things
I've bought a domain name for the third
place now I'm gonna install Drupal
install the CRM on that so once your
daddy AGL you can come and have a look
and I can just come and show you with
the one I've got and then you can see
rather than try and store one there's no
user thought well real rent yup that one
that way through your ent eight myself
with it because I've looked at it for
years but I know it you know so and so
yeah so and doesn't says of coming up
loads of ideas I realized now do gain be
there's a huge chasm between the
thinkers and the doers and a lot of the
like I probably come from the land of
doing but nobody guess what I'm on about
and as I said there's a huge layer
bridge that leads chasm and I realized
today that I've got no fixed ideology
you've got no fixed belief system but I
love looking at things and I love
looking ideas so in the game be projects
I'd like to do a one to one with all the
members in there gave me projects to
find out more about what your projects
are and maybe do a research project on
what collaboration tools people use it
and see if there's maybe possibilities
that in the future and building
something or getting something there
because what I find about collaboration
tools is if you you know if you if you
start off on an idea and you've got no
money and the tools are out there
they'll make you pay for certain things
and as soon as you get somebody to come
and play out with you you charge you
more and more and more well these people
would come and play out with you they
might not stay so you'll end up paying
for them as well so it just just look to
barriers to it anyway so if there's a
way we can find that maybe get rid of
the barriers and that we can all have
collaboration tools that we're then we
can actually use that's not gonna cost
us the earth and maybe I have a suite up
them rather than just paying each month
for different ones I think that would be
cool but neither one two long
conversations find out your project
provides what you do in to find out what
collaboration tools and I'm seeing
synchronicities in between lots of
different people and I like looking at
things I mean you know can go research
project what's out there what we can do
to him
- Tim throw with the game B philosophies
and not and I think that would be great
and I think I've talked the legs off
multiple ball he's now don't you think
it works I just want to mention to
anyone watching at the moment if they
wanted to come on and be on camera and
join the roundtable that it's more than
welcome you can come and tell us what
your project is and what your update is
this happens every Saturday at this same
time would you like help with something
Carrie would you like to be in the hot
seat
what would you um help right no I think
I think just conversations conversations
or people message me I think that'd be a
start because I know I'm quiet maybe
some people Steve is a bit dodgy I am a
bit intimidated but the message reads
say hello and tell me what that all
about more talk to and it's as things
that I might like to look at I think
that that's about it for now and but oh
yeah help
right developers we've got Drupal
experience um and it's not I'm going to
body it to death is I know how to
install it it's just I need somebody to
kind of talk to in case of go wrong
somewhere and that's all and but yeah a
triple anybody's got Drupal experience
and the content management system help
right developers we've got Drupal and
experience and it's not I'm going to
bother you to death is I know how to
install it it's just to meet somebody to
kind of there's not waste knitting you
so when you haven't finished okay I
love you sorry I got you dead
I'm gonna shut up now
would you like to give an update on to
BAP to in your project and if you need
help with anything
we meet you or did you you muted
yourself say you have 10 years hi good
there was just tons of echo where I was
hearing coordination up now I'm still
here have Facebook open up and another
tap your serie and you need to close
that okay
all better there was just a huge gap in
time thanks mentally well it's just
listening along I I have like some ideas
of what I'm trying to accomplish I've
been writing a lot I've spoken with both
Kari and jublee on separate occasions
kind of to understand you know what you
guys were up to as well as what I'm
trying to accomplish which is still a
little vague although I have these big
insights that pop up on occasion
so last night I got really inspired
after listening to another Daniel
smocked in burger talk and so last
night's idea was kind of a kind of a
science fiction novel that describes
like how we evolve into the next level
of thinking that allows us to get past
the the struggles that we're dealing
with I'm not sure that like you know
science fiction or even fiction is
necessarily a great model to help the
world understand how to get to the next
level I'm also trying to just understand
that myself so I've found some things
that I think are really key elements to
how we should be viewing the world and
as a collection of systems where there
are you know better and worse I think
using Ken wolbers kind of terminologies
around these different developmental
stages you know the world and is made up
of a bunch of people we all have
different worldviews the political
divide and the polarization that's
occurring is because we have these
different worldviews
and ideals that we hold dear to
ourselves the predominant one on a kind
of leftist liberal person but you know
currently there's some problems with
that worldview which kind of you know
equates everyone as being absolutely
equal no you know no ifs ands or buts
yet there's a and I irony or a conflict
in there which is that well clearly
people that are racist aren't equal we
you know and I agree with that like no
they have a lower worldview but it's
that next stage of development where we
become aware of systems worldviews being
able to honor what's right about them
and then also be able to say well and
this is where the upper limit is and
fill that upper limit for a you know
leftist worldview is where it's like yes
we're all equal that doesn't mean they
were you know we're all born equal and
we should all be treated equally in
terms of respect and dignity although
different ideas you know we need to be
rethought in terms of you know how we
can work together coherently because not
everyone's the same level of
intelligence for example so it's kind of
controversial there's a lot of pushback
in the political world right now about
about these subjects so it takes a
certain amount of courage and bravery to
go into them with enough detail so that
you're not called erases because you're
saying you know well you've got some
limits that are dear to your worldview
but so anyway I'm you know I'm trying to
find out ways to you know write about
this that's really coherent and kind of
lifts the dialogue out of our current
our current paradigm but I also find it
just really interesting what other
people are doing and getting inspiration
from that and then if I can help people
do that work that's great too I've been
a CEO of a company before and raised
lots of money and so there's a lot of
experience in my world that could help
on a collaborative level with something
that that I felt really attracted to but
I also don't want to
take so much time out of my life that I
can't continue my efforts to become a
writer so that's it so I have a couple
of things to say on that first of all I
think science fiction is probably the
most effective way early storytelling in
general is really fast effective way to
change minds you know if you just look
at the impact of Star Trek and and all a
lot of the other kind of worlds it
really tackled a lot of the things we're
still working on today we're back in the
60s you know they they had an episode on
on racism so I think that's a great
that's a great way around and I've
actually thought of sharing some of my
concepts through storytelling okay doing
a mystery novel where they use my
technology to solve the mystery so that
would I think so I encourage you I think
that's a good path to go and then some
of the other things you suggested I
think I think some of your wording it'd
be interesting at some time to explore
some of the phrases and wording the
cheese because I think that some people
would that that result in some boards
that are a little vague and and they're
in a potential interpretation could be
not what you're intending so yes yes
which is always hard I mean you know
that the the heart is you've you
probably know you know the hardest day
was trying to explain your ideas in the
way that it gets in a person's brain
right yeah I've been doing fundraising
which is a lot of that yeah and then the
other thing is that you know if you've
been doing if you've been a CEO and been
fundraising I might it might be
interesting for me to my project doesn't
have a good funding model mm-hmm and I'm
okay with potentially either keeping it
as a small project or a non-profit in
the future if I think I can prove out
the idea but it it might be interesting
too
have you kind of review it and see
whether you think there's a funding
model I mean there's several potential
ones but none of them are likely that
I've seen and just get it be interesting
to get an additional opinion sure yeah I
am
I had your when your guys had some
meeting with at least I think you
Bentley maybe not a drill but the other
three folk Kerry Jubilee Bentley
yesterday for like two minutes and I
just kind of barely heard something and
suddenly found something more
interesting the cloak of God so I left
and then this morning I open this window
but then went and brush my teeth so I
kind of missed what you were actually
talking about and then when I came back
from brushing my teeth someone was like
you know if you're watching you should
just pop in I'm like what the hell I'll
pop in though I'm totally new it
whatever anybody's ideas other like I've
heard Jubilees idea I think and you know
part of me was like oh maybe I should do
a solution raising on what is the best
format or formats because you know as
you said like I think you know mythology
and storytelling and and science fiction
you know there's so many examples in
science fiction of things that you know
like in Star Trek the tricorder or you
know here's a communication device
that's wireless that can do all these
different things and we have them now
you know so these things do come in the
reality but it's kind of like I'm
studying all these folks like Daniels
Malcolm burger and Jordan Hall and you
know what Ken Wilber describes as these
tier 2 type thinkers where they're
integrating all of these complex systems
that are interrelated but separate and
how we can pull them all together into a
coherent sense-making deal you know I'm
trying to understand it enough so that I
can write or currently enough that it
comes across so I think that bounced
around a little bit a lot there but I'm
but I'd yes I'd be willing to hop on the
phone with you separately if you wanted
a ship you know since I don't want to
waste everyone's time here if they've
already heard your story or your what
you're trying to accomplish but I'm
happy to do that so so I think Kerri if
you understand
you sorry and I'm family and one of the
guys turns up in the the project periods
and I read what they were doing it and
it was like transmedia storytelling now
if you dominate about transmedia
storytelling that's taking one story and
I judge you were just talking about
different different formats so like so
let's say like if you write a book if
you want to have a film of that booth
you have to adapt that story to fit the
medium so it's basically the transmits
transmedia storytelling it's just
fitting the story to the different
mediums that are out there using you
know like film animation a bit what I'm
yeah so just to mention that because
when I'm of course transmedia
storytelling Oh God about three years
ago because I wasn't too sure what it
was and then all that stuff translate so
say like if you you've got a product or
not and you doing this stuff trying to
mediate and then you know the
merchandise and and all of that it all
links into kind of the seed from the
story so I wanted to say that and I
think that if you're nominated over
maybe go check it out because it I think
you though yeah it makes good sense
yeah I I think I told you that scary
before but like there's you know so much
for this kind of systems theory and
stuff is really kind of left brain
logical and it's really inspiring but I
also write poetry so you know while I've
been writing about some of those game be
left brain stuff I've also become so
inspired that I end up writing poetry
which is arguably very right brain
approaches and it's funny how I can get
an idea out in poetry in an incredibly
short amount of words mm-hmm
that you know not everyone may relate
with if they're not really trying to
understand what it is it's the same with
with you no longer twenty paragraph
essay on you know on what makes game be
tick you know what or what's wrong with
game a you know well I think to be
honest like me personally I feel like
I'm in the middle between the logic the
data and the way win the floor good
place talk in between other
belonging either and so yeah so like
there's a lot of stuff that throws right
over my head
and but I'm interested some curious I'm
like what's that yeah okay well maybe I
need to look at that because I sent
something in it there's something there
that I can't articulate what's there I'm
the same with the fluff and the woo yeah
I get it you know really so has a set up
so six Jubilee before there's a huge
there's a huge chasm that needs bridging
mm-hmm I mean for people to understand
but as I said people need to come to
things in their own time you can't kind
of post it on them you can't preach at
them they've got a conference no time
but you've gotta leave the bread crumbs
for the people to see yeah and you know
I mean unless people start getting
sorted and more to organize and what
then they start looking you know I mean
boys having a place that they can
actually come and start oh oh what's
that and then go from there to that's
you know I'm terrible on a Google search
for something I'm like oh yeah that's
sorry that's how I came across this
anyway I was just listening to rebel
wisdom podcast and it's kind of more
interested in like the you know sense
making stuff and it took a while for me
to even hear about game B when I finally
heard about I was like what oh wait
there's people that got together and I
was trying to rethink this from a
fundamental level I've been doing it out
of my head for years but it seemed like
you know I was just this semi lonely
voice out there and then I was like wow
this is an entire movement sign me up
so anyway I've played with a few ideas
and Karie pop in it could we said you'd
be the hot seat if you wanted to be so
if you actually the hot seat smells like
we're putting you in the hot seat
but the idea of storytelling I like my
favorite genre is dystopia but I'm
trying to create proto PIA but then like
besides the story of how you get there
which I'm sure is interesting once
you're there it's like well what stories
are there to tell and that's part of
almost what breaks it in the real world
is like we feel like a beautiful world
to be so boring what
stories can you tell in that world and
of course not like every story nowadays
right like love and adventure and the
element still exists but what does that
leave together and look like in a way
that that brings the audience along for
the journey and the characters and not
and then almost subconsciously gets them
the the information of integral or game
B or a beautiful new world that is
possible mm-hmm yeah the story I got all
inspired about last night was basically
you know starts off in the proto Pia you
know this like most of most of the
world's challenging jobs were automated
you know nature was really protected
people didn't necessarily work for a
living they did what was really passion
to them and followed their own curiosity
and passions into creating things that
were beneficial to everyone and in the
world around but it kind of goes into
you know the deaths and tragedy that
occurred a couple generations before
which was when you know the world went
through that transformational process
and kind of describes you know the
painful realities of you know the loss
of people that went through basically
kind of a revolution not necessarily war
but and gone too far into it yet but
just yet kind of what we're stuck in
right now you know and out and I do
think that you know a lot of times
instability happens within nature like
evolution doesn't really occur unless
your environments under threat it just
doesn't happen you know and it's the
same for humans like typically we don't
really learn a lesson and was it hurts a
little bit unfortunately so you know it
in a way it's like I think all the
people that feel stressed depressed
anxious worried about you know the world
that just shows that they're really
healthy I mean because that's how you
should be feeling when we are in the
situation written so I'm trying to you
know put a bright spin on the pain that
were currently experiencing and I really
do feel like we are on you know might
take
- I mean - would be very fast you know
might take a decade to 15 years before I
think we are elevated at that next level
but that's kind of what my passion is is
to help promote those voices as well as
my own to show what that next world can
be and how we can individually and
collectively be viewing the world to get
people excited about it so anyway I just
wanted to pop in and say hi
kind of been out of it for a while um I
guess for my project and when I big idea
would be to get a medic currency system
developed for humanitarian wealth and
then have an art show or an exhibition
where I was able to share that or give
it to community that could then practice
this game be as just kind of a art
experiment and see where it goes I think
it's very organic that way and we don't
have to think through all the
possibilities what can or can't happen
it just gives people more of an
opportunity to start doing it so that's
it I'm still working at making art and
thinking through stuff but really I'm
not moving forward right now I'm just
kind of struggling with everything
that's going on in the world and how it
affects me and trying to get on some new
meds so maybe I can process better and
that's about it it's really great to see
all of you Stacy you too shallow right
shallow I've got something for you
like Cousineau and I you mentioned about
the the currency and I don't know
whether you're presently by David
Graeber it's called debt based 5,000
years at the brilliant booth I thought
it'd be dead folded and I picked it up
and I couldn't put it down
um it's a it's an excellent we get
interested in doing half
also apparently it said the future damn
what he had remembered reading that
because after the Second World War
community currencies and all that they
were doing really well and then we got
two successful and then they got banned
you know I mean and also I wanted to
connect with you over the art because
part of what saying before you don't end
I want these little craft pubs which is
like an arty part but mashed up with the
tea shop the people can just call my
coffee a sense of belonging
Josephina flight house welders also
supply wants to talk to ya and see if we
could maybe come up with ideas and maybe
after you know healthcare and have
chapters to do chat so that's that was
why I would want to connect via I wasn't
wanting to connect we like to talk about
the weather so just get your thumbs up
sounds good yeah I'm hoping to get a
little more together this coming week
I'm dealing with the pharmacy issue or
well go there's no dose just just
whenever you Betsy just so like give us
a shout if we can no it's open okay
sounds perfect thank you I'm excited
yeah me too I'll be excited for days
it's like I have a couple thoughts if no
one else has a burning desire to speak
Kerry first note on your eye I work with
a lot of different technologies even
though I haven't worked with Drupal I'm
constantly having to figure something
out so if you get stuck feel free to
reach out to me and if you want to
schedule some time I just put a link in
the chat and really for anyone
Bentley Davis comms last schedule I need
to put something on my calendar if you
want well I would like so actually
talked yeah because I can pick up a chat
with AGL when he's ready even that's no
loss and I would like a one-to-one
conversation with ya find out more about
your projects know what you're doing and
then see if I can you know help and as I
said once a Jules ready
I never but as I said once once again
what what about we are on T ated myself
with the Drupal or not and then I can
show you what I've got because
I'm tellin ya as a content management
system platform Drupal because it's
modular you get a core module and then
you can just build on it's very powerful
and there's loads of stuff as I said
last time I was on my own and I was like
all of this I love that I love that what
does that do I don't know but it looks
good you don't read sorry I'm just out
with someone to to get me to wine to me
neck him that would be really helpful
yeah I could definitely take an hour to
and trillions that's actually cheese and
then just to mention Julie had mentioned
the the problem with writing about this
feature things that were we have this
kind of really well functioning society
they they had a big debate in the Star
Trek next generation just bring Star
Trek back when Gene Roddenberry the
creator didn't want any conflict between
the characters on the enterprise because
they kind of pictured that as this they
they have reached that state where they
communicate well and stuff like that
of course he they did also have a
counselor on board which I think was
great but they ended up having you know
just deciding that they were gonna have
internal conflicts between the
characters for story purposes as my
understanding but also the benefit doing
science fiction where your aliens exist
is that you're constantly reaching new
cultures so yeah so it just culture
conflict worse or maybe the cultures
might even have pieces of these
different psycho technologies are
calling them in the game be in rebel
wisdom space I think and then them
conflicting and learning the the
technology of communicating better would
be might be an interesting solution for
that and then I don't know why I think
that I think no matter how far we get
there will always be kind of an internal
conflict but but I guess the thing is
that they would they would then show
them
they be reminding each other of okay now
I understand your frustration you know
but here's the tool that we use in these
type of situations might be I I think I
would find that interesting
yeah Reid I mean I think one of the the
interesting out oh no effect quite call
it a struggle but one of the struggles
I've had in understanding you know the
basic framework for game a which part of
is described as non hierarchical is that
you know that sounds great because you
know there's obviously so much pushback
against the patriarchy and there's
really good critiques of what is wrong
with that type of mindset in thinking
yet at the same time how do you do it
when there clearly are people that know
better ways to do things and people that
are holding us back from doing that so
you know you're kind of describing like
you know if they're willing to make use
of these tools then we can find a common
language with which to you know attain
new levels of coherence in our systems
but you know I mean it's hard when you
know there's cultures that are still you
know arguably third world countries I
mean they just don't have the the
complexity the intercultural connections
the education to be able to picture it
so you know we have this different
strata levels of understanding going on
so it's part of the reason I think
storytelling is so good is because you
can kind of create metaphors for it but
I did struggle a bit in terms of like
well what would this proto you know this
new way of this new world looked like
exactly
you know nobody making decisions you
know how is the collective making a
decision how do you filter the less the
less now there's me a bunch of voices
that never feel heard because they're
not providing good solutions to things
so how do you filter the
Solutions out than the less good
solutions out without making people feel
incredibly unheard you know so anyway
everybody hello learn what appointment
if there's time here is my mic on yep
yeah it is good
well thanks for having me I've been a
Wallflower for a bit and little
background on me I became a student of
ontology about I don't know I mean it
might be like 10 years ago had a coach
to introduce me to spiral dynamics ken
wilber ah I guess before that a
psychologist I was dating and my wife
ended up showing me a book about
introverts so I saw all this knowledge
about people like me finally felt like
others people that think like me and
have these ideas like and not alone
process information like me so yeah that
felt quite good so I own a business in
Seattle Washington I lasted ten months
in the corporate world built my own
business immediately I can only do what
I want to do I can only do things on my
terms and so I built the business over
20 years and now I want to go do
something with that money
and it feels weird to me being a person
that you know I build websites do retail
we own bars cafes and I desperately want
to give all the money away yeah I'm
reluctant to do so because my wife
actually runs the philanthropy program
at our at our office and I told her to
just go donate
don't go write checks to people we have
a huge audience and let's use our money
to leverage so instead of giving five
$10,000 checks to organizations she runs
events that generate one to three
hundred thousand dollars at a time for
the same organizations that we would be
giving to and so anyway I have a thesis
in mind a project I've been sitting on
for a long time of that domain I've been
sitting on for a long time and funny
I've never really run it by anyone that
would actually not just listen to me and
say cool John you're like the people
that could actually get behind an idea
like this and anyway my thesis says I
look around at Misty Island we have a
lot of homelessness right now among the
problems that most cities have and I
firmly believe there's plenty of money
floating around to solve the problem and
whether I'm talking to wealthy friends
or not wealthy friends I said if you had
a good way to map your wealth to help
the people that need the wealth would
you do it and I've never heard a single
person say no I philosophically opposed
to moving my money people that are less
deserving needy not my problem everyone
seems plugged in and as silly as it may
sound I think the actual problem is
there's not a convenient conduit to move
the money and there's a low trust level
if I write a check to somebody you know
I don't know I hope they do something
good a good even we're in Buffett rolls
this way I think that thirty billion
dollars the organizations that I believe
in how can you do that if you're not
there watching it happen don't you want
to be more plugged in
so I realized that this worked for me
when I joined have you all used Kiva or
heard of kiva.org heard of it it's just
a micro lending platform yeah and you
make loans generally to third world
countries usually for small retail
businesses the kinds you've seen on
vacations they get into education
farming and things like that but but it
covers the full gamut anyway you can
loan as little as $25 and eventually
generally you're $25 you get paid back
and then you lend it to somebody else
and then you can opt into a kind of a
tip that goes the organization so that
they can run their affairs and I'll just
sit in bed at night with my daughter and
we'll donate money to women and third
world countries running businesses
that's kind of a sector I've chosen and
I'm just stunned of their ability to pay
that money back you know me Here I am
helping people far away it's kind of fun
because you have people trying to take
their business to the next level and
they literally need like $200 so it
makes you feel really thing more
powerful and capable than you normally
feel you're carrying some fans and we
give the money away and it comes back
I'm like this isn't me giving away
anything this is just me giving other
people access to my unused capital the
thing I find the funniest about that
website is people can join into groups
so you can affiliate with whoever
whatever group so I individually have
loaned this much money but the group I
officiate with has also moved this much
money the top two donators are the
Christians and the atheists interesting
very in a battle to be the most
charitable and it's actually really fun
to watch because it's not what you would
expect to see on a website like that
okay so anywho I want to build a piece
of technology that works kind of like
Kiva I hate to use the word gamified but
it's a good metaphor what works about
gamification there's a satisfaction
knowing tactically got my phone I'm
hitting the widgets I know what I'm
doing
if somebody gave me a widget that said
here's people in Seattle that are really
desperate right now here's their faces
here's their story
I would dump all my money into it
mmm and I'm like but that's not
happening because I don't know who to
trust
I'm scared to go meet these people to
myself it's not really my comfort zone
and I know a lot of other people with
you know collectively billions of
dollars of wealth and I think they're
kind of doing the same thing in their
own way so I want to bring this to other
people that have high net worth and say
like do you want to do something like
this you know I've got a friend that's
building he's bringing virtual reality
to this technology he wants to build
online forums that you literally can't
tell you're not sitting next to the
person but he's also passionate about
climate change and other things and so
it's funny I've been reading to sit down
with this guy and chat with him about
this very thing then his whole family
got strep and then we had a pandemic and
so everything's all right John I just
want to tell you this right and so 17
years ago I tried going back to help out
because that's been numerous off and on
but about 8/9 years some nobody nobody
got what it was all about because it was
all about your circumstances dictate who
you meet so I was trying to gather done
that way together there's that there's a
book called winning by charing by Leon
Benjamin so if you just type in winning
by Cher and who is Kelly son so that we
attracted about me in that booth about
our tried come from nowhere anyway I
fell flat on my face because no one
caught what it was what I'm about anyway
17 years later trying to do stuff I've
been working in a Christian Science
retreat place and it's basically a hotel
bed and breakfast with Christian Science
trip to put in a proposal to stop the
place and shot and done and during the
writing of that proposal I realized I
wanted the Phoenix lighthouse so they
let these little lighthouses all over
the place that people could come and
stay and
not a solution reason with them do you
believe that I did you can go and listen
to it you would talk about shoe it's
made and now being homeless and for that
long the time and and you just want to
give up on your life and it's your life
that you've got do you want to give up
on and you may not want to die but you
just can't can't do it anymore so what I
was talking to Jubilee I realize this
Phoenix lighthouse idea it was but
because like when there's people who
fall through the cracks and society like
he falls through the cracks you go to an
organization that are set up to my book
and all these charity organizations are
self twelve you go to them you take you
don't fit our criteria we can't help you
but you still need help at the end of
the day so back then I wanted to help
the people who are falling through the
cracks you know I mean so my idea was to
build these little kind of like little
bed-and-breakfast is so people are
falling and slipping rather than wakeful
that in the gutter then we could come
and stay and we've been that way for
people around them to help them get get
them on the feet and and I'll build them
up and and that net worth your life and
as I said I was in their children's
rooms but a few years and I come out to
that and when you come out I don't know
I know some of the kids in the only
thing out no family nobody so once they
get kicked out of the care system that's
it they've got nothing so I wanted to
gather it out of place as I said like a
bad leg has become stay was a matter
where you dark come and stay and and and
as I said to be and building that way
for now now though people from jail to
get the one that beateth that's what
being what to do so if you wanted to
one-to-one child because like that
obviously I found ya everywhere and I've
got no money but if you and your people
wanted to go and through that over there
I'd love to come and help yeah you know
that's a really cool idea
I've actually been digging into
something that's kind of a similar
concept have you heard of Oxford home no
I mean okay my guy I think he start in
the 80s next alcoholic he built this
framework for addicts no I uh
and it's really open source really
to play there's a central agency that's
really lightweight mm-hmm but Jenna that
happens is it takes six to nine people
who gather and say we're all addicts if
we want to get sober
there you go find a landlord willing to
rent a house to them mm-hmm
rent usually ends up being you know
rather affordable because of the number
of people they build a charter and they
self manage this house and you might
think if I grab six to nine addicts and
put them in a house together that's a
recipe for some really bad and
remarkably successful yeah well it
depends what stage that are if they're
not in that stage that they're ready to
give up then putting them in with the
others who are ready to give up that
that's not gonna you know you're right
and I what I suspect makes it work is
nothing makes change harder than some on
two levels ahead of you yeah because my
thing is you realize when you're in the
hooter them just how hard it is to get
out and as I said my things we should
say like at the time years ago I was
trying to build a network and I was
trying to open up a little drop in
offices because then I couldn't get a
job and I was still selling you sorry
and I was stuck and catch-22 I spent
like probably got no experience from
that right so I was trying to settle the
drop in office and what we would do is
like the micro businesses and people who
couldn't afford so like big accountancy
fees and we would teeth we would do
their bookkeeping and administration
stuff well given the people who sleep it
on people's couches and have nowhere to
go
and they would get to know the people
who were starting the business list
because your circumstances dictate who
you meets now when I when I was homeless
all I ever got lumped in with other
oness people so you got no no job no
sense of belonging
no nothing and as I said it took me a
long time and I thought people died
around me and I've I've been through all
sorts of and when I went to the
organizations who are in charge I've
given out the funding to help to help
people are none of them of enormous so
they don't have a clue and all the
fondant like oh you've got a you've got
to make what you're doing fit to what
what we're giving out they said no no no
you it's the other way round you need to
if the fondant needs to get what's mean
and not not the other way around for
like they'd all look there well I don't
want to lose my thirty grand job a year
and all of this I'm as I said I didn't
get any way and I spent seven years of
my life trying to convince people to
join it I wanted five hundred people to
give me 80 pounds the money three amazed
about eight thousand pounds and I did it
one at a time but I didn't want to spam
them and there's all these people going
Oh lovely idea great idea but he didn't
have a clue and everyone was like you
know Eddie your time I said well that's
no good to me now you know I mean you're
wanted to be seen to be doing something
rather than actually doing it and that's
done on and every time I've gone back to
the funded oh well you've got to do this
but no because that just creates more of
the same because all these organizations
they just roll you know from Europe oh
look at us we're doing this we need the
money give us your money you're not I'm
it just wouldn't work and I said because
I've got told off with the social
entrepreneurs conference in Oxford one
time when I'm pitching at Jeff's ball
you know I mean and you know just for
some amazing people doing stuff in this
world and they don't get a chance
because they're not all shiny
if you don't have the PR stuff you know
minami really thank you who's that
okay so I'll shut up now so if you've
got gonna want to run John I'd love to
talk to you and find out more about what
you're interested in because it's not
just about the money it's for people as
well you know I mean son it didn't get
so as I said I can't be everywhere you
know but I'd love to have a string of
these phoenix-like houses all over the
world the people who just and then from
they build the communities out from you
know glass water community wants and
maybe look at how these people come
together and create notice together
sorry and I said is yeah yeah I'm super
excited to well one I'm live in Seattle
myself I'm actually living in Kingston
currently but I've been in Seattle since
night we went to Bellevue High School
and I've also been a drug addict in the
past I did five years of therapy and new
different types of methods to be clean
I'm not a hundred percent sober
sometimes I smoke a little bit of pot
that's you know maybe once a month or
something I sometimes don't really enjoy
it very much but clean myself up I'm
actually really connected to a number of
people I've even been asked to be on the
board of a you know specific modality
for treating addiction some very I've
been surround you know when you become
an addict you've know a bunch of addicts
and many of them don't make it
and many of them make it and actually
become very successful in helping others
get out of addiction you know but you
aren't here earlier so I'll just
reiterate I've also been the see since
I've gotten sober I've been the CEO of a
company with you know 35 employees
managing 250,000 dollars of sales per
month
with a board of directors and kind of
reached levels I never thought I would
have reached when I was younger but um
so anyway I just wanted to bring that up
that we're local to each other at least
and that I'm familiar with a lot of the
minutiae of you know kind of what I
think people need so you know there's a
part of me when you say like Oh give
money to the homeless there's two parts
of me if there's one that's like right
on and then there's the other side
that's like you know people have to want
to change to to to change so it you know
I I don't know that giving money to
people that are stuck is necessarily
helpful and you know but I also see that
you know the were their problem addicts
are products of the system too so they
do feel unheard and chewed up and
hopeless as carries saying and you know
it takes a lot of effort to pull
yourself up out of that and it's great
to have support systems around but you
know the amount of people I know that if
like stuck around to try to help people
that just
never never took off you know that
happens to so it's a it's a tricky
subject
I like the loan process you know I like
that thing of you know the micro loans
are the loans because it doesn't seem to
be a similar thing now now and you have
a website a lot of like I tried out
Lending Club which makes the loans and I
can invest in those loans yeah making
pretty decent money then people start
defaulting and I'm like I don't know I
feel like I'm kind of investing in
pseudo predatory lending here yeah oh
this doesn't feel like Kiva yeah well I
think you need to have a some type of
system where you know if people are not
paying back their loans they certainly
can't come back for more money you know
so if they can put up the reason why
they want the loan in the first page you
know so I have this idea so forgive this
organization of people helping people
but connecting wealth people that need
wealth of course we're receptive yes
the notion Seattle is you know a lot of
tent dwellers they like being there they
want to be there and sounds dubious but
you know they probably got a culture and
they probably feel ostracized and it is
a comfort zone so everyone seems to be
approaching it from kind of an arm's
length one of my challenges to myself
with my coaches if I want to know the
answer I should probably just go talk to
some people in that situation to get it
directly from them if I said I would get
you an apartment would you take it if I
said I was gonna feed you would you take
it if I asked you to do your part
and seek employment would you do it and
just see how they respond I have no idea
how they would respond want to be
changing and you've got to get to that
stage and you like can't do this anymore
and that's that's basically that stage
and you're suddenly open for change and
it works mm-hmm
so we are in the last five minutes of
the round table I love what is
merging I wanted to add I know I'm very
familiar fairly familiar with microloans
I've been interested in the space since
I career circle to decades ago there's
something about the Oxford that people
who are addicts can get together and say
we are ready and we're gonna support
each other even if that doesn't look
perfect and get a house together that
also reminds me of the beginning stages
or maybe it was 2.0 microlending where
people did get together and they were
each other's collateral they were like
we're kind of getting and so you
wouldn't get the next level of loan
until you've got the previous loan and
having people come together be like we
don't want to be homeless right so we
are gonna find a house and having a way
that people who have money can support
that and see because I think there's
just more trust there more and more less
risk right that money isn't going to be
paid back or that there isn't going to
be a positive outcome coming out the
other end and empowering that process is
in and of itself employment like it's in
and of itself
music I'll turn it in that's when I
totally get what I was trying to get at
if you build this organization to me the
most elegant thing to do is you need
field workers going out and who
needs what are people their part is this
thing working if you made those very
field workers the people that needed the
help in the first place you've built
employment into the system yep and then
you can build on that you've built like
a kernel that can actually grow from its
own resources and I can't think of
anything more powerful than then play
from open the wealth coming from without
kind of like energy comes into any
system so we're down to our last few
minutes I wanted to I think there's a
lot of passion here about your project
John absolutely but I think that this is
a perfect project to a project raising
on to get people together and say hey
how do we help you you know crystallize
your vision a project raising with
something that we first did months and
months ago where someone would come on
horn and say here's what my project is
here's what I want to get it at the hour
and we would just crowd-sourced that
right we would just
is on that project for an hour that is
something you were interested in I think
people are in the Oxford I was actually
motivated just myself and turn it and
resonate it in Oxford well then talk to
the organization say I know it might be
hard finding especially a ttle a home
that's a bit or I'm only making the
program available for Oxford home and
see if that's the stream model I guess
yeah really real estate business off of
that and everything a chat with yeah I
don't know one on and if you want to
contact me by a Facebook and you can go
and have a look to see what's wrong and
then we come back and do solution
Regents for you okay sander people they
will show up because it sounds like
there's a lot of interest especially
right on yep
I've been wanting to build communities
for a long time and a lot of my models
had kind of wanted to include like yes
how do we help the people last minute
would anyone like to give closing
statements before or anything you can
and you could do that you know if you
would like give it oh yeah well it's
nice to hear people you know working on
projects that are trying to elevate you
know the rest of us you know the rest of
the world and so it just been so
exciting to kind of come across game be
and I've been you know just it's been my
life now for a few weeks and you know
that's when I learned of it I just got
so excited that I've spent all this time
and and I've learned of all these
different elements from ken ken wilber
is a huge influence of mine too
that I learned from a therapist of mine
years ago so anyway just you know I've
really inspired to see so many people
jumping into this with good hearts and
minds
so right now it's my closing thought
would be spiritually I believe there's
only really one thing you can do in this
world that actually matters most of what
we do is if distraction the only thing
you can do that action matters is how
you treat your fellow human and it's
either with compassion or it's with
separate and there's two paths and what
happens when we all get along well look
worried about that one get there
let's move toward that yeah Charlie did
you want to say something uh yeah no I
everyone else that's jism is that better
uh weird I just want to say I'm also in
Washington in Olympia so that's cool I'm
excited for all this go later I just
want to say I'm so grateful for everyone
showing up today I thought this was a
really amazing roundtable and everyone
is welcome back of course every week
thank you to a troll for dropping down
so that Jon could join and thank you for
like this is Kerry's first roundtable
John's first time that I've ever seen
John's face Joe's first round table and
Shila has been back for a while so thank
you everybody and we do this every week
and look out for John's
gross project raising in the game be
projects goodbye YouTube and Facebook
thanks everybody
[Music]