the more I write notes about what I want
to say on this topic the the more I
think about it and the less I could put
down everything that that sort of needs
to go into these sorts of very important
subjects so I better start recording it
before more things sort of get lost in
the ether better so I was watching on
rebel wisdom there's this sort of
roundtable of jordan green hall and
someone called the Kara the dawn and the
interviewer comics the title of the
videos Comics superheroes in the
intellectual dark web now the the the
topics covered in this video this forty
minute video is incredibly important
ground they go through a string of you
know conversational topics essentially
which is a really good cross-section of
a whole lot of issues which are very
closely related that I'm going to
address I'm going to sort of address all
of them because I I have a lot of
disagreement with a lot of the content
but the the thinking on the topics is is
a really good at least point of of
address to say that a lot of the
problems that I have are generally what
I would call the the style of contents
of Jordan Greenhalgh I'm not sure if I
ever uploaded any of the videos that any
of the recordings that I made talking
about
how to frame the substance that Jordan
Greenhalgh is yeah I so I'm going to
sort of address this issue yeah so I I
guess to use some of maybe the language
in in the that I don't like a lot of the
conclusions in in sort of the opinions
expressed and such but I mean you know a
lot of you know let me just get into the
issues specifically I guess so
yeah there's so much to comment on they
bring up Joe Rogan as being a kind of I
mean I do I don't have disagreements of
fact with a lot of what is said here you
know and and it's true that people like
Joe Rogan are almost like a sort of a
nexus between high culture and low
culture and Joe Rogan is something like
a very important aspect of the new
emergent media and you know there is
there is a lot of obvious value in what
Joe Rogan does functionally for you
could say the evolution of culture and
such yeah this is perhaps not not the
best thing to start with here
I very critical of Joe Rogan's yeah you
see I don't like talking about these
things because they come out very harsh
like a lot of my opinion and comment
here is is is overly harsh and and it's
important the points that I make are
very important and that makes it even
harsher but there is a difference
between the kind of the meta discussion
of the issues that are important and
let's just say the facts on the ground
and how they present themselves and
these are our separate arenas so let's
say the criticism that I have with Joe
Rogan if you were to take on board that
criticism he would probably be much less
popular and that would be that would not
be helpful in some sense so I mean and
in as much as that girag in' is
essentially a platform in which he can
interact with many different voices many
different ideas come across his
his band width of broadcasting which is
quite broad you know he reached as many
people so that reach would would not be
possible and so but I mean in some sense
I think you could make the case that Joe
Rogan in terms of style is somewhat like
what is sometimes referred to as legacy
media that he is almost like them the
closest thing to legacy media in the new
media in some sense and obviously that
has nothing to do with the people that
he gives a platform to it has to do with
I'm just talking about almost him as an
individual and his how he assesses
things and and such and I mean this
really has to do with his temperament is
almost intellectual temperament
personality style and such and you know
it's always it's not nice talking about
these things because people have
different personalities people are
different in terms of how they perceive
and judge the world and it's not nice to
talk about their limitations which are I
don't think any of these limitations
that I levy against people are in any
way innate but there are such heavy and
ingrained patterns that develop
character in a person's character
through a process of you know there's at
least some level of psychological
innovation individuation which obviously
is why very young children are
especially intelligent because they are
making decisions that are in fact
framing their psyche and and how those
things are structured lay the the
boundaries for future networks of
possible decisions and possible
judgements and perceptions and yeah so I
mean there are lots of different
theories in terms of personality theory
all of the good ones essentially are not
academically viable because you can't
really justify them academically because
they're there's no there's not a good
enough philosophical argument for how
you you would have to kind of
meaningfully discriminate between
different styles of cognition or mental
objects or these things are by their
very nature incredibly theoretical
psychology is is probably the greatest
blemish that we have in the respected
world of academia or I mean I'm saying
that kind of the societal authority that
is given to academics the lack of
psychological sophistication and the
impoverishment of it anyway to to just
focus on on this context so I mean there
is a lot of that can be flung in
every direction I I must say I have a
lot of reservation about Jordan green
holes contributions which I could hash
out I don't know if I don't think I did
I blow these things because I feel
somewhat like since I need to lay down a
broader thing about why it's important
to do so because it definitely feels
unfair without a proper context of of
talking about psychology but there are
two ways of let's say understanding the
world and I'm going to talk very roughly
because they're depending on how you
bring up subjects and how let's say you
reduce them there are there are pitfalls
there are very obvious traps which I see
people falling into
and this is the problem is that you know
people just almost want to fit into some
kind of patent framework that maybe the
IDW is roughly sketching out and they
just want to kind of find some some
important dicta that they can live
within that outline they can operate
without that outline without someone
like me creeping up in the shadows and
sort of fashion them over their head and
and and living things against them in a
nasty way and this is a problem is that
that if you try to extract dicta like
that you've lost the real space and
you've kind of already conceded it to
just kind of be taken over by what is
essentially a kind of vague consensus of
some kind of horrible morality which I
even heard some descriptions of in the
content of this particular video just in
terms of yeah now what I'm going to say
I can I can illustrate my point slightly
but what I think is missing from this
discussion is let's say purchase on the
core belief system that kind of grounds
the IDW and I think people even said
well you know we're not trying to be the
IDW so we don't need to sort of have our
feet on the ground in that way we just
actually want to live within a kind of
framework and or an outline and do some
thinking of our own let's just say and
yeah a lot of this this kind of almost
loose consensus I'm going to say I think
I see it building basically out of some
flaws that I see in the the thought of
Jordan Greenhalgh which were almost
stylistic floors
I can describe this in a few different
ways but I do want to give a sort of
broader context but let me just go back
to making the illustration that I wanted
to make you know creating an atmosphere
of good behavior and creating venues in
which this honest thinking can you know
it can sort of happen in a nice way
I mean my ex--you is completely
different
I see the having an having an ethical
culture is is much stronger than that
and much more important than all of that
so I mean the only let's say thing that
I would the the curatorship of one's
content set as section something like
that I mean this doesn't really matter
cuz my youtube channel is is you know
practically dead but the the the only
thing I would ever consider editing out
of content sorry out of comment sections
would be spam like literally spam that
you could not actually see what people
were thinking or something like that you
don't need the repetition of something
so if something was literally inane and
spam I think you can obviously make a
case for removing that but if someone is
making nasty maybe making a good points
in a nasty way I think I think you
intellectual honesty can deal with that
I think you can make relate an
intellectual response you you can and
then rebuke the person style you know I
I don't see a problem I think you should
be able to contend with these things I
don't think I mean essentially when you
are kind of editing a sorry
when you're removing people's comments
because you don't like the kind of the
cultural vibe that they're creating I
mean that just sounds like you know I I
mean obviously I'm of a different
opinion that you know the that we're
trying to promote a culture and we need
to do that by basically creating an
atmosphere and someone's saying you know
this is my house or something like that
I mean ya recoiled from a lot of of that
kind of to me that that is that is the
admission of a kind of intellectual
cowardice but also lacking the
lacking a sort of a good faith in the
kind of the mind of the individual but
this is perhaps better exemplified from
a completely different example I would
say that yes there are people out there
who are going to read the comment as
they read the first comments as they
were listening to a video before they
respond to the video and that's almost
like that contextualizes the content
already and that will contextualize
let's say your response to it I mean I
might see a comment but actually very
often but this might also just because
of be how I how my screen is set up it's
I you know in terms of the size of the
of the YouTube panel or where the video
is viewing I will not be interested in
the comments until I have my own formed
opinion I like so after I have an
opinion
then I'll maybe consider the comments to
work out if someone has ready let's say
dealt with the thing that I found
offensive and then I can sort of add my
two cents or chimed in something or
modify something that has already been
pointed out or make my own contribution
you know so I would say perhaps I'm in a
very different class and and in some
sense I am in a very different class of
curator or consumer of this new media
because essentially I do consider myself
as being part of the intellectual dog
with and I don't think that the the
price of entry of that is necessarily
high there cultural references to this
that horrible pop music not horrible I
mean actually stylistically I wouldn't
call it horrible but the content of this
particular song you know will never be
Royals you know this is what I kind of
see
trying trying to make his face for that
yeah there's a lot of content that I
need to cover but I don't think there's
anything like the death of the author in
in this new sense I mean I I think that
is a very that again comes from tracking
a kind of the form of what patterns seem
to be happening at a kind of abstract
third pot third-person perspective on
what's going on with this new culture or
new media you have to have a very kind
of okay yeah this is good summation I
think of the problem happening here is
that you should not address people as a
kind of group now that like human beings
the whole perspective of like this is
happening to human beings plural group
this is happening to group noun and we
are members of a group now and this is
the wrong way to conceive of these
things and you're going to get yourself
into a lot of trouble because you
actually completely circumvent what's
really going on because and and I do
think that there is an absence of
dealing with let's say the core the core
belief underpinning of let's say the IDW
contribution
yeah so I mean saying that like the
death of the author sort of the
individual agent in some sense I would
say the individual has greater direct
access to the collective features of of
psychological properties that are
aggregated and exist as sort of entities
within the culture which then can be you
know I I would say that the idea that
the author is lost in in that kind of
greater saga of forces I think that only
that literally only happens in the mind
of the audience that has already adopted
the framework essentially of John Green
Hall you know so it's interesting that
there are some beliefs that almost they
have a kind of there's almost a lot of
dial ism in in something some of this
thinking I don't almost feel like
wanting to catalog the problems but I
mean I've probably made enough insulting
remarks that I should probably try to
substantiate them fully so at least they
could be seen as more potentially
helpful and and this this comes to the
point as well that if you are interested
in cultivating a venue which facilitates
good behavior as it has has been morally
described or which has been put as a
description of a kind of new morality
which is coming out of this new media
you know this this evolving ecosystem
that that whole notion
it has a kind of it has a kind of I
don't want to be too inflammatory but
I'm just trying to think of a nice way
to kind of describe it I can only think
of analogies right now it's a sort of
you know we need security we need safety
you know we need some room to breathe
you know we and and I I do think that
that is an important grander point which
can be served by something we do need
but I would call I don't know if anyone
else has has used this phrase I feel
like I must have stolen it from someone
but we need slow spaces in which we can
get a hold of our own thinking and that
room is important but I would say that
the price of admission to that is is
sort of it has to be vulnerability of
vulnerability and a kind of human
intellectual humility of being able to
take on things which are perhaps very
devastating and the idea that you're
sort of going to don't be rude in my
house I mean yeah look you see it's very
hot you can't critique things blankly
because obviously that would there would
be a context in which that would be
appropriate you know if someone is being
rude and there isn't let's just say an
intellectual challenge in what they say
but it's merely just almost spam I would
say that that is worth disdaining and
removing from your sort of environment
because it's literally just kind of
trying to slow things down but there are
things that are not merely trying to
slow things down you could say that they
are they are trying to wreak fatal fatal
devastation and I think we have to be
permissive and open to this because we
either have to refute or contest or find
some perhaps that there is some
potential value in that
at least in in in developing a rebuke or
an immunity to such let's say an
intellectual assault and so you know
obviously we cannot actually know
perhaps this is not so illegitimate to
expect of people that the idea that
people should be shielded from views
that are would require one to completely
dismantle oneself and re re redevelop
yeah to cut out a whole section of
discourse simply because it isn't
gratifying to to sort of to pass PA rse
I always wish I could say that word I
could say that work without having to
spell it because it's a homophone but
that's you know I would say that a lot
of these things are happening yeah I
need to talk about psychology more in
details so the thing is is that
psychology has its own parameters it has
its own that I mean psychology proper as
an obviously psychology that I refer to
in a sense is not popular
yeah I mean it would probably do much
better if I would write a book about my
ideas before trying to sort of inject
them into the public sphere but
yeah so was it basically what gives way
to death of the author and notions like
that is let's just say psycho
psychological politics in its proper
place and understanding that there is a
whole field of psychological politics
and this was perhaps even what was being
slightly explored when this conversation
was talking about comedy
the the problem I would say with its use
some language droolin greenhalgh is
presenting fragments of introverted
thinking he is sharing his introverted
thinking frameworks introverted thinking
is a very vital part of intellectual
thoughts
the problem with articulating fragments
of introverted thinking is that
introverted thinking is so vital to
intellectual life that it basically sets
up orthodoxy and dogma and this is
especially sort of obvious when you've
got fragments because they they will
sort of have their own internal
coherency which will lead to more of the
same you know and it kind of ends up
assimilating things into a kind of
matrix framework
the problem with introverted thinking is
that
you cannot build it you have to take it
as a as an entire package and so unless
you have a complete package of
introverted thinking it's pretty much
always going to be poison now you have
to be able to work with introverted
thinking in order to understand
something
the problem with introverted thinking is
that it will never keep up with context
and so it actually has to have quite a
simplistic sort of engine behind it you
have to kind of keep it reduced to
something manageable and you have to
like kind of it has to be representative
of something that is quite core and
pivotal pivotal but there's something
that is essentially quite simplistic and
an almost blunt but almost infinite in
its application now this is the problem
is when you start kind of rendering it
and rendering it into detail you get
these kind of you get what seemed to be
very useful implements but they if you
use them they kind of have this sort of
toxic influence built into them and one
of the toxic effects of this is that you
you you get sort of married into an
abstracted disembodied paradigm where
you're kind of looking at reality from
the third person or through the the the
the entity of some kind of group now and
collective human beings or something
like that and you completely miss out on
what I'm going to call a spiritual
component but let me not sound like like
a crackpot I'll just catch that out very
importantly I was just thinking of a
phrase which hopefully the looking at
this phrase will well is illustrate the
point the important points because this
goes into a core belief moving and
understanding from a core belief rather
than
through a kind of through some kind of
aggregated pattern you know that you're
just kind to try to mimic the activity
that you've seen modeled and and kind of
live within some kind of moral domain
that that you see instantiated within
that like narratives are important but
they're important as gateways to let's
say core belief almost actualization
okay so here's my example so here's a
phrase let me just make up this phrase
it's so important for human beings to
believe in human beings now depending on
the context and the kind of the
intellectual context that one puts
emphasis on certain things and reads
into things with certain common sense I
can find a context in which what I've
just said is the worst thing in the
world and what I've just said
is a very profound and wise thing now
let me just contrast those views to try
and make this point you know it's a
shame that human beings don't believe in
human beings you know
so the the idea of human beings
believing in human beings now you should
not believe in the group noun of human
beings that simply just the collective
of human beings like matter-of-factly
banding together that group of humans is
not is not that's not going to have some
kind of magic that it's going to be able
to kind of almost you know the idolatry
of a group of humans is not significance
and it in fact entails no deep or
profound promise on anything you know it
cannot but to say that you know it's
important for human beings to believe in
human beings the idea that the thing
within human beings is what needs to be
believed in like the thing that let's
say can be
human beings the the space within human
beings needs to be believed in that is
certainly true and that is you could say
that that's quite hidden in the phrase
human you know the only problem with the
world is is that human beings don't
believe in human beings now if you
believe in the space within human beings
right that is the let's say the
articulation of choice and and let's say
decisions made in an unbounded way in
the exercise of free will
let's say in the purpose in the
enterprise of constructing purpose okay
now this is what is actually happening
when you're trying to create a community
and you're trying to curatorship
it into being a good venue of good
activity or something like that all of
that is essentially meaningless unless
you qualify it with what purpose are we
cultivating what purpose are we trying
to to kind of get our ecosystem to to be
crafted around you know so you know
there's a kind of economy of purpose and
there are different types of purposes
there are you know there are generative
purposes and they are just devastating
and bankrupts purposes in some sense
that are just looking for more people to
go down with them you know and there are
kind of a kind of self defeatism or to
some species of nihilism now in as much
as one isn't transparent about one's
purpose you know which is kind of quite
obvious and in the intellectual sort of
manifestation of what is generally
regarded as skepticism
you know skepticism doesn't have to
state a purpose for you to have to take
its accusation seriously this is where
where skepticism essentially defeats
people because it forces people to get
into their economy of no purpose and
therefore it will eventually exhaust you
you know so I mean the the proper way of
defeating skepticism is
is attacking it for not having a purpose
it is for making a positive claim
against us now when when you that's a is
quite an intellectual point let let's
just say or abstract philosophical point
ER when you've got that under your belt
then you're not so worried about let's
say being ravaged by trolls or something
like that and I mean I have I mean I
believe intellectually I'm quite robust
that I don't have any real problems
dealing with anyone and you know
sometimes I will be angry at trolls and
I will express genuine anger at them and
they will take this as a technical
victory on their part because they have
gotten me to react and you know in as
much as they have not expressed their
true intellectual position let's just
say perhaps they were just doing it
purely to sort of simulate an
intellectual exchange to kind of help
produce a reaction but I would say in as
much as it's done by very young people
that do this it's one way for them to
interrogate the states of
intellectualism in the world or to come
across something I mean it's one it's
one way to search in some sense and in
as much as I actually come up with a
good piece of almost intellectual
technology that I can showcase and some
of that is is inverted on the troll that
is let's say not expressing any of their
genuine value but literally just looking
for how much feels they can kind of get
from the ether usually that kind of
trolling or I'd like to think I have a
sixth sense about these things that you
know I mean when people are being
incredibly low energy you know I I'm
often I rebuke them but I I dismiss I'm
quite dismissive in my rebuke I don't
puts a lot of energy into it anyway
there is a kind of art to this and
perhaps I could have discussed this
better details but anyway in a sense one
can add purpose to any context even in
as much as that one is communicating
with and seeking to communicate with
authenticity in the communication that
that is currently present not just by
moaning the lack of authenticity all or
the that something is missing in terms
of some euro so basically I will I will
bemoan when things are missing content
that I think is missing will disagree
with but I won't ramón purpose there's
no point in bemoaning that someone isn't
expressing a proper purpose I mean this
gets convoluted but you know sometimes I
will complain to people that I think
they're being inconsistent that they you
know that their sense acting like
pseudo-intellectuals
because they're not actually willing to
take on anything although they have kind
of suggested that they are you know I'm
sorry so I'm making these things and I
keep on trying to undermine them as
dicta because no dicta holds the economy
of purpose is sort of the real game that
is being played by the IDW less to say
or the form of the new game in in this
new culture yeah so I think that we must
be quite subsets able and vulnerable to
content
disagreement yeah so the content
disagreement is what we need to what we
need to foster and then suggesting and
and that will always be suggestive of
the economy of purpose that is in play
in some sense and that is say the
essence of the Methodist the core of the
matter discussion obviously the meta
discussion can also have a kind of
content in its own right which is kind
of not centered in the core but we'll
keep on tracing its particular its roots
from the core into into that sort of
yeah but but generally it's very hard to
discuss those things because they're
almost of a psychological nature yeah I
mean I I don't I don't like really
bringing some of my contribution to bear
because it is much like character
assassination sadly and you can't really
get away with that as I yeah so I would
said the problem with Joe Rogan and I
know know that he was sort of being
discussed as a kind of cultural fact but
that he has this kind of he he Joe Rogan
also has he's primarily what I would
call an introverted censor and he has a
quite I would say almost a relationship
with introverted thinking although his
introverted thinking in essence he kind
of group group sources that he gets that
from his network of his you know of the
people he knows the things he
understands the things he's kind of
experienced he extrapolates that's kind
of in
Virgen thinking and so he's almost like
his own Overton Window and I mean that's
the problem that I have with him is that
he's sort of contract you know he can't
you can't really put novel things to him
and he's going to it like judge them
based on first principles he doesn't
think that way and it's not really his
fault
in some sense that's the character of
his personality style these things are
subject to change there or subjects
modification but you know generally
speaking very few people become
enlightened you know very few people get
the kind of self-knowledge that sort of
allows them to change the cognitive
functions that they have a pattern of
utilizing so but I mean and this is this
is a fundamental problem in in the
grander scheme of things is that so
there is almost a fundamental problem in
that the IDW cannot you cannot just
extract a kind of short list or a
framework or an outline you have to kind
of understand it you know like you have
to kind of own it completely you can't
just kind of work within its outline you
know and create a kind of a new culture
that sort of looks like that it's not
going to fly and different people have
let's say different structural
limitations you know so I mean the
reason why let's say the IDW or better
asset or something like that
I mean talking about these issues is
somewhat complicated for me but let me
just say that at the very least these
people have been worked on and they have
worked on themselves
and they have made hard choices in terms
of their own internal schema and they
have sacrificed its some it is something
like the the Christ archetype you know
and you know this process you know is is
described in the Christian scripture but
you know so sort of to break bread is to
break down your understanding and to eat
it and to break bread with somebody else
you know the kind of the communion and
the sharing of the flesh in the blood
the breaking of the flesh and the
consummation of the blood is you know so
you you taste it to know is that good
wine you know what is the effect of this
wine what is this blood good enough to
drink you know this is a kind of
spiritual metaphor how does this blood
operate in somebody else's life if this
blood is nourishing somebody else's soul
how well does it function in that other
soul how well does it work in another
body you know there's a kind of there's
there's a universal ethics sort of built
into this and when you get into nuanced
issues and discerning those issues you
know it gets generally it can get very
nasty especially if it's not done in the
right context as I said it requires a
lot of vulnerability to use another
spiritual net metaphor it requires to be
naked
I mean just just to I mean I'm sure
almost everyone must have had many
dreams in their childhood about being
naked in either public places or being
naked in uncomfortable settings you know
and and I mean I feel sorry for people
who did not have dreams like that
because if you didn't have dreams like
that you're certainly not looking in the
right places you you're not asking the
right questions you know it's one that
one might be engaged in the same process
without having the dream one could have
similar veins of sort of daydreaming
that's mean the same thing that have
nothing to do with being naked but have
anyway I'm not going to get in tune to
sort of so
there is a problem of specialized
knowledge in the sense in that
it's not something that is just going to
take on in culture it does require a
certain let's say conscious common
purpose let's just say or economy of
common purpose and that economy of
common purpose or reaching a greater
level of understanding in that or
something like that unless it gets into
the the kind of caring about the kind of
how to construct that common purpose in
a way that is vulnerable enough to
actually not fall prey to just kind of
something that essentially just becomes
the the new form of kind of historical
residue which infects sort of brain-dead
generational or something like that or
is sort of it meant something to the
people who were innovating the culture
at that time but because it was not
translated throughout the culture in an
authentic enough way because it was
ripped off because it was sort of
counterfeited well enough that
essentially that that becomes the the
kind of the new shell that sort of just
passes these these kind of superficial
tests in terms of consistency and sort
of those patterns of consistency
I can understand the intellectual
interest in looking for those but yeah
and that is certainly the interest of
people who have let's say a creative
introverted thinking and I'm using
creative in the sense of the the
secondary function in the myers-briggs
personality matrix which is not a person
not a personality matrix that I actually
personally believe in but it's a good
enough approximation and I'm certainly
don't have the space to to get into my
personality theory which is sort of not
known and unpublished and without a
platform but you know there is a
I would say that the by that one I wrote
that punch but
yeah so the whole superhero analogy
I guess I mean the problem with his
exploration I guess is is that each
superhero must have an origin story must
have a sufficient and necessary origin
story and although there are certainly
those will vary as the the heroes
themselves vary and they all seem to if
they're all you know in the class of
superhero at the end of the day and they
all have various different powers that's
all fine and they all have various
different degrees of acclaim or or
purview in terms of the types of matters
that they contend themselves with that
also is all fine
but I think what is being overlooked in
this analogy in terms of this
conversation is the origin story and the
kind of the faithfulness of the origin
story and that let's just say the the
all of the all of the superheroes are on
the knife's edge of their let's say
their own character developments in
terms of why they are where they're are
where they are they know why they are
there and that cannot be formulaic Lee
derived and modeled and mimicked yeah
and I do think that there is the kind of
the core belief thinking is sort of
missing from this discussion and you
know sadly when I raise these points it
has to come up at let's say the expense
of Joe Rogan because I do think that I
wonder even if Joe Rogan would would
even be able to receive a lot of almost
these IDW guests unless there was
actually
this criticism or it's not the this
critique mere Allah said critique rather
than criticism as I don't mean it to be
critical but I think it's important to
give you that even what's-his-name
Ruben I always get his first name wrong
he said Paul Ruben I don't know I keep
forgetting his name but Ruben of the
Rubin report I think even he potentially
would not have moved over from his
liberal echo-chamber
unless there was a certain scale of what
was going on in the greater society
unless there was a kind of if this was
just one glitch in the matrix I don't
know if he would have actually kind of
recognized it because except that there
were these many things happening and and
I think Joe Rogan is is such almost a
repository of a kind of collective
experience of of what he sees as as a
kind of you know like he doesn't he
doesn't construe facts for himself I
have to contextualize this properly like
he would not be the first person to make
a claim a fact he sort of gets his
standards and even principles in a kind
of crowd-sourced way and in as much as
that he becomes an organ of essentially
a much larger movement so he's part of a
thinking process with his audience
almost that is let's say more open and
that's probably what perhaps allows him
to draw a broader appeal because he's
let's say not not as judgmental as he as
perceptive he is very perceptive but not
as judgmental and that man
sometimes as an incredibly almost
capricious judgmental the only example I
can think of is if you look at his
exchange with Milo gianopolous if you
just sort of take a very minut you know
for following the threads of the
intellectual threads of that exchange
and the kind of the character of the
substance that is being traded in that
exchange were being offered and
counter-offered yeah so so I see figures
like Joe Rogan at least how I believe he
was discussed in this conversation is
that he was being roughly this claim is
was not directly made but I think the
reason why Joe Rogan entered the
discussion was because he's roughly seen
as we need a robust middle ground where
things happen and we need to kind of
create the landscape of culture you know
all all the topics brought up in this
conversation or like you know it's sort
of it's it's talking right at the heart
of of things that are kind of you know
in the zeitgeist of this burgeoning new
era or something like that or you know
like it's sort of you know it's it's
it's it's quite almost a visionary
reading on on sort of the likely
framework and structure of how culture
is broadly evolving and
to me it loses its spiritual elements
and when I say spiritual I mean like in
that it's being led by the collective
noun of human beings and it's not being
led by the decision of human beings of
what is within human beings yeah I think
even in the discussion in terms of like
how how anything develops you know like
Jordan greenhalgh was talking about
courage that you know people have this
kind of instinctive Drive to know that
that you know if our culture is not a
repository of a sufficient enough
courage that were in perhaps a hopeless
state or something like that and I think
hope part part of the the development of
hope or the the container of hope is is
perhaps being slightly displaced by the
the kind of analysis which Jordan
Greenhalgh is
tends to to gravitate toward because
this introverted thinking I believe
actually is always that in fact it is a
state of hope and if it is not let's say
tethered to core beliefs and I know
Jordan greenhalgh I'm sure has great
intentions but I don't think that his
introverted thinking is particularly
tethered to the core beliefs of his good
intentions I think they're they're
almost you know he clinically is doing
the one abstractly in good faith from
this kind of you know divided sense of
his intention and his character and his
mental machination or whatever but some
that courage is not just the kind of
social good and phenomena that is
impacting human beings collective noun
but its collecting the collective
consciousness and the collective
unconsciousness you know to use Jungian
phrases but that if one is even more
discerning about people's conceptual
networks and their mental schema and how
this is the again the prom that I have
with specialized knowledge is that I'm
let's say speaking from from a kind of a
very specialized perspective and this
allows me to ground my core beliefs
because I believe that I can sort of I
can I can discern what's going on in a
situation I can come to my own formed
opinion I don't have to read the comment
section first and then contribute and I
would even say that that strategy allows
me to actually at some point develop the
strength to have a robust enough schema
to have my own voice and yeah so I'm
seeing that so I hope that that I know
this sounds arrogant SAR conceited but
you see that those points I think are
almost incredibly incredibly central to
to the contrast in in positions in terms
of the content of this conversation that
I've been responding to and commenting
on
yeah I just want to say that I think
that Jordan green Hall is not is not
someone that should be ignored you know
intellectually I think that will eat
even my comment on him now if it if it
least stands in the minds of anyone
listening to this I think it has value
in that sense that some understanding
these sorts of pitfalls are important in
general but also that there is some
intellectual value that can be kind of
extracted from rebuking this and I mean
this in not just generally but also in
particular in as much as that you can
eventually tether up those systems
there's those relics of introverted
thinking you can kind of systematize
them into a kind of ideological you you
have to kind of find some kind of
holistic framework a is the prominent
with ti-ti is always going to be
poisonous unless you can kind of create
a some kind of interface like I I didn't
want to bring up all these strange
spiritual sort of analogies and things
like that but there are networks that
can be made between different people
that can synergize and reinforce each
other in a positive way and so that in
tandem with other people's gifts let's
just say you can create something that's
greater than the sum of its parts and
you can almost kind of create a kind of
a human mechanism made up of spiritual
gifts and let's say psychological
insights that if you have a good enough
working system I mean generally the
problem with Ti is that it's can only
really be used
- to fix problems it cannot be used to
sort of - so and and it can it fix us it
can be used to sort of diagnose problems
perhaps the arm is try to be very
precise otherwise we'd mislead people it
can't so yeah it doesn't fix the
problems but it can diagnose problems
but it really is very bad at suggesting
what the solution is because it almost
it has no yeah so it really is something
that kind of yes generally even I have
you then will the times in which I've
used TI is that is when when TI
fragmented TI will will put holes in
something then you actually don't throw
it away
the thing with holes in it you use those
holes as a way for it to kind of puzzle
piece into something else
you know and and but T I will tell you
nothing about what the puzzle piece of
with you know that requires a kind of a
leap of something else and the key the
the occasion between those puzzle things
essentially will never be intellectually
justified it will only ever be kind of
pragmatically you know so in some sense
you can never impose these these sorts
of will never find use for these things
in very strict arenas that have to be
let's say universally ethical you can
only find efficacy for this kind of can
only find utility when you're dealing in
sort of creative enterprises like
constructing
something where everyone involved is
consenting you know sort of like
devising businesses or sort of creating
something constructive with with a group
of people you're not going to this is
not a way to to do government except in
some kind of voluntary sort of
self-government that you know is kind of
constituted you know so the ti-ti is
hope but it is hope already kind of has
to presuppose a sort of faith it doesn't
it doesn't have any specific expression
of faith the context of the hope will
give you the character of the faith
attached to it and this is getting so
tangential as I said the the problem
with Ti is that it is useful but it's
only useful if you have it in a complete
holistic sort of ironclad thing and you
know you can't really do that in the
intellectualism well I mean you can but
it's then your expressions won't be in
the form of Ti they're going to be in an
array of things so yeah I mean Jordan
Greenhalgh would have to become a very
different sort of intellectual I guess
for him to to take on board the things
that I have said and
so you know yeah this is why this is why
character assassination this is not is
not desirable you know I mean roughly
speaking why people don't bother you
know sort of attacking atheists for
their atheism because it's just sort of
it's it's such a kind of well I mean the
intellectual sort of esoteric crowd why
they you know who let's say are
generally intellectually the ones that
are more intelligence than the atheists
why they don't bother
because people are let's say so
psychologically invested and people are
certainly going to be more
psychologically invested in their
personality style than they are about a
mere belief you know because I mean
really that I mean just to say to make a
general point which is perhaps going to
be quite provocative but um you know
let's say the the spirit of man Satan or
whatever you want to call it the the the
beast and and loving the world and the
God of the world and and loving you know
the temporal things that these are baked
into the personality style on the level
of a kind of psychological ideology and
that is where Satan lives let's just say
whether or not you say bad things about
what you label Satan or the spirit of
man or whatever you you know if you
don't actually have an understanding
that links to the psychological paradigm
it's it's somewhat meaningless and you
know so even if someone is is a atheist
or all professors to believe in in God
you know it's doesn't really matter on
on the psychological level the question
is do they believe in fatalism do they
believe in determinism do they believe
that they live in a kind of magical
matrix you know is probably better if I
don't make these border general
statements with I don't want to sort of
invoke frighten people but you know that
there really is no difference in
believing in denying freewill and
believing in fatalism and determinism
you know if you believe in the pagan sky
father that Christopher Hitchens spoke
against if you believe in a celestial
North Korea it really doesn't matter if
you say you flee from God or not you
know it's a you essentially are a pagan
at that point you know I mean you you
know you you I mean a lot of pagan
there are a lot of different species of
a lot of different beliefs in terms of
how people self-identify but the real
question is do you believe that the
spirits do you believe that the economy
of purpose that you're engaged in that
that is the highest level of action you
know you either believe in that or you
don't you believe that you are subject
to to to time to determinism well the
time of the soul fatalism you know if
your soul is controlled by an external
forces not controlled by your economy of
purpose what does it mean to love your
brother if you believe in fatalism you
know it degrades everything you know
when you degrade the economy of purpose
then your purpose essentially is as
cheap as what whatever economy is is
sort of governing it and so if you have
an economy of fatalism or an economy of
determinism that that is your God at the
end of the day and determinism is your
God so it doesn't matter if you say that
you're an atheist if you believe
essentially that time is the ruler of
all things so is you know essentially
time is your authority or some other
physical property or some other anyway
these are metaphysical claims you know
and so you know it is a very high bar to
admission into the club in some sense
because you you have to you have to say
you have to sort of take responsibility
but when you do that you get the power
as it were
you become a superhero and you know
these sorts of core beliefs you know
that they can be accessed through
narrative and we definitely need
narratives probably better narratives
than just the superhero analogy as I
said that what is probably missing in
this discussion is that the origin story
is more important than just looking at
these capes and these superheroes is
that what is hidden behind the cape is
the origin story the public doesn't see
the origin story and so yeah okay
finally going to stop talking now I just
want to quickly go back and fill in on
at least one point when I was describing
girag and I never made a good enough
description about at least yeah I this
is because I was roughly trying to
collect recollect something that I had
said in a conversation to somebody else
but I'll just fill in their detail other
the the problem that I see with Joe
Rogan's intellectualism essentially is
that his tact in dealing with the topic
or dealing with someone's opinion or
what someone says is almost not a kind
of universal test that he applies you
know he how he sort of deals with things
or the merit of someone's ideas is not
on a first principles basis it's more on
the basis of if he already agrees with
you or not and so there's a kind of at
least in terms of intellectualism what
seems to be a kind of a very almost
capricious treatment and you know that
has its value because in a sense he is
representing all the very many opinions
and factions on this topic which he has
kind of generally perceived and fielded
from what he considers at least
respectable elements within
general society or population or
something like that you know see who
love he will often I mean I don't
actually consume a lot of his his work
but he will reference feelings and
opinions out there which he will kind of
have quite somewhat of a holistic record
of and repository for dispensing you
know and he will have almost a his
record of almost like a matrix of
controversy and a matron you know in
terms of the various factions that he
sees that that have a dog in the fight
or something like that and how he keeps
tabs on that is also perhaps why he's
able to at least be a platform that
caters to a very broad audience but what
he is in fact modeling is is something
that at least I find doesn't bear record
to any core belief or universal ethic or
anything like that it doesn't have a
kind of substantive or you know and as I
say that comes through very clearly in
his articulation and treatment almost
just of ideas themselves and so he sort
of stuck being some kind of pundit and
you have to hope that he is being
corralled enough why let's say the
collective experience in which he is
situated or in which he does obviously
situate himself but he gets kind of sort
of he's sort of just in the in the
general trend in the general movement or
whatever and I mean for various reasons
this lends itself to modeling things
which
oh yeah I've made in my own mind at
least I've made probably in recordings
that I've made that I have not uploaded
there are comedians especially have this
when they are let's say somewhat
offering social commentary and/or
political analysis I mean not all I
would say George Carlin had a kind of
first principles sort of stance on
things and said Bill Hicks I'm so bad
with names his name wasn't Steven Hicks
Fawcett I think was I think it's both
Bill Hicks anyway I mean not that their
body of work sort of has a large amount
of social commentaries but at least I
can imagine these are people that would
be particularly in their defense of
their points of view let's just say
anyway
let me tie this into the thesis the
general thesis that I was making is that
it is problematic therefore that some
people have personality styles that are
less capable of exuding a kind of
Independence or uncompromised stance and
that is somewhat more susceptible you
know it is unfortunate that in a sense
for some people as they are in terms of
I would say the development of their
personality or false ego or whatever
language you want to use that they have
not yet created enough self-knowledge
let's just say to to be aware of certain
things and and you know try to sort of I
was trying to sketch out in in the main
recording that I made that this is an
addendum to that that you know sort of
when you try to sort of address these
issues you're starting in some sense
with almost nothing in in a naked state
and a completely undeveloped state
you're trying to develop a new faculty
or facility within your character and
that is incredibly daunting and you know
having to go through the phases of let's
say redevelopment and hopefully more of
a pristine way because if you're sort of
just going to mix it haphazardly with
how you've already collected experiences
you know essentially it's going to be
impossible to sort of not just continue
the same mistakes in some slightly more
cryptic or subtle way that the arrogance
compounded in perhaps under some kind of
general guys you know and and then you
know that can also be part of the
process of development that then one
takes if one can read iagnosed or re
submit oneself to some sort of exercise
of reform or revision you you can sort
of see a meta pattern
and sort of getting closer to the root
of it in terms of manufacturing some
sort of realignment or growth at the
point at which one was delimited into
yeah it is interesting because people
are shaped a lot by their experiences
and I mean this in a positive way in
that when one is confronted with
something and let's say demolished and
then there is a restructuring that comes
from that that the experience somewhat
which is part of their narrative then
perhaps a narrative around their core
belief enables them to articulate
something new something that is from a
synthesis and so in some sense you get a
piece of somebody else worked into your
character and as long as you're
conscious about this in a sense you can
somewhat
in this sense there is a kind of
constant communication between different
people that you can almost use the
strengths of others and I want to use a
word it's something like emulation but I
mean that almost in the kind of in the
technological sense of a me that you're
like you're emulating a different
platform with with the hardware that you
have and when you are consciously
emulating yeah you can also then
recognize that even your your original
false ego is itself a form of emulation
but often it's a kind of unconscious
reactive you know thing that lots of
ways of describing it primal hurt
remember what that book was I think it
was called something like sacred
contracts it has some what it's some it
has some kind of theory of primal hurt
in it I I didn't read the book but I did
I did
I think inform some of the author's
knowledge in this area it was a very
long time ago but anyway um yeah I make
all these claims white prove three
traulsen to substantiate at some point
but also can be said about this is that
this does get somewhat more convoluted
in that there is a there's an element of
psychological politics in culture always
in some sense and I think until the
general culture is until there's enough
general knowledge about this activity
that's going on in culture and this
level of deconstructing culture into
this level of awareness and
understanding and the consciousness of
psychological politics until we have
that there's going to be no ball walk
against essentially just I would say the
most important part of culture as a word
is that
there are certain elements which have
let's say always been unconscious that I
would like to say that generally the
plutocratic element within culture has
always been served by a kind of
sympathetic bond with the so-called
revolutionaries you know the people like
Russell Brand I find very intellectually
cheap and you know these are actually
you know that they pretend to be
visionaries but they are in fact the
most reactionary sorts of people you can
imagine that it's that kind of I think
the interview with Russell Brand and
Candice Owens almost just wish I could
sort of just pause that exchange and
interject with a whole slew of critiques
against Russell Brand's just
mindlessness essentially and and the
elaboration of the points that Candice
owns was was making which could be
elaborated into credibly robust and
broad rebukes against again the kind of
the fascistic mentality which is really
at the core of Russell Brand's wishful
the visionary conflation of politics and
morality you know that kind of the
inherent limitations that he just kind
of wishes away in in you know which can
only really be done when you have a kind
of cohesive force binding your your
political vision together which usually
just is this you know oh well it's just
the rich or it's just the powerful you
know we just need to gang up against the
evil people and that will keep us safe
you know as if you can just basically
blame every
on the fact that we have this plutocracy
but in fact the plutocracy is in the
ideology of people's inability
essentially to I mean really the same
thing that is why we don't already have
nice things essentially is because
people are unable to manifest them
already there's nothing stopping you
essentially from I mean why does your
government need to fix things for you
why can't you privately organize around
politics
I mean we live generally in open enough
societies that it really wouldn't
shouldn't matter even if you are run
politically by idiots because you could
organize your life essentially to
completely avoid those structures well
enough if you were able to actually
coordinate your energy well enough to
displace what is provided by the general
Association of a broader society rather
than actually creating a more effective
society well oh the society should be
better for the people that deserve more
justice you know it's sort of you know
that will generally always tend towards
the kind of creep of fascistic
ideological you know and I mean that you
know in the context of social justice
because you have to understand the Nazi
philosophy was really obsessed with
social justice at its core this is you
know that was their their proto-fascist
ideology which basically infected all of
Europe and America
I mean people forget that how popular
Hitler was before the wall before the
war Hitler was pretty much the most
popular leader in in Europe and and you
know people forget why is because you
know the kind of the liberal progressive
vision which collected people in the
Nuremberg rallies to destabilize far
more Germany you know basically the
essentially the proto-feminist as well
and all those people walking
hand-in-hand wanting you know
essentially the
fascist vision is that you would have
basically a rainbow Hitler that sorts
everything out
but obviously identity and and sort of
identity purity or whatever or or
identity morality can only serve one
master so you know there's only one ring
to rule them all essentially you you the
state can only serve one identity and
you know identity is just such a
pathetic philosophical vehicle and
instrument you know like yes you can fix
everything according to to one identity
but you know you're going to have to
fudge everything into into making the
narrative work for that identity and
therefore you have to have this very
stark and and caricature of reality
serving that ideological you know spiral
because it essentially is unsustainable
and it creates a hyperrealism and you
know we have this happening in our large
level in terms of culture you know and
the whole feminist thing is pretty much
just sad even you know trolling and
things like that although everything
within his context can be fine
the whole I mean one of the things that
made trolling attractive at the start
was that it was a way to undermine the
kind of brainless nurse by basically
copying the brainless nests of certain
ideologues essentially because there is
almost so much race baiting and trolling
based into identity politics and and
that sort of activism and that sort of
thinking and so it's sort of like you
beat them by joining them by joining
them and being stupid you kind of
somewhat exemplify the era of that sort
of particular slant of political lens
you know and so in some sense I do think
trolling has a dual function in that way
because it sort of dilutes the efficacy
of the kind of heuristic tactic in terms
of culture it dilutes the cultural
fascism which is but sadly that doesn't
ever go away unless properly until you
sort of confront
head on and you name it at its core and
sadly I think that if we just try to
fall into some kind of dicta and outline
of the cultural space that the
intellectual dark web provides that's
not going to be good enough to save us
from it
and the core beliefs and the and the
ethical ethos and getting that right
will be the only ball walk will be the
only safety in fact and this is the
problem that I have with with someone
like Joe Rogan is that he essentially is
is sort of nihilistic on this point it's
sort of beyond him he's somewhat at
least he's fairly intellectually honest
about that you know in terms of how you
know he's at least articulates his
assessment of it in a way where he's not
you know I'm on this team or I'm on that
team you know he says you know where he
he would prefer that one side to win but
he doesn't you know pretend to be part
of it you know so I think you know he's
very honest in terms of transparency in
terms of where he's at and and that I
think you know he's not a bad actor but
yeah my point is simply that he isn't
you know not being a bad actor is is
sort of helpful in the general context
because it gives the room for good
actors as well and he has certainly been
helpful platform for people as I said
factually he is every positive trend
within the general culture but there is
a difference between the meta discussion
and and let's say the factual discussion
and so yeah I'm just trying to delineate
these things