good morning welcome to meditating with
Chandra Viki I'm a cognitive scientist
and a cognitive psychologist at the
University of Toronto where I
academically and scientifically study
phenomena like mindfulness related
phenomena like Insight flow mystical
experience transformative experience
higher states of consciousness the
cultivation of wisdom the aspiration
towards enlightenment in addition to
that I've been practicing the past my
meditation Metta contemplation Tai Chi
Chuan Chi cung related to practices like
that for over 29 years and teaching the
past not not anti Chi Chuan for almost
20 years
welcome this is a progressive course
every Monday there is a Monday is a
Dharma day I teach principles and
practices that build on previous dollar
days and previous therefore previous
principles and practices if you're
joining for the first time you're
welcome to stay but please go to the
links in this video in the description
and you'll find links to previous
lessons and previous tips and if you go
to the lessons you can do them too maybe
sort of once a day over the next week or
two and catch up so as I mentioned today
is the Dharma day but at the end there
will be QA please keep your Q questions
directed towards this practice if you
have more general questions or reminded
that every third Friday of the month 3
p.m. est on YouTube a lot of strength QA
for more general and broader questions
so the thing I'd like to talk to you
today is you've been doing this thing
where we you know initially we were
learning the past night and we were
getting I know remember the metaphor the
pond we're getting to get the pond to be
still still so the stilling of the
surface and I brought an enquiring
lifeless going deeper
now we want to take that quite deep this
practice is the deepening of a pasta and
it has it has a very important function
now you've already like everything else
you've all been training us implicitly
especially more recently but now we're
going to make it explicit and focal so
the idea here is we want to take the
kind of insight that the parsnip affords
but we want to take it into the level of
meta and this is and what we're doing
today is actually preparation for the
practice where I'm going to teach you
next week which is the progeny practice
but we want to take that mindfulness
that the past not very very deep we want
to like breaking frame in a really
really deep and profound way remember
what we want we want eventually to be
able to integrate the past not the level
of matter we want you know that insight
not to just be a cognitive or
intellectual insight but one going an
accident an existential insight when
going into the depths of that process of
identification a process by which we're
assuming and assigning identities we
also want to bring a space into that we
want to open it up so so now we serve
getting deeper but we want to really
open up a space in which when only three
from automatic unconscious and reactive
ways in which were framing that process
of identity formation and operation we
also want to be free too we want to be
free to grow develop change transform
freedom from what was just right which
we've already been really deepening and
now we're going to deepen that more but
also start to integrate it with freedom
- what does that mean well think about
how I mentioned especially if you've
been meditating on your distractions
especially the distraction of thinking
it could come a moment where the
distraction goes away there is no set
there's no inner speech so inner
pictures is just a space and what's
happening in that space is you are dis
identifying your dis identifying with
that inner speaking voice and think
about how much we identified with that
inner voice in our head that inner
speaking voice and of course that has
afforded us lots of things we've talked
about how you need to do that with your
coaching are you directing like
everything else that this has a
tremendous function but like every
function it can be overused and abused
and malfunction and what happens is if
we are too tightly and automatically and
mindlessly identified with our speaking
voice that puts a lot of constraints on
the process of identity formation and
operation remember we're talking not
just about the identities you're
assuming for yourself because they are
correlated and Co determined by the
identities you're assigning to
everything else so to the degree to
which you are over identified with your
speaking mind is the degree to which
your identity and the way in which the
world can disclose a tough self to you
are locked down and of course we're
trying to open that up and meta now
we're deepening the past us so we can
take it more deeply into a deeper
integration with meta itself so how do
we do this it sounds all very abstract
one thing is you're already doing it
which is whenever you meditating on a
distraction and it falls silent there is
for moment no speech no scenery I try to
as I said try to create a felt memory
for that what does that feel like does
that feel like and I know you'll say but
I have to talk to myself and try not to
count the initial self coaching as part
of what you're paying attention to
eventually you'll just be able to
directly note oh you wanted to save
yourself just like you don't have to say
to yourself you know I need to turn on
the tap when you're washing your hands
you just notice that you need to turn on
the top you'll get to the point where
you'll just notice without having to
speak yourself oh this is what it's
when my mind is empty inner speech and
inner scenery so that's one thing I've
already mentioned this to you and now
you want to make that you know something
that you really try to remember to do on
a regular basis with dealing with your
destructions but now we're also going to
learn a new focus for of a pasta that is
designed to do that dis identification
that breaks up the automaticity the the
unconscious reactive nature of the
process of coid notification and also
frees up a space for a new way of being
a new way of seeing a new way of
realizing okay so this is what we're
going to do with it we're gonna of
course find a core for and then you're
going to do what all not from now on be
calling basic for pasta now I don't mean
but passing without the five factors to
the core in mind for us I mean the past
thing that I've taught you up to now
you're going to follow your breath where
there's a distraction you know to employ
the five factors if you get the silence
try to notice that especially and then
you return as I taught you to your
breath so it's gonna be awhile we find
the core for we do basic the pasta
following the breath right noting the
distraction so that ing were at apply
inquiring mindful us you'll see why you
need to keep inquire mindfulness quite
engaged okay so you do this for a while
while trying all sort of try and flag
when you should switch just to give you
a basic idea
once you've did doing that for a while
you're going to do something initially
it sounds counterintuitive but please
stick with me okay so now you're sort of
in the zone of meditating it's great and
now start putting in so much effort know
right let distractions come up and don't
label don't apply the five five doesn't
quite a mindless you O'Hara see just
hang on just hang on
okay so it comes up alright and then
what we're going to do is we're going to
do an interesting practice and I'll give
you a metaphor and it's based on a
metaphor that we already use think about
train of thought the idea is a train of
thought right
one thing is pulling on the other and
they're all right all moving together
because they're linked like it's the
causal effect to train all right so
imagine now a literal train and if
you're standing very close to it its it
fills up your vision and it seems solid
to you but if you could step back and
look at deeper version of this all right
you can actually notice the space
between the cars and then you can do
that thing with your attention where
instead of for grounding the cars you
forth around the space between the cars
and you start to see beyond the empty
space you see beyond the train to the
empty space that's on the other side of
it so what we do is we're sitting we do
the basics of pasta for a while and then
we just let write the distractions the
thoughts come up but here's what we're
gonna do we're gonna count our thoughts
we're gonna count your thoughts
1 2 3 4 5 the number the number is
meaningless the point about counting
your thoughts is it does that thing
where you step back and by counting you
step back and you start to look for the
spaces between your thoughts and they'll
be small but you've had some familiarity
of that already from working with your
structure than in crime rifles you look
at the spaces and then try more and more
to notice the spaces typically what
happens is they start to get bigger and
the the train of thought starts to slow
down and then see if you can do the
following
see if you then do for pasta where the
focus isn't on your breath the focus is
on that empty space between your
thoughts and then the distractions are
out here again that's the empty space
between your thoughts and then what do
you do you apply the five factors of
inquiring mindfulness to that empty
space you meditate into it you
meditatively quest
into it in the tradition this is it this
is described as you're like a cat
sitting outside of a mousehole waiting
for a mouse what does that mean
so I meditate into that space and what
I'm trying to see when I'm in that space
is I'm trying to get an inkling I'm
trying to get a sense of sort of a
movement of bubbling and energy that
right as if a thought is going to form
and see if you can pull back this
identify with that bubbling it's over
there so that it doesn't actually
germinate into a thought bubbles here
that's probably and so you're meditating
into that space and you're always sort
of sensing these proto thoughts these
first first seeds there's no so many
metaphors for thinking and you try to
stay dis identified from them and you
try to look at them just as shifting
patterns if you'll allow me this
metaphor of energy and then that's what
you're meditating on and what tends to
happen is you get the empty space
between your thoughts opens up very very
profit and you keep meditating into it
the five factors of inquiry mindfulness
now you say to me but how do it like if
I was counting my thoughts what do I do
with their distractions it's the same
rule if you can get to the place with a
space between your thoughts is now you
know center stage and holding the mic
then that becomes your passing the focus
you stop counting your thoughts and you
focus on the space you now you say well
I might still have distractions but if
the distractions are out here that
doesn't matter just like when you're
following your breath you zero in on the
space and you say but what if I get
fully distracted correct if you get
fully distracted from the space if you
if you give in to the thought in that
sense then what you do is you step back
notice the thought label with an ING
word apply the five factors see if the
destruction falls silent and then try to
note that then what you do is you come
back to basic the pasta follow your
breath for a bit he's stabilized
and let but you might just be open
thoughts come up count your thoughts
until you realize the space between your
thoughts and then meditate into meditate
into that space so that you come to a
place where you feel an expensive nosov
mind that is not identified with
speaking or making scenes so a couple of
things this is this is a very you know
this is a challenging practice remember
we always have to keep the demands ahead
of our growing skills and that's so be
patient with yourself for some people
this this falling silent of their inner
speaker inner inner painter or whatever
it is that makes the scenery can be a
roof it can be a little challenging
precisely because they are very
identified with this inner speaking mind
and so if what comes up is something
being uncomfortable as normal and just
keep meditating maybe you know anxiety
or something if it's if it takes you
away or if it's just in the background
percolating uncomfortableness to stay
with it I do I promise you that with
time that will go to me it will change
as valence from something negative to
something positive for you that it takes
time
however if when you get that dis
identification and you're into that
silent mind if you experiencing
something that is feels like it might
mount to Terror stop go back to basics
for pasta for a while leave this
practice for a few weeks
try it again gently like always gentle
probative erosion until we can gradually
make our way into this place now just to
give you a bit of force shutting what
happens is right initially you'll get
the space between your thoughts and it's
free of thought and it's free of scenery
but it's bubbling still if there's all
this sense of sort of energy and it's
going to a thought might form here and a
thought might form there
and that'll be the case whenever you
start this practice and it'll probably
that be all that you'll get in this part
is for a very long time but what can
happen down the road is not only does it
go silent
it drops still okay don't try to silence
your mind or make it still remember we
put that we put that project away long
time ago but what can happen is is you
meditate into the space you get the
silence and then the stillness okay I'm
sorry I was just talking when there's a
talk just be with you yet aside oh sorry
about that
okay I'm back so you can file it silent
and then still and then what you'll see
is that's going to be one poll that
we're going to need to have cultivated
when we practice and learn progeny next
week Partha is dynamic wisdom it's
active self liberating intelligence okay
everyone so I'll remind you again of
everything we're going to do and I'll
try to make an indication of where to
sort of shift gears so find your core
for a six-foot Pastner noting and
labeling the distractions with an ing
word my factors of inquiring mindfulness
trying to be especially sensitive and
aware if the distraction goes away and
there's that silence what does that
taste like what does that feel like now
you bring your attention back to the
breath as I've taught you and then I'll
at some point after we've done that for
a bit I'll say okay now oh just open
your mind you're going to reduce that
effort you're putting in to track your
breath just opening your mind thoughts
come up they're counting them on
and don't worry was that one thought or
two thought position doesn't matter her
one two three and try to notice what the
county that does is try to make apparent
to you the space between your thoughts
try to notice it more and more see if
you can foreground the space between
your thoughts until that becomes focal
and the thoughts are now out here and
then you meditate in to that silent
space the five factors requiring
mindfulness if we're distracted okay
you're distracted by ing noting five
factors of inquiring mindfulness noted
that fall silent return and do basic for
pasta again and then after you back in
the zone open the mind a lot of thoughts
to come up count the thoughts except
okay so there we go so please set your
phone to do not disturb please get
yourself in a comfortable position and
we will begin when I say be good be good
yeah
you
you
opening your mind and counting your
thoughts
you
you
Shh slowly you can come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate but you cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition
perhaps by reciting to yourself the five
promises
review questions on them target based
service shuttle you'd set up for
yourself so if I recommend alternating
I'm doing the past let's all just
presume you're doing once in a date but
you can just listen you're doing Tuesday
today do the past in one day or per set
and then the next day do matter the past
not matter the past not matter whenever
you're doing the pasta now how most of
your meditation be basic for pasta but
towards the end especially when it's
most challenging and it's it's sort of
easy for the distractions that come up
try actually doing the deepening the
constant exercise that I've taught you
so and eventually over time it'll shift
so that following the breath will just
be preparation and following the mind
will be actually the focus of your
practice most of the time so alternate
between them once a week
I recommend instead of doing them a
pasta or no matter and you'll always
find your core for and do a preliminary
basic of the pasta but doing the
meditative questing just to strengthen
inquiring mindfulness strengthening
vigilance next week I'm going to teach
you Raja to practice and then what
you'll do is also try to practice Raja
once or twice a week as well now some of
questions one is Victoria performance
Duda mind it's good to see you again
before I notice the emptiness right
before it happens usually because of
some ing labeling or after it's gone is
this because I'm nervous about losing it
that I'm not able to look in without
losing it yes but especially if it's a
thought that very active just stepping
back is already a beginning of this
identification with thinking and we're
trying to look like when you're trying
to step back and look at it rather than
they're getting caught up in it that can
cause it to disappear now
the emptiness itself if that's what
you're talking about the disappearing
yeah
so there's I'm trying to be very very
careful representative I don't want to
give people sort of too much expectation
because then that'll play into it don't
try and hold on to that emptiness I know
that sounds strange if you're trying to
keep it in existence that's the language
you're trying to keep it into existence
that will actually mean you'll go back
off and just thought and stuff like that
because you'll get that hard you're
actually doing the opposite of what you
want is that hard focusing trying to
keep it into into existence is the
opposite of that I of the soft vigilance
that we want at the core of acquiring
mindfulness so instead of trying to you
know keep it into existence try and look
and then it might be oh then it just
goes away right and I'm going back to
the basics in that that's like I said
that that will take quite a bit of time
quite a bit of time before that starts
to stabilize you have to do this
practice quite a bit so I your question
was a little ambiguous I hope I answered
both sides of it or both interpretations
ah sure Brioni what's the benefit of
meditating on distractions as far as I
understand either the distraction goes
away in which case you should try not to
be happy about it you go away in which
case you start again or you're enduring
and have to start again none of which
sounds particularly beneficial um it is
very beneficial if the distraction goes
away then you get that moment of
dissident vacation that I rectified was
talking about today which is very
important if you go away you can realize
how powerful these distractions are and
you'll start to give you get ability to
meditate into them to quite as that as a
quiet month less progresses these the
things that pull you away that the
distractions the meta distractions the
distractions that pull you even away
from your distractions reveal some very
deep habitual patterns of mind this is
how you can become aware of them and how
you can learn them and so that you are
they're no longer operating
unconsciously and reactively in you if
you're merely enduring yes
then that is something that should just
be that is I agree with you that didn't
uh if it comes to just endurance that's
fruitless and you should let it go
that's what the practice says and then
return back to following you brother
these are Carlucci sometimes if I hold
my breath my thoughts also pause and
then and there's that space was that why
does that happen and should I not do
that um you shouldn't hold your breath
so holding your breath is an alerting
response okay and so alerting response
will often make your mind go empty so
that you can give those resources to
whatever threat or you know really
important opportunity is suddenly in
front of you that's why you can even
freeze in fear because what it's trying
to do is clear everything away so that
everything can be given to you what's at
hand
so that's why it does that I would
recommend not holding your breath if you
can because your sir I understand it's
kind of nice because you get that to get
that pause holding your breath may be
very very slightly to get that is okay
but trying to you know making an
extensive and repeated practice then
you're going to limit the space to only
when you're holding your breath and so
while it initially gives you a gift
it's got a hook in it then keeps you
sort of attached to that state of empty
breath which is not good for trying to
bring this kind of depth of awareness in
what we're doing Praja because in Praja
you're going to be trying to get this
depth while following the flow of your
breath that doesn't make much sense
right now but I'm just mentioning that
because it's relevant to answering the
question was asked Mycah Schreck back
pain during the practice despite trying
different positions so they try to
observe you put my attention to the pain
because the pain is really distracting
me from bullying present yes
yeah so I hope that you're trying not
only different positions but also
meditating against the wall perhaps or
in a chair to take some of the pressure
off if you're still getting pain then
and then some people it becomes part of
their practice because they experience
chronic pain chronic pain and so
doing what you suggest treating it as a
as a strong distraction that you can
apply the five factors but quiet
mindfulness - yes that's what you do on
the understanding that the goal here is
not to make the pain go away the goal
here is to stop unconsciously
automatically and reactively relay ting
to the pink and red hair
hello I'm very good to see you again
when you asked us to try open our minds
I was still in reading stage to be fair
in the mind of the middle still a my
liking something or doing something
wrong is it okay to be the slope yes
don't take my intervention to get you to
shift as an indicate ha there's no
normative demand view or standard I was
just sort of an average from teaching
this of where you can transition for
people they said there's wide variation
how long people take find the core for
you always that priority always give
that further leaner Ludwig
there's noticing different sounds around
you count as thoughts or discus
fractions I tend to label these sounds
yes if you're directing attention to it
it is a thought in that sense yes yes
exactly
Kyra Kroger what if thoughts seem like
white noise or buzzing bees no space
between the thoughts what do I count so
if you're just getting that buzzing and
it's happening all at once there's two
things here it's sort of like just a Shh
nose then meditate on that with the five
factors of acquiring mindfulness see if
there is like if there's space within it
rather just count what you can but if
it's like you say sort of a white noise
hum then you're horny I would I would
think starting to transition towards
what I'm talking about
the white noise is necessarily something
bad it's actually something that's sort
of a liminal state of transitional state
to getting to the space between your
thoughts so say
and meditate into it instead of trying
to I'm gonna find the space behind it
maybe meditate into it and see how it is
admit I've have 80 mañana if I don't
know how to pronounce that
do you have the prescriptions for how to
assess the progress and efficiency of
practice are the things we can do to
produce self-deception now we are
appropriately meditating in
contemplating so as I've admitted
there's no the the standard you use for
evaluating if you're making progress is
the practice of integration are you
starting to notice yourself like like
are you starting to notice moments of
insight moments of stepping back and
realizing how you're framing moments of
stepping back and realizing the
identities you're assigning and assuming
moments of enhanced flexibility moments
where you feel like you're really
zeroing in on what's relevant and
important maybe getting into the flow
state more often often and especially
not only if you notice those behavioral
changes but if other people start to
know those changes in you that's the
indication that you're starting to make
progress in them also do the reverse
when you are in your life and like
you're like you were really in the flow
state or you found yourself sort of
really insightful what does that feel
like what does that feel like what does
that feel like right how does it taste
in your mind and in your emotion in your
body and then try to remember of that
felt memory and you try to see how much
it is naturally occurring in your
meditative practice so you can get into
a Cartesian well of death where maybe
i'm self-deceiving but maybe i'm
self-deceived about my self-deception
and maybe i'm self-deceived about how
him self-deceived about and you can
tumble down that and there's no not even
if god can get out of that so the thing
you need to do is to like you have to be
very pragmatic about this and Buddhism
is a very pragmatic philosophy all right
if you're starting to get more insight
catch yourself in an elysian be able to
zero in on what's relevant get more to
the flow state in your life and
especially other people are noticing
that change that's one half and if the
other half is you can when you notice
that you start to get a felt sense of
what it
like to be in touch then see how much
you can find that in your practice and
try to create that loop that loop is how
we tell how well we're doing I said I
would look for some Tai Chi online Tai
Chi courses I was gonna put the notes in
on Friday unfortunately I haven't found
something I like I haven't given up that
I will continue to look for that and
when I find something I'll put the notes
in a video and we'll all fly it in some
way by announcing it as well alright
everyone sorry again for that minor
disruption with my Meniere's attack I
hope it wasn't too to start late for you
I want to thank you for joining
I want as always thank you thank my dear
friend and technomage Mar and my beloved
son Jason who are behind the scenes
making all of this happen please like
this stream if you can because when you
like it you raise its visibility on the
YouTube algorithm and that helps me to
extend this teaching to more people in a
way that I think they'll find helpful
and beneficial please share this
meditation course with as many people as
you can you think might benefit print
please subscribe to this channel so
you'll get notice of notification you'll
also find lots of videos we'll both
within the awakening meaning crisis
series or the voices with reveille P
series where a lot of these topics like
mindfulness and insight and flow and
mystical experience and self
transcendence are discussed at length
and also how to set this into a more
comprehensive way of life and perhaps
you know a new culture for us this is
very powerful and important at this time
that we're all facing worldwide we're
doing this every weekday morning as I
mentioned at 9:30 a.m. est Mondays at
Dharma day
today was the Dharma day to be longer
Tuesday through Friday or just sit days
every day has a Q&A at the end so
remember continuity of practice is more
important than quantity there is no
enemy
worse than your on mine but there is no
Ally no friend greater than your own
mind thank you everyone for your time
and attention I'll see you all tomorrow