[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis this is episode 25 last
time we took a look important
developments that are centered upon the
figure of Hegel and again I said last
time I can't give a comprehensive
analysis of Hegel's thought it's too
complex and sophisticated I was trying
to do the best I could to capture that
within Hegel's thought which is directly
relevant to our understanding the
genealogy of the meaning crisis and we
saw how Hegel proposes how to move
beyond Caunt
and the romantics by rejecting const
notion of the thing in itself and saying
look reality is just the patterns of
intelligibility there is nothing above
and beyond that a form of idealism and
that as our ideas are being realized as
patterns of intelligibility are being
developed reality is also simultaneously
being developed and we took a look at
this notion of write a system a living
you know a quasi living system of these
patterns of intelligibility in
development called Geist and that Hegel
proposed that that development can be
understood as a process that he called
dialectic echoing Plato but I think
severing the notion of dialectic from an
agog a which figures in some of the
criticisms of Hegel that we looked at
towards the end this dialectic is a
process in which ideas again not just
things in the head these are patterns of
intelligibility patterns of the way
reality is realized in both in the sense
of being known and being actual there's
this pattern in which ideas articulate
and differentiate from each other one
idea is opposed by another contrasted to
distinguished from and then it is taken
up in a higher order integration and
then that serves as a new idea that
be contrasted with other ideas and this
dialectical process complexify x' the
pattern of intelligibility we get it
emerges and develops and becomes more
and more so the the irrationality the
failure to understand is being slowly
transmuted actualized into deeper
patterns of understanding deeper aspects
of being and then the idea is that this
reaches a state in which a system of
ideas emerges that grasps the
dialectical process itself as found
exemplified Hegel believed in his own
philosophy and this is the culmination
the state of 'absolute Geist and if we
remember that for Hegel the real is the
rationale the rationale is the real what
we get is that this development of the
rationality and intelligibility of
reality is also the development of
reality itself
and so this Co development of meaning
and being is absolute spirit absolute
mind this is Hegel's version of God a
secularized non religious God we saw how
much Hegel understood his philosophy in
religious terms but that he was always
pursuing that understanding by
translating religious terms and
religious experience into philosophical
conceptual structure and he advocates
for a new mythology a mythology that is
integrated with philosophy a mythology
of Reason which will be the last and
greatest work of mankind the culmination
of all of history I took you through an
example of how understanding right there
the ability to make sense passes into
this moment of self-realization in
reason as mythology passes
to philosophy we did an example of that
showing how Hegel secularized the
Trinity in a historical process of the
self realization of rationality and in
that sense Hegel is the Thomas Aquinas
of Protestantism he was proposing this
grand synthesis this grand
secularization of the whole Hebraic
Christian idea of God at work in history
and God working through human beings and
in there a gothic processes to co-create
the real future the utopic but real
future we took a look at the main
criticisms of Hegel we were we reminded
ourselves of the criticisms made by
Schopenhauer about the will to live was
missing and then how Nietzsche takes
this up in the will to power and this
whole the centrality of the will I took
a look at the other great existential
forerunner kirkegaard and his criticism
basically using some of the terms we've
developed that Hegel has reduced
everything to propositional conceptual
knowing he has left out the perspectival
participatory knowing he has left out an
agog a he's given us only epistemic
transcendence he hasn't given us
existential ethical self transcendence
personal transformation and
transformative experience that are
necessary for returning to making deeper
contact with reality has been left out
and we noted that this is also consonant
with the work of La Paul about how we
can't reason our way through
transformative experiences that are so
central to the cultivation of wisdom we
then looked at another person who
emphasized this lack of will and
participation in Hegel system and this
is the work of Karl Marx and Marx was
great proposal great and terrifying
proposal
is that history is not driven by reason
the man in Plato system but by the
monster and Marx is deeply influenced by
Feuerbach and for abouts critique of
religion as the projection of our own
humanity and that religion is not the
arena in which spirituality is working
itself out religion is the the
projective distortion that distracts us
from how we are the authors of
spirituality in history it is a vehicle
of self alienation so Marx takes the
Ford Ibaka in critique and he rejects
the theistic resonances within Hegel the
idealistic and he says no the dialectic
is not a dialectic of ideas that's
playing itself out religiously it is a
dialectic of economic forces that is
playing itself out politically the
dialectic is not between ideas that are
in contrast but between socio economic
ways of life classes that are in
political conflict with each other but
are Neth nevertheless systematically
related and as that historical process
of class conflict unfolds this dialectic
will work out all the self
contradictions in our socio-economic
system our current one being capitalism
for example until the contradictions are
resolved in a socio-economic state in
which peace and freedom have been
achieved because all of the internal
contradictions that drive the violence
will be resolved this is a completely
secularized version the the
judeo-christian model of God working
himself out in history to bring us to
the promised land Marx offers the
participatory knowing that is missing in
Hegel by proposing how we identify with
class we identify with the struggle and
we participate in the Kairos the turning
of history by engaging in revolution and
so the totalizing the totalitarian kind
of ideology that Hegel is proposing is
being being wedded to the idea of
violent political change within
revolution and so this is very very
powerful pseudo religious ideologies so
what started in romanticism has now come
to fruition in that we have the proposal
of secularized political socio-economic
ideologies in conflict as the way in
which spirit and spirituality is to be
understood and pursued pseudo religious
ideologies we should mention a couple of
other ones that of course are emerging
at the same time have been emerging
since the disruption in the
socio-economic life of Europe following
the the Bloch death we've caught of
course we've already seen the rise of
commercialism but we are also going to
see write the conclusion of this idea
that the political arena is the place in
which ideas struggle with each other and
meaning is made that the secularization
of course is going to be understood in
terms of your participation
not necessarily in your class like you
have in Marx but in other ways in which
people are going to declare their
political identity and this is
nationalism nationalism is the idea that
the nation-state can take the role in
many ways that God has taken in the past
that the nation-state and your patriotic
devotion to it your canoe your
commitment to it you're willing to sock
Feist for it your participation in its
historical development that precedes you
and will follow you
upon your death right is trying to do
many of the things that religion had
done for people in the past and you get
the fierce nationalism that is emerging
in the 19th century around the same time
as Marx and Nietzsche and right and
kirkegaard are doing their seminal work
so nationalism when it is understood
this way and when it is understood in
terms of will of course gets very
clearly wedded to the emerging
socio-economic and technological power
driven by the scientific and industrial
revolutions in Europe and that
nationalism very quickly gets wedded to
imperialism
so nationalism and imperialism become
ways in which people have secular pseudo
religious ideologies and identities that
they pursue as a way of trying to fill
the gap that has been vacated by the
erosion of the Christian framework now a
place in which this is all fiercely
happening in a really intensified way as
Germany so all of this work all of these
people who are talking about when will
not kirkegaard but you know Nietzsche
Schopenhauer Hegel Marx they're all in
Germany right and again Germany is the
place of Luther where you get the first
big you know change towards
secularization Germany isn't a cut
Germany as a country as younger than
Canada it doesn't come into existence
until I believe 1870 and the work of
Bismarck the Germans had been fragmented
as a nation they were not a nation-state
they've been fragmented for centuries
and through powerful realpolitik
meaning you know ethics be damned
bismarck helps craft and unite the
nation of Germany into a nation state
and so nationalism is fierce in Germany
because Germany has finally gone from
being just a cultural leader to becoming
a political entity with tremendous
economic industrial power and scientific
production in its grass nationalism is
fierce and Germany sees itself in
competition with the other nation states
that have got a head start in their
imperial self promotion Germany sees
itself lacking lagging behind France and
England in the creation of world empire
so nationalism and imperialism become
paramount in Germany and then disaster
strikes
and it's a disaster that actually
reverberates around the world because
this whole attempt to secularize
progress in terms of material
advancement scientific advancement
technological advancement nationalism
imperialism comes to a crashing disaster
in the first world war in which all this
machinery that was supposed to bring us
to utopia was seeming to take the place
of God and our spiritual traditions
drenches Europe in traumatic tidal wave
of blood and destruction an entire
generation is decimated so Europe itself
is traumatized by this but Germany is
especially traumatized because it is
defeated all that's national and
imperial and cultural ambitions are
thwarted and the victors France and
England especially Treat Germany very
very poorly they weaken it a konami Klee
they cripple it militarily all of this
has taken up in a lot of careful history
and I can't go into this in great detail
what we need to know is let's gather
this together this is this is Germany in
the state those were one the by our
republic this state of right the
collapse right of German idealism right
the the thwarting of the dreams of
nationalism and imperialism Germany as
remembered is the country that has
Ben I don't know what the right were
tainted by Luther's horrible
anti-semitism the anti-semitism we
talked about like in his work you know
the Jews and their lives in which he
proposes a genocide genocide of policies
towards the Jews we saw that Germany is
the home of the rhineland mystics
there's been a under current running
through Germany that helped fuel the
Protestant Reformation but there's this
undercurrent of the mystical tradition
it comes to fruition for example in
people like Boheme who's a German
Lutheran mystic and and and a Protestant
mythic mystic a very odd thing in some
ways but this undercurrent in Germany is
very Neoplatonic very Gnostic we've seen
as I said the collapse of German
idealism under the critique of the
alternatives by Marx and the
existentialists the German idealism also
seems to fail because of the critiques
that are coming out of positivism and a
philosophical position that is wedded to
the tremendous success of scientific
materialism scientific materialism
Marxism is arising in Germany as a real
threat we saw of course that Germany was
the home of the powerful Romantic
tradition good is one of the important
generators of the Romantic tradition and
we saw how romanticism is also becoming
decadent in Germany we have the ongoing
fragmentation caused by the partisan
Reformation the Germans have developed
an explicit form the idea of will to
power
this is this resentment this
undercurrent of gnostic mythology
anti-semitic religious traditions the
collapse of German idealism leaving this
philosophical vacuum the collapse of the
Romantic tradition also leaving
philosophical vacuum the thwarting of
nationalism and imperialism the advocacy
of a will to power as the way in which
human beings can recapture the lost self
transcendence and of course that
nationalism and that anti-semitism very
quickly integrate with a racist
interpretation of history to try and
replace Hegel's idealistic
interpretation of history or Marx's
socio-economic interpretation of history
and all of this is drawn together in the
autodidactic vortex of Hitler's mind we
talked about the dangers of a fragmented
autodidactic approach to the meaning
crisis the meaning crisis is being
driven to a fever pitch in the vom our
republic and all of these forces are
being spun in a romantic and I mean that
at a decadent sense a romantic willful
autodidactic manner reading mind Kumpf
is a difficult thing to do not just
because of the opponent moral stance of
its author but because it verges on
incoherence because of the attempt
Hitler has of
of trying to articulate all of this
personally see and and and this is not a
coincidence I think Hitler is like
Luther be careful of this analogy and
not claiming an identity I'm not trying
to insult all Lutheran's but what I mean
by that Hitler sees his own personal
struggle mine Kampf my struggle as
representative of in emblematic symbolic
of all of Germany and beyond that of all
of Western civilization and he
exemplifies this chaos and he
articulates this weird mythology you see
you misunderstand Nazism if you
understand it only as a political system
if you understand it only for example as
fascism or racism it is those things but
you want to understand that the fascism
and racism are actually in service of a
gnostic nightmare
I mean you can feel like the currents of
you we have our true self we're born
with it well that's you know it's in our
blood you know you can hear decadent
Romanticism and and then you can hear
the Gnostic you know here we are we are
that we are actually a master race but
we're trapped within a worldwide
conspiracy right that is keeping us from
knowing our divine heritage and only by
opposing and trying to thwart the evil
overlords can we come to our true divine
heritage as the master race that is in
our blood and in the soil of our nation
DC it's it's it's and and of course
Luthor's Luthor's anti-semitism is
mixing up with a strand of Gnosticism
that says if you remember you know the
people that worship the Demiurge is you
know the people who worship the God of
the Old Testament are the Jews and this
is all this all makes a weird twisted
kind of sense
it's a Gnostic nightmare in which Hitler
is crafting something that hangs between
a religion a totalitarian ideology and a
personal mythology that he he
exemplifies and people are attracted to
it this is a you shouldn't understand
and you can't respond to Nazism as if it
is just a political movement you're not
getting it it is a pseudo religious
ideology at a totalitarian proposal that
confuses and distorts myth mysticism
nationalism infuses this with decadent
Romanticism decadent gnostic mythology
the will to power of nietzsche that's
why the great propaganda film about the
Nazis is actually entitled triumph of
the will triumph of the will
it's being late to imperialistic racism
do you see what I'm trying to show you
Nazism is a tsunami of in which
all of these currents these the currents
these that are emerging out of the
collapse of the three orders are being
spawned by Hitler in order to try and
give people a brutally powerful response
to the exigent intensity of the meaning
crisis in vimar Germany and Hitler
Luck's out because that whole
socio-cultural process is intensified by
the socio-economic collapse of the Great
Depression what seems to vindicate his
gnostic nightmare it seems to vindicate
his dream of dealing with the collapse
of meaning through
a mythology of imperialistic racist
twisted decadent romantic Gnosticism
that has gathered together the shards of
this whole historical process in of the
place in which they were often
originating which is Germany so we have
now these two great pseudo religious
ideologies Marxism and Nazism and of
course they are diametrically opposed to
each other and Hitler proposes his
history of race against communists
proposal of the history of class and
these two pseudo religious ideologies
that both propose a totalitarian
ideology infused with mythologies of
grasping and driving the Kyros of
history towards the utopia of the
promised land they meet they meet in the
most titanic struggle to use the term to
both Marx and Hitler use the titanic
struggle of the Eastern Front in World
War two you see the the the the thing
about many of us is we we tend to
understand World War two largely from
the perspective of the British or the
American or the Canadian viewpoint
because we're British or American or
Canadian right we forget that the
Western Front while significant and I do
not want to in any way denigrate the
tremendous sacrifice that people made or
undo endured on the Western Front but
the Western Front is dwarfed by
happening on the Eastern Front
19:43 these two Titanic forces and the
historical socio-political socio
economic forces that they have marshaled
they meet at the Battle of Kursk in 1943
on the Eastern Front there's nothing
like it anywhere else in world war ii
there's nothing like it anywhere else in
world history this is the biggest battle
ever literally this battle involves
millions of men tens of thousands of
pieces of equipment thousands and
thousands of Tanks thousands of
airplanes it goes from Horizon to
Horizon it's brutal and vicious it it
somehow there's there's individual acts
of tremendous brutality set within this
huge technological machine of mass
destruction
the battle of kursk and eventually in a
Russian victory
so militarily it spells the beginning of
the end of the Nazi regime and the
ascendance of the Soviet Union into the
post-world War - military superpower
dominating Eastern Europe so of course
it has all of that historical
significance but the Battle of Kursk
points to write it the literal what do I
wanna say the it's overwhelming it's
literally sort of beyond comprehension
in terms of its size and its scope and
the depth and and and and that and and
the sheer amount of Technology and
material this also has an impact you see
on on the genealogy of the meaning
crisis I want to point to what this
leads to and of course and then I of
course I've alluded to the cold war that
comes after it right
see that this tremendous struggle right
is of course it is symptomatic of the
meaning crisis what we have is a
fixation at the level of beliefs both
sides are fixated on belief systems to
Tollett Aryan ideologies and attempts to
create secular alternatives to religion
totalitarian systems of ideas that are
supposed to explain history reality and
how we can achieve utopia how could we
can recapture the axial legacy we have
the complete politicization of the quest
for meaning mythology is being confused
with politics confused with politics in
powerful ways the perspective of knowing
has been reduced to your political
viewpoint the participatory knowing has
been reduced to your political
identification and it marshals
tremendous physical resources and a
titanic struggle of wills confrontation
of ideologies now what does that what
does all of that legacy mean for us
because of course eventually the Soviet
Union also collapses well
this whole secularized political process
of the pseudo religious ideologies is
not only symptomatic in the meaning
crisis it also contributes to the
meaning crisis it's not just a result it
causally feeds back into exacerbating
the meaning crisis okay how well we face
right the matter crisis
Thomas Bjorklund it's called it that
talked about it you know this is the
intertwining you know ecological
socio-economic and spiritual crisis
existential crises of our time the
mental health crises etc now the meta
crisis right which in which the meaning
crisis plays a significant role I was
injured interdependent with these other
crises to address this this is going to
require comprehensive we have to have
comprehensive change in our
consciousness cognition because I've
shown you the deep history of all of
this if they have a comprehensive change
in our consciousness our cognition our
character we cultivate virtue wisdom
compassion soft transcendence or culture
how our community structure distributed
cognition together create systemic
psycho technologies now the only thing
that in the past that has created
systemic sets of psycho technologies
that transform cognition consciousness
character and culture in an
interdependent way is religion
that's the only thing that we've created
that does this now in the 19th and the
20th century we tried to create
alternatives to this the pseudo
religious ideologies that have drenched
the world in blood
so what do we do we need to respond to
the meta crisis
but we have been traumatized by right
the pseudo religious ideologies
so don't no longer seems like a viable
option one thing of course that some
people are pursuing is a nostalgic
attempt to return to religion an attempt
to ignore all this history and of course
this leads to various kinds of
fundamentalisms and I do and do include
certain forms of atheism as being pseudo
religious fundamentalisms read Chris
Hedges book on this I think he makes a
good case for it this of course can
interact with how everything has been
politicized there we go when those
interact of course we get the potential
for terrorism and so many people rightly
are very doubtful of this as a response
many people find themselves stuck here
their post religious they reject this
but they also reject this the pseudo
religious ideologies their post
religious and they find themselves as we
said fragmented autodidactic
and these responses right of course
dangerously interact with this
facilitated by things like social media
and the internet I also dangerously
interact with these pseudo religious
ideologies see what I'm showing you here
is we seem to need a religion that
cannot be any kind of religion at all we
seem to need a religion that cannot be
any kind of religion at all we can't
deal with the meaning crisis by pursuing
pseudo religious ideologies trying to
deal with this as a political issue this
is why I steadfastly refuse to build an
argument for this work that I'm trying
to share with you as on the back of a
political controversy as a confrontation
of political ideologies under stuying to
frame or understand the meaning crisis
as I struggle between political
ideologies as a political thing about as
a political process of using violence
potentially or argument to change belief
is to miss represent the meaning crisis
there is no political solution to our
troubled evolution to quote the police
we somehow need a religion that is not a
religion at all we need a God beyond all
gods for many people this seems I think
reasonably enough to be a dilemma to be
a contradiction and we are not just
being stuck on the horns of a dilemma we
are being gored and ripped apart by the
horns of the dilemma
so the clash the adversarial clash of
pseudo religious ideologies is not only
symptomatic of the meaning crisis it
contributes to the meaning crisis by
locking us in - or at least contributing
to the way in which we are locked into
this dilemma this aspect of the meaning
crisis in which we need a religion that
is not a religion at all
so I mean I could continue on this
history I could talk about great works
of literature that struggle with this
dilemma
I think a fruitful way of understanding
one of the great novels I consider one
of the the greatest and certainly one of
my favorite you know Moby Dick is about
this dilemma
I think you could make a good case for
that you could talk about different
aspects of popular culture you could see
the zombie mythology as an articulation
of this and aspects of the meaning
crisis but we'll come back to that
because it's now time to move from the
historical analysis from understanding
the genealogy the collapse of the three
orders the noma logical the normative
and the narrative the dilemma that
emerges out of the attempt to deal with
the collapse to the creation of pseudo
religious ideologies it's time to pass
from that historical analysis because we
could continue it we could carry it like
I said into an analysis of popular
culture important works of art and
literature we could talk about
Dostoyevsky or as I've mentioned
Melville or Conrad and that that of
course and it's not in any way an
exhaustive list right
but it's time I think now to turn to the
other side of the argument that we need
to make we need to turn now to not a
historical analysis of the genealogy of
the meaning crisis but a cognitive
scientific analysis of the machinery the
cognitive machinery of meaning making
itself
because if we want to respond awaken
from the meaning crisis in a way that
does not amesh us inexorably in this
dilemma that gives us a way of
recovering the axial legacy without
trying to do that through utopic to
Tollett aryan ideologies
I propose that what we do is try to
understand using our best science the
machinery of meaning making and use that
as a way of trying to build a
theoretical structure for recovering and
salvaging what we can of the axial
legacy and hopefully that science that
science of cognition that cognitive
science will also afford the engineering
of new systematic sets of psycho
technologies practices of
self-transcendence that can be
coordinated with the science such that
we are not just talking about responding
to the meeting crisis and the historical
forces therein we are affording and
providing people with the means to begin
the process individually and hopefully
collectively of creating systemic sets
of psycho technologies that bring back
the connectedness lost in the three
orders and bring back
the sappy ntral pursuit of
self-transcendence so the way to begin
that is to just talk about what
cognitive sciences antennae and of
course I mean I'm a cognitive scientist
I teach cognitive science at the
University of Toronto I teach the
introduction to cognitive science I
teach many courses I teach a course on
Buddhism in cognitive science some of
you may know about that
I teach upper level courses on the
cognitive science of consciousness and I
teach also cognitive psychology where I
do a lot of work on the MIS machinery of
meaning-making and the machinery the
cognitive machinery at work and wisdom
and self transcendence so what I want to
do is present to you I mean I I'm
laughing because I'd like I have entire
university courses in which I do this
but I want to try and present to you or
introduced you what is cognitive science
or a particular vision of cognitive
science because of course academics will
disagree as to what cognitive science is
and I'm going to present what cognitive
science is for me not in terms of my
personal proclivities or taste but my
argument for what I think is the best
vision of what cognitive science should
and can be doing and I want to present
that in a way that is deeply
interrelated with the meaning crisis
okay
so cognitive science is a fairly recent
discipline it really emerges only in the
late 70s as an explicit academic
discipline
the early 80s and it's and it's born out
of an important idea that we actually
have multiple disciplines that are
studying this thing called mind the
organ of cognition
so for example there are some people
let's organize this this way we can talk
about sort of levels of reality or
levels of analysis right to keep contact
and then we can talk talk about
different disciplines all dealing with
this phenomena and I want to show you
how as the science is advancing its also
contributing to the meaning crisis in
the way it's fragmenting the sense of
mind and attendant senses of identity
and self so what do I mean so you have
right the understanding of mind by
understanding the brain and people
should be more careful when they
criticize this the brain is a
terrifically complex and sophisticated
thing but what you do here is you're
gonna try and understand the mind by
studying the brain studying patterns of
neural activity and of course the
discipline that studies this is
neuroscience and right they talk about
entities like neurons they neuroscience
they talk about neurons neural processes
they use you know FMR eyes perhaps EEG
right new new technologies for observing
the brains behavior but of course
there's another discipline that is
talking about the mind cognition at a
different level this is where you try to
understand the mind in terms of
information processing
and here you're not so much talking
about neurons you might be talking about
neural networks but you're talking more
like about like programs algorithms
you're talking about ways in which we
could potentially make artificial
intelligence because you know computers
and neural networks aren't made of
neurons they're made right out of
different kinds of matter and so what
we're not talking about the brain level
now we're talking about information
processing and you know this is sort of
computer science but especially in the
project of artificial intelligence
especially and we'll talk about what
this means later artificial general
intelligence where the what I'm trying
to do is not just make machines that can
do sort of sophisticated things but I'm
trying to make machines that actually
are cognitive agents and we're gonna
talk a lot about AI and of course we
know that AI is the potential to
radically transform our self
understanding and exacerbate the meaning
crisis and it is doing so already
but of course another way I study your
mind is I study your behavior now notice
here I'm talking about what do I do here
I don't cut out brains and slice like
slice them under microscopes or run F
MRIs III make simulations actually
create programs or neural networks or
various combinations so notice what I'm
showing you each discipline is directed
to a different level and it's using
different language and it's using
different methods of Investigation and
it's amassing different kinds of
evidence so what's the what what's the
discipline that studies behavior of
course well that's psychology or
discipline that I I'm privileged to
practice at the University of Toronto
and we talk about different things I
mean psychologists sometimes talk about
brains and they sometimes talk about
this because cognitive psychology is
very influenced by cognitive science but
generally psychologists are trying to
understand behavior and we talk about
things like working memory and long-term
memory right we talk about those kinds
of things and what we do is we use
experimentation on human beings and we
gather statistical data demographic data
etc and we try to understand so again a
different level using different language
different methods and different kinds of
evidence is that enough no there's
another discipline that talks about mind
because of what I'm doing right now I'm
making noises come out of my face wall
and you understand my mind language
language seems to be in a really
important way in which mind operates and
mind communicates it's through language
that mind minds are linked together
until you get language here and this of
course is studied by linguistics and
here you don't talk about working memory
and long-term memory you might if you
linked them together in
psycholinguistics and notice how there's
this is constant wanting to link the
levels together in these new hybrid
disciplines but generally in linguistics
you talk about things like tree
structures you talk about
transformational grammar you do
something like experiments but it's more
right where you're testing people's
judgments about whether or not a certain
uh pterence is grammatically acceptable
makes sense so again different level
different language different methods
different kinds of evidence and as I've
said before long before the internet
networked computers together culture was
networking minds together because most
of our problem-solving is done with
distributed cognition and the discipline
that studies that of course is
anthropology
an anthropology uses a different method
it uses participant observation because
listen to that language because culture
is something you have to know in a
participatory knowing fashion you have
to go through the transformation of
enculturation to know what a culture is
and uses participant observation it
generates ethnography so what am i
showing you I'm showing you right that
this term doesn't refer in a univille
fashion it's equivocal when I'm saying
mine it's not clear what I mean
science is fragmenting what the word
mind means and therefore it's
fragmenting you who and what you are now
here's the idea right we have a problem
here we'll come back and about this if
we don't get clear about how we can
integrate these various different
meanings of mine we're going to engage
in it lots of equivocation I'll come
back and talk about that but here's the
other idea it's highly unlikely and
already we've seen that these different
disciplines want a hybrid together it's
highly unlikely that these various
levels are not culturally I'm sorry are
not causally impacting and constraining
each other in fact it's highly plausible
that these various levels causally
interpenetrate and deeply influence each
other
so we need to capture the causal
interaction between the levels how do we
capture this causal interaction that is
not being captured by any one of the
individual disciplines will we follow
that impulse to hybridization but we
pursue something more what we want to do
is we want to get all of these
disciplines talking to each other not in
an equivocal fashion but in a meaningful
fashion talking to each other we
a kind of theoretical integration
because that integration of right these
different languages and ontology z' for
each one of these disciplines is how
we're going to capture the missing
causal interaction between the levels
and avoid equivocating and it also holds
this potential because if we can get a
discipline that does that then we will
also not only have a theoretical
scientific advance we will start to be
responding to the fragmentation of the
mind now a discipline that helps to
bridge between different ontologies
discourses methods ways of theorizing
bringing evidence together the
discipline that does that is philosophy
right so what you want is you want some
philosophical training in how discourses
and I mean it's very deeply how
disciplines ways of theorizing observer
observing studying reality these
different levels of the reality of the
mind right you need a discipline that is
capable of trying to bridge between
those vocabularies and that's philosophy
now if I take this philosophy and I so I
get training in this and I get training
in these and I start to try to bridge
between the disciplines to avoid the
equivocation and to facilitate grasping
the causal interaction then I'm doing
cognitive science so
next episode we'll talk a lot more about
the nature and practice of cognitive
science but I hope you can see already
how it's going to be relevant to trying
to understand the machinery of
meaning-making and the fragmentation of
ourselves and our identities that is at
work within the Scientific Revolution
thank you for your time and attention
[Music]
you
you
[Music]