[Music]
for better or worse I think I can
probably safely say on one of the most
high-profile academic couples who are
willing to talk about and explore the
issues around polyamory what do you make
of the fact that you're now kind of the
poster academics for this subject but
there are nearly enough yeah one thing
you realize if if you get into debates
about polyamory versus monogamy you know
it it was said by a lot of folks in the
hall right politics is downstream of
culture but culture also apparently is
down the stream of the mating system so
if you really want to get people riled
up you challenge the mating system that
actually dominates you know relations
between the sexes but also family
structure and has knock-on effects on
everything from kind of the design of
housing and urban spaces to the design
of careers and the extent to which
people can kind of use freedom of
association to form little families or
poly tools or communes or whatever and
as soon as you kind of shake the tree of
monogamy and challenge that people panic
and they think like what else might have
to change if this is ever questioned we
actually don't really pay that much
attention to other polyamorous people
because we think that a lot of what
other polyamorous people endorse is
actively not to be yeah Leslie puts you
find a point on it but yeah we I mean I
always like to say that we don't endorse
it we just talk about how it can work
for some people and about how it is
potentially a you know a better way to
have a fuller life for people who can
manage jealousy and who you know I think
I actually don't understand how people
do polyamory without an evolutionary
perspective for example and that is
something that we're planning on
exploring more and writing
videos yeah yeah like we don't really
hang out in the polyamory Facebook
groups or go to poly meetups or go to
the conferences or whatever I brought
all the poly books I've I'm very
familiar with scientific research on it
I've taught a class on polyamory and
open relationships but I think a lot of
the aspects of at least American
polyamory culture are kind of dominated
by the same far-left you know ideologies
and gender constructivist views that are
absolutely handicapping to real
relationships so we kind of like to keep
our distance from kind of poly culture
even though I think we have a huge
respect for the the impulse to try to
have you know a new ethical approach to
relationships that's open and honest and
fulfilling and adventurous and it's just
kind of heartbreaking to see people try
to do poly without understanding him in
nature yeah I think that a lot of people
engage in polyamory because they have
some kind of ideological commitment
right they want to show the world that
it's possible to escape your monogamous
programming or they have some kind of
feminist agenda or even a communist
agenda they don't want another person to
own them they don't want to be in a
contract with someone else they see
exclusive monogamous relationships as
some kind of wing of capitalism for
example and that somebody else owns your
labor and owns you as property and we
really do what we do because we think
it's fun and fulfilling and I mean for
me I'm a utilitarian really
affirmatively from an evolutionary and
utilitarian perspective that I'm having
the best time I can have and not because
I'm trying to show people that I'm not
owned or that I don't own him right it's
still a quite small percentage of people
actually do open relationships and poly
it's not likely to become the majority
anytime
soon so it's almost like the people who
thought that you chose to be gay or
lesbian thinking we have to keep a lid
on that whole homosexuality stuff
because oh my god everybody would
obviously turn gay if they could like
know there's a certain percent of people
for whom that works and I think for us
it works for a certain percentage of
other people polyamory probably could
work very well at least for certain
phases of their life but it'll be
interesting to have a debate like that
because I think you know the monogamists
basically have the view everybody must
be monogamous pretty much all the time
and the reasonable polyamorous are like
some people can be poly some of the time
at certain life stages if they develop
certain skills but we wouldn't advocate
it I think for like it's not ready for
primetime really yeah I guess the the
question that comes up immediately is
what are the skills I think the number
one skill that I have that helps me is
skepticism towards my own feelings so
understanding that I am an evolved
creature I have certain feelings and
thoughts and ruminations and cognitions
and just because I have a thought or I
feel a negative emotion or I feel
jealous for example doesn't necessarily
mean that those feelings are
communicating something true that I have
to listen to or that I have to solve a
problem to reduce right it could just be
that those things are ways of managing
the relationships that I'm in that are
in some sense vestigial and I can figure
out a way to reduce those feelings and
for me in terms of all my relationships
and everything I think about in terms of
evolutionary psychology it goes hand to
hand with meditation actually I have
found meditation to be really helpful
for if you take a look at your native
programming if you can look at it the
feelings that come up and think about
what they're for from an evolutionary
perspective then you can actually
dissipate those emotions I think with
mindfulness and I don't know if anybody
else has ever talked
combining these two things but that's
that's how I do it yeah I think you're
also unusually good at articulating what
you actually want and then kind of
committing to if I say I want that and
then I deliver it kind of taking
responsibility for saying that that I
should be content with that yeah rather
than sort of going back on your word and
saying no I really like what I actually
that was this so I think it requires a
really high degree of kind of
rationality being articulate having self
insight having emotional maturity like
polyamory is probably a bad idea for
kids in high school and I think it Dinah
talked about there's a kind of monogamy
has a bunch of hacks and tools and norms
that are really good developed over
centuries polyamory has only been around
basically since about 1990 in its
current form and it doesn't have a bunch
of those norms and hacks and the problem
is poly culture is so on judgemental
that they're kind of unwilling to say
this works that doesn't work hey
everybody let's not do that thing again
so I think it has to become more kind of
serious and professionalized as a as a
culture that says like sorry the
relationship monarchy thing just doesn't
actually work because you can't create
sustainable predictable commitments with
a relationship the hierarchical
polyamory maybe that works better but
here are some ways to tweak it and prove
it etc so I think if the left owns
polyamory as it does now and if the left
really strongly believes in the blank
slate and bad communication and
hypocrisy then polyamory is going to
fail as a movement I mean I certainly
free love in the 1960s people have tried
to manifest their relationships in such
a way that they are a representation of
their philosophy that's happened for a
long time but I do think that polyamory
is trying to be a representation of the
philosophy that humans are really
malleable that an emotion like jealousy
which obviously has
a function and I would totally disagree
with the idea like Christopher Ryan says
that jealousy is in some sense unnatural
and is the product of an agricultural
society I think jealousy if you look at
hunter-gatherers but you know as old as
dirt as old as non-human primates
jealousy is very very important and so
to say I think that humans can overcome
any of their emotions I think that we're
socialized to have these feelings and to
be possessive polyamory is a way of
saying I can overcome all of those
things because that is not us but that
is uh and so I think the way we think
about it is really different in terms of
working with our evolved psychology
rather than saying there is no human
nature so there's like a kind of
communist idealist blank slate version
of polyamory that's like nobody should
own anybody and we're more of a kind of
libertarian polyamory that's like
everybody should take responsibility for
what they want and what they say and
negotiate you know consensual when when
relationships that are open and honest
and we don't like polyamory being used
as sort of a way to virtue signal
leftist ideals we think it's much like
you're dealing with real people to whom
you have real responsibilities do you
think is relevant that your evolutionary
psychologists that you think this way
yeah I think we two things that kind of
turned me polyamorous we're number one
being in evolutionary psychology and
seeing the range of mating systems that
are out there and thinking the range of
what people actually do in modern
society is perhaps overly limited right
and then meeting her and saying oh she
actually runs her life in a successful
and rational way doing this polyamory
thing that I knew very little about so
as I learned about it I thought this is
great there's a lot here very
interesting this experimental subculture
very well intentioned often but there's
a lot of stuff they're doing in
crazy dysfunctional ways partly because
they don't understand sex differences or
won't talk about them they don't
understand human evolution and mating
strategies they don't even understand
why monogamous marriage was invented
like they don't have enough respect for
monogamy to actually understand like
which parts of it should be challenged
first and I thought that so this is a
very promising subculture that might
just implode under the weight of its own
virtue signaling and that would be kind
of project I think another polyamorous
idea is that there is no limit on love
that you can love everyone infinitely
and that's part of also relationship
anarchy that you can have these
malleable relationships of people your
relationships can all accommodate each
other everything should be really fluid
you shouldn't have any kind of stable
negotiation or idea about what your
relationship is going to be like with
any particular person and I think that
that is very difficult I think it can be
very exciting obviously but I think that
relationships that have no stability
that have no line of Homebase can be
incredibly heartbreaking can cause a
tremendous amount of jealousy and
especially if you're living some big
cosmopolitan area and you're a young
person like you're somebody young living
here in inland and there's this troop of
people I think called the unicorns and
they're polyamorous and there was some
vice documentary about their different
problems and you definitely see that
without kind of a home base so that any
one particular person that you have a
serious bond with it can actually just
leave you feeling very lonely and
abandoned continuously and so that's
kind of one problem the other idea is
that somebody can you know through
talking out your problems through
discussing things with people you can
eradicate your jealousy with
conversation right because it was
socially constructed or it's it's from
an agricultural society or whatever so
it actually should be easy to deprogram
yourself of jealousy because
there's nothing deep-rooted or in you
know fundamentally human about it and in
some sense I you know that's a kind of
growth mindset I can appreciate but on
the other hand it does cause a huge
amount of shame that I know of people
who can't seem to relinquish their their
jealousy and I know that polyamorous
people sometimes look down on for
example people in open relationships or
swingers
I actually think swinging is like a
really great technique you could call it
a technology of figuring out how to
solve the problem of sexual boredom and
also how to get the excitement of seeing
your partner flirt with or being
attracted to someone else it's a deeply
natural thing to see your partner
flirting with or interacting with
somebody else who thinks that they are
attractive and it definitely makes you
think more of your partner's value it
makes you value them more and
potentially take them for granted less
but we don't see our partners in
contexts like that very much in a
society where people are nuclear
families and they're atomized so I know
polyamorous people who sort of poopoo
swinging but swinging is actually a
really ingenious solution to that
problem it's pretty hard to be jealous
if you're currently having sex with
somebody else
and also if you as a couple have sex
with other couples which is what
swingers generally do then there's also
a aspect of having a new experience
together which can strengthen your your
basic relationship the infinite love
thing I keep encountering right and it's
it's completely bizarre because from my
point of view romantic love as an
emotion right is actually a way of for a
person to go here is a potential mate
they seem like a good prospect I'm going
to focus my mating effort on them being
in love means I'm going to devote a lot
of time and energy and attention to
courting them and impressing them so the
it is a way of taking limited resources
and channeling them to a potential mate
that's what romantic love or being in
love is and if the polyamory people say
but of an infinite it's like why do you
guys use Google Calendar to organize
your day
then like time is finite money is finite
attention is finite the amount of
talking you can handle is finite if
you're an introvert so why pretend that
like love is infinite
if every constituent element of love is
finite and has to be managed carefully
it's just fucking empty rhetoric sounds
what you almost think about it in a
masculine kind of transactional way I
think transactional is is probably fair
I yeah I mean you could say that I'm
thinking about it in a in a masculine
way well you've got quite a masculine
brain in certain ways but people say
transactional like that's a bad thing
but we're both kind of libertarian and
to us like transactional is is win-win
voluntary exchanges of like goods and
services and affection and commitment so
if you're upfront about what the
transaction is and also how likely is it
to be repeated how long will it last are
you committed that's a good thing
because that's honest and open I think
the problem with polyamory at the moment
is it hasn't been around long enough
right it's only been around 30 years for
it to develop good kind of social norms
and expectations about all these roles
and how they work it would be as if you
tried to run a fortune 500 company
but you had just invented the concept of
a boss and a laborer and management and
and accounting and marketing and you
were trying to invent all of it all at
once right it'll probably take two or
three generations before polyamory
regularly works like anywhere near as
well as monogamous marriage which has
been under continual R&D for thousands
of years yeah there's like a technology
of monogamy there's common problems that
you have and you can talk to your
grandma or your mom about the problems
you're having with your spouse and
they'll have advice that they know from
other people because everybody has done
this
whereas with polyamory it is a very
weird subculture it is a
subculture and actually being really
clear about your expectations for other
is actually a violation of many of the
rules of that subculture which is that
there's limitless love and you know in
some sense a lot of these people are
nearly limitless time that they have to
expend on these multiple relationships
that they're cultivating and I think
maybe polyamory for busy people is what
we're sort of looking at but also a
technology of polyamory which is saying
actually you know you have to bring
evolutionary psychology and
understanding and human nature and
understanding of emotions and also a
skeptical view of your own emotions and
your own jealousy to bear otherwise it's
actually not going to work because if
you think everything's socialized if you
think everybody is infinitely malleable
and if you believe that your
relationships should be able to adapt
and take any form from one day to the
next in an almost you know protium way
then it's going to be pretty hard to
organize your life around variables that
are not at all consistent and the other
thing that people in sort of the the
polyamorous communities that I know and
people on the fringes of it say is it's
just endless processing it's just
endless emotional labor and processing
and and they find it far more difficult
than a monogamous relationship just
because of that kind of emotional time
spent yeah so we we I know we sort of
sound like very cold calculating
sociopath somehow we discuss this but
this is through like years of kind of
bittersweet experience of realizing that
if you have a clear enough frame for
what you're doing and you can explain it
clearly enough to other people then
there's actually room for a whole lot of
affection and tenderness and love and
passion to flourish without all this
fucking processing without all the
verbal fireworks the vaguer you are it's
a less well you know yourself the more
you have to constantly renegotiate
everything with
every one so I think the typical levels
of poly drama that people get into are a
direct result of polyamory not having
enough clear hacks for how to do this
stuff efficiently and you know in
monogamy there's also plenty of
emotional processing drama aligned early
married couples fight and one of the big
points of couples therapy is to equip
people with better ways to fight you
know that are less destructive
I think poly has to embrace that and it
has to be willing to say you know the
way to get to the limitless love and
being able to have wonderful close
relationships with people it's kind of
to be just totally economic and upfront
about what your your parameters are and
your rules and your norms and like take
the things seriously and and don't
always be trying to play catch up so
like well that didn't work let's process
it over that failed as well let's
process that's more like that's no way
to live yeah so I think that we can
probably emerge people do tend to have
very open and honest dialogues often
about how they're feeling but is not
really couched in anything in particular
like I think when something's couched in
evolutionary psychology so for example
you can ask that you can have them leave
this in or not but I'm gonna I'm gonna
tell a little story all right so we had
a woman that we see together
stay with us for several days and while
we were all together
I missed Jeffrey even though he was
there with me the whole time but when we
were all three of us together he didn't
I was there he's like why would I miss
you you were there right and so after
she left I was very excited to have like
his attention all to myself
again and if from an evolutionary
perspective obviously that makes sense
like I'm trying to in some sense well
not even just some sense in every sense
we sort of monopolize David his
investment and so that's why I felt so
relieved and
if I had no understanding about that I
might feel ashamed or bad that I was
excited to have him all to myself or
that because I didn't actually feel
jealous when we were together I just
felt like I wanted his attention and I
was happy to have his attention again
when we got back together yeah oh you
might you might miss misconstrue your
unhappiness as being either my fault
right or her fault we might not have the
words to express what you actually
wanted from me yeah and and that's the
Royal Road towards serious conflict is
if you don't know your own heart well
enough through science right and you're
just kind of kind of trying to wing it
based on like well I learned this from
reading that little bit of self-help and
I learned this from that like tantric
seminar and I learned this from taking
ayahuasca and Peru and you cobble it
together yourself it's really hard to
make sense of some of these little
issues of pom-pom because because we
we've talked mostly about kind of
individual the psychological aspects of
it so far but there are sort of societal
ramifications and I know that's
something that that's eeveelution area
biologist for example are very
interested in it's like what would it
look like if we kind of moved over
wholesale towards a new religion
relationship model and one of the one of
the criticisms is that what would happen
is that there would be a sort of a small
set of hyper successful men and polygamy
would degenerate into polygyny which is
kind of one men one man man having
access to many women what what do you
make of that I start talking about two
things so one thing is that I think that
there's a number of different kinds of
relationship architectures that you can
look at and we've picked and shoot you
know chosen from a variety different
ideas in order to cobble together a
system that kind of works for us but Dan
Savage is a prominent you know sex
advice columnist talks about something
called monogamish which is being
monogamous but then having
room for outside liaisons and that can
be something as small as you know
somebody seeing a sex worker it can be
don't-ask-don't-tell out of town kind of
thing there's all kinds of different
ways of looking at it
and so this monogamish actually seems to
me the most stable relationship
architecture so I don't think that
polyamory is necessarily super stable
especially not as its practiced overall
and there's a couple reasons why I think
monogamish is more stable than straight
monogamous right one of these ideas is
that in monogamous culture there's this
idea that if you want to have sex with
or you have a crush on or you have
romantic ruminations about someone else
it means there's something lacking and
you're kind of home base pair
relationship and that's I think a very
pernicious and bad idea and so what
happens sometimes is that one person or
the other will start to fantasize about
a third person and then they'll think
okay I'm risking so much in terms of my
main relationship by having fantasies
about this other person that cognitive
dissonance clicks in and they think I
must be really in love with this other
person and not all of my partner if I'm
willing to take these risks for this
other person and then what will
sometimes happen is you know this new
relationship energy right there's this
flurry of excitement about this other
person and then ultimately it burns out
you don't know the person as well as you
thought you did for example so I think
we evolved in a system where there was a
lot of monogamy at least for several
years oftentimes while children were
young but there's also a lot of
dalliance --is and there was a lot of
Affairs and there was a lot of seeing
you know who you were going to see next
and so I think that monogamish which is
having some outside allowance reduces
the chance of a stable relationship
necessarily breaking up because the
person who cheats for example or who
asks to make a negotiation isn't risking
everything and also the idea isn't that
if you want to sleep with somebody else
it means that your primary relationship
is is doomed or is you're not in love
with that person anymore the other thing
people have to understand is
meeting market dynamics and like what's
the local sex ratio what is this
distribution of mate values that's
relevant
how do people pair up I mean the weird
thing is you see a lot of people in
their twenties doing casual dating which
is basically disorganized unethical
polyamory that's unselfishly telling
anybody they're dating like who else
they're dating what their commitment
level is you know are they getting
regular STI testing all the while and I
think it remains to be seen like a what
percent of men and what percent of women
can handle you know open honest
polyamory and B what are the kind of
mating market results of that I think in
certain contexts like China we have this
huge access of unmarried single men who
aren't going to be able to find
monogamous women certain kinds of
polyamory might be a really good idea
for the Chinese government to kind of
consider because otherwise like what's
their what's their release valve for
tens of millions of guys who can't find
a girlfriend that is not a recipe for
social stability so again I think it's
the the important thing is to kind of
recognize this is an experimental
subculture we need to have like clear
metrics of success we need to be honest
about the pros and cons we need to be
respectful of traditional marriage and
monogamy and go there's a lot of
embodied wisdom and what a lot of people
do and you can't just reject it before
you understand it right there's a kind
of Chesterton's fence issue here like we
think we understand monogamous marriage
more than most people do because we've
lived an alternative to it and we kind
of know what kind of costs and benefits
are and what would have to be managed in
terms of boredom also in terms of you
know women like high status men
and if you are around your mate all the
time especially in isolated nuclear
households and you never see anyone else
admiring your mate or flirting with your
mate or trying to gossip about you so
they can steal your mate then you get no
cues at all that they're desirable to
anybody else and that is a very very
unnatural environment artificial
environment when people talk about this
top percent of percentage of women
whatever 15 percent 20 percent being
competed for by the vast majority of
women and the fees are the men who are
getting all the mating opportunities
they think that polyamory and open
relationships is simply going to
exacerbate that problem and that the men
who are the in cells or who are losing
out on the mating game are just gonna
lose harder but I haven't really had
that experience at all so I've been
involved in these kind of cultures of
that are very matriarchal where it's a
lot of women that date various different
men and they all vouch for certain men
and they'll often there's just so little
jealousy about men they'll say this guy
just makes a wonderful meal and he will
take you on a really lovely date and so
the kind of man who wouldn't necessarily
make a good full-time boyfriend or who
potentially needs leveling up before
they get to the point where they can be
a good full time boyfriend is actually
the kind of person who'd be great to see
once a week right so there's this idea
of something called a relationship
escalator which is you start seeing each
other you know every once in a while
then you see each other more than you
move in together then you get married
then you have children then you die and
that is the relationship escalator and
kind of an alternative to that is that
and people find this really profoundly
unromantic but I think about the people
I date and the and the kind of social
and sexual sphere that I'm in as kind of
a marketplace right I have people that I
trade with right more most often and
that I engage with most often there are
really blurry lines between friends and
lovers and obviously people can come in
and out of my life and in various
different roles but I have an idea about
what you know what I want from somebody
else and what role they'll fulfill and
they don't have to be everything and
ever and and all things to me and so
that puts a lot less pressure on them
but also we get to enjoy each other and
we get to enjoy a certain amount of
variety that we wouldn't be able to if
we were just closed off to one another
and in terms of strengthening the
primary relationship that I'm in with
Jeffrey I see him having other people
admiring him having other people flirt
with him I see how he manages other
relations with other people and it
actually causes me to admire him more
and to think that I'm getting a better
deal and also to be happier to share him
because in that sense if somebody is
high status and is admired by multiple
people then you're getting a sharing is
better than having one person all to
yourself that no one else wants well
also you're really good at like taking
kind of weird-ass be eccentric guys and
who would not make good primary
boyfriends and kind of leveling them up
and training them so that they are then
presentable to other women right and
that's the thing you've done you've done
multiple times so it's actually really
good
for those you know in cells yeah like to
meet a woman like her who can kind of go
okay you're not quite good enough to be
full time boyfriend
right but you have certain traits that
are enjoyable and here's how to
cultivate your other traits and I think
that's a better path for those like SPS
or in cells or whatever to to meet
someone like her rather than to kind of
like meet a woman is saying okay you're
a dysfunctional broken young man but
you're the best I can get as a woman
because I'm also kind of just like
that's that's not a good way forward
okay yeah that's totally fair yet I and
I have done that I mean like this is why
you take a loan on the date this is ya
know and I and I and III like ASPI men
cuz I like the way they think and I like
that kind of systemising thing but also
I'm very transparent my facial
expressions are very transparent I'm
very clear about what I want and so I
think that women can learn a lot and and
aspies I mean now we're going on about
talking about dating a space but they
actually can be really great today
because they do want to make you happy
they just don't know how to do it with
unconscious or cues or reading facial
expressions or whatever if you tell
somebody exactly what you want and they
want to make you happy it's very easy
it's only when you have an expectation
that somebody's going to infer what you
want that you have these various
different problems and if somebody
figures out what a woman wants it's a
lot easier to figure out what other
women want afterwards but yeah
definitely I've dated guys who I've you
know never had a girlfriend before and
being like I actually can't be your
full-time girlfriend your job this week
is to go on four dates you tell me how
they are and and I really love to do
that it's it's not a chore at all yeah
famously Jordan Peterson got into
trouble for talking about enforcement
agha me and his point I think was that
monogamy evolved it's societally and
culturally enforced and it's an
evolutionary trait so as evolutionary
psychologists are you not persuaded by
the argument that monogamy has evolved
time and time again in cultures as I
kind of as a way of coping with with the
pressures of life and a way of
furthering the species yeah so monogamy
has been very important because the men
who are the most likely to be violent
and the most likely to cause problems in
any given society are those men who are
out of the mating game so men who don't
have a wife or girlfriend or many times
more likely to engage in homicide or
really risky bad behavior one of the
best predictors of a young man cleaning
his life up is actually him getting a
girlfriend or a wife for example and so
young men who are unmated or who don't
have the faculties like the resources or
whatever to get a long-term mate have
always been dangerous in society and so
what you've seen is there's been
monogamy as a cultural beam that has
enabled these men to each be assigned a
woman and thus it actually reduces the
kind of likelihood of insurgents for
example so that does make sense right
but what I think Jordan Peterson is
failing to understand is that if there
were more people who are having open
relationships and some young men for
example who were not necessarily good
material for a woman
to date full-time but we're good enough
for somebody or a couple women to see
casually that guy I think is just as
unlikely to engage in difficult and
aggressive and criminal behavior as
somebody who is married right yeah I
mean if a guy is really not good husband
material and you kind of shoe him
shoehorn him into husband role but kind
of against his wishes like he's he's
just not really capable of that kind of
sexual commitment well you're basically
asking is for some poor woman to fall on
the sword for the greater good of
society to put up with this motherfucker
and and like do the best she can with
him whereas in a polyamorous society he
might be able to find women who actually
kind of like his dark streak or has bad
bonus or the fact that he spends you
know three out of four weeks working on
some oil rig somewhere or whatever
there's just more flexibility so just
the way that the free market with money
is better than a barter economy right a
polyamorous society could be better for
everybody in terms of exchanging sex and
romance than trying to fit everybody
into this monogamous paradigm another
thing that that people who are kind of
more traditionalist talk about a lot is
about how if there were more polyamorous
people and there was more kind of casual
non-exclusive negotiated relationships
that fewer people would be have
investing fathers right we're not really
sure exactly how much a investing father
figure is actually important so it does
seem like it could be quite important
but it also seems like men who are
likely to leave also have certain
genetic qualities right they tend to be
more promiscuous they tend to be more
criminal for example and so it's very
hard to tease apart the environmental
and the genetic effects so I know that
some people think that if you've made
polyamory more popular that there would
be many fewer investing fathers in the
picture but I think that the irony is
it's not that hard
part the effects you do a large twin
study and you can tease them apart and
what we find is in fact almost all of
the traits that people say are due to
apps and fathers are actually heritable
traits that are not much influenced by
family structure so right the irony is a
lot of the people who are saying we need
monogamy because we need dads because we
need role models and who you know in
other contexts will be like you should
never ignore the behavior genetics but
in this domain they're ignoring the
behavior genetics and like they're
making a kind of blank slate argument
that says it really really deeply
matters that you have a stable family
home or else the kid will grow up to be
a terrible person it's like that is not
what the twin studies show and do you
think you your typical in your emotional
reactions or or is there something
special about the way that you guys are
able to approach it that that is
different to how most people approach
their relationships that's why I don't
think I often say I don't endorse
polyamory like I don't endorse my
particular relationship style I just
sort of endorse certain kind of tactics
and I definitely need to get all this
kind of down in blogs or on paper at
some point but yeah I'm really strange
in many ways like I'm unusual I'm not
you know neurotypical in a lot of ways
so I tend to not feel bad feelings for
very long and I tend to have a even when
I was a child I had quite a kind of
utilitarian way of thinking about things
so my view has always been if I'm
distressed or I feel bad or I feel
jealous if for example because of me
being able to be stoical about those
feelings or being able to manage those
feelings Jeffery and somebody that I
like especially somebody I like if
they're enjoying each other's company
then I'm actually doing something kind
of for the greater good right I'm and
and I think Jeffrey is wonderful so in
some sense I feel I was feel guilty
monopolizing him entirely and it's
actually very much the kind of
utilitarian reasons that I think about
it and most people would not think about
things that way and instead they would
think about how
they were maximizing their cues of
commitment and loyalty by acting
incredibly jealously or by having a
proprietary feeling about somebody so I
think in that way I'm unusual I have a
very kind of high hedonic state I'm
happy all this - and basically what I'm
trying to say yeah you're you're happy I
think it helps that you're bisexual yeah
it helps a lot of asexual yeah so so I
there's this concept that red pill
people use a lot which is called
hypergamy and hypergamy is a woman's
desire to be with a man who's higher and
status than than she is and you see this
in romance novels all the time
women who are with billionaires
millionaires sheriff's Kings whatever
the case may be and so the way that I
manage my jealousy to a great extent is
because I'm attracted often to the women
that Jeffery sees and also because I
think about him having high status the
best indicator of a man's status is how
many women like him and desire him
because women are really really good at
sussing out how quality a man is so if
Jeffery has other women who are
interested in him it increases my
perception of how good he is and it
actually makes me feel really in love
and excited about him right so that's
kind of how I deal with it and that's a
kind of a very primitive emotion like
this you have status me watching the
different primitive but I really it has
really good outcomes in terms of me
manage my jealousy so i inflate that
emotion and I use it all the time in
order to enjoy whatever it is that we've
negotiated yeah I'm just a speii it's
always I mean I'm very rational and very
systematizing I seek out principled
solutions to issues things that make
sense I hate inconsistency I hate
hypocrisy and so it was very a lot of
people in polyamory who were good at it
I think have a little bit of that
Asperger II sort of hyper rationality
because they're willing to kind of take
a step back from skate track of the
calendars you go to be great yeah
like systematizing and and to be able to
take a step back from your kind of
monogamist background and think
seriously about alternatives I think it
helps to have a kind of experimental
scientific attitude and a kind of
epistemic humility also that says man I
don't know we're just gonna try it out
and see what happens and learn as we go
and try to keep notes about what
succeeds and fails yeah I mean we're
also sort of irreplaceable to each other
this is gonna sound really romantic but
I don't want to too soon basically we're
both really unusual in several different
ways right I actually tend to attract
people who are a speii because I'm
incredibly emotionally transparent and
my facial expressions very transparent
and it doesn't bother me to say exactly
what I want I think many women don't
want to say exactly what they want
because part of the cue investment that
they're looking for is for somebody to
use enough cognitive cycles to guess
what they want so I think that that's a
big part of it but we are very unusually
suited to one another and we are
irreplaceable to one another so that's
why we can have a hierarchical
relationship where I'm not worried that
somebody's gonna replace me or that
anybody's going to replace him but most
people if you look at tinder how would
you know about somebody if you look at
them on tinder you know that they live
close by and you know what their face
looks like maybe right but people get
married with people that they meet on
tinder all the time back in the day
people would get married to people who
just lived around the corner so
proximity and attraction are the main
reasons that people get together not
because they have any deep-seated
interesting stuff in common or that they
have unusual you know lifestyles or
whatever the case may be so if two
people all they have in common is that
they're nice to each other and they're
attracted to each other they are
infinitely replaceable by anybody else
and it's going to be very difficult for
them to do hierarchical poly without
somebody else you know coming in and
taking people's places again and again
and again and that's what you see also
in polyamorous communities a lot is this
constant kind of switching of partners
and the endless conversations that
people have emotional conversations and
I actually think that people
like that I think that's why they do it
otherwise or or they don't have anything
else fulfilling in their lives so it's
something that they're trying to
maximize another way that people can
have unique things in common and you see
this a lot it's somebody will be
monogamous for a long time and then
they'll open up their relationship a
little bit and as Dan Savage says just
because you open up your relationship
doesn't mean you have to blow the door
off its hinges right you can have a
relationship opened up a little bit and
there's this terrible bias unfortunately
in that you hear all the time about
people who say we opened up our
relationship everything went to shit and
now we're broken up you very rarely hear
because so many people are on the down
low or in the closet about having open
relationships we decided to have an open
relationship and everything worked out
marvelously right and so yeah maybe it's
the case that people open their
relationships up and it's more likely to
end badly but we wouldn't know because
we have a completely biased sample we
only hear about how open relationships
screw things up because that's the only
time we hear about people having opened
up their relationship just like
attention I think I think yeah we feel
like it's important but also it is one
way in which we use evolutionary
psychology in our day-to-day lives and
our knowledge about the psychology of
relationships I think it's important for
people to have to be able to see couples
who are like reasonable people and not
sort of freaky California and New Age
delusional like being able to do a open
relationship and talk about it honestly
it's pros and it's cons and why it
wouldn't necessarily work for everybody
and not sort of proselytize it
recklessly
I think that's really important because
if folks like us are sort of on the
down-low and lie quietly doing open and
we're only letting the most extreme
weird people show up on reality TV as
like the exemplars apollyon
I think that's terrible right it would
be like if the only examples of
monogamous marriage that you ever saw
were just people fighting during divorce
court like that doesn't make monogamy
look very good either
you said proselytising then and I think
that kind of links into what I think
some people feel so triggered maybe by
certain aspects of poly culture which
kind of fear feels like people are sort
of IVA evangelizing it and saying well
it's the next evolutionary step there's
this kind of it either implicit or
explicit kind of sense of well you're
just not evolved enough if you were more
evolved you would be poly and monogamy
is something that we're going to evolve
past you don't think what do you make of
that there is that sort of sense in some
areas of the poly community oh yeah a
lot of them have have a sort of
progressive utopian cult that eventually
like in a hundred years everyone will be
enlightened and polyamorous now able to
overcome their jealousy programming in
Bubba
and and I think the percentage of people
who are in successful poly and open
relationships or swingers will increase
it already is increasing especially
among the other people but I don't think
monogamous marriage is going to
evaporate anytime soon it has many many
benefits to individuals couples kids
civilization etc my main concern is just
create the broadest market that you can
for for different mating systems be
experimental see what works trade
information about successes and failures
and then hopefully in a couple more
generations will have a sort of sense of
like these are the top three or four
kinds of relationships that tend to work
pretty well for most people and one of
those might be monogamous
marriage one of them probably will be
hierarchical Polly there might be a
couple of others people in bet I don't
know I mean people have definitely said
stuff about you know Twitter people
actually very really come after me on
Twitter it's not an invitation by the
way and they say it's kind of elitist
the way we say like oh you kind of have
to have very high emotional intelligence
you have to be smart you have to be have
a unique bond in order to be polyamorous
mostly I've seen polyamorous people say
that anybody can be polyamorous and I
have followed some polyamorous groups
and places like small cities in England
to see all of the crazy drama that gets
kicked up there because people are
managing relationships without any kind
of understanding of human nature I think
so it's important I think to talk about
it but I also think it's important for
people to be able to evaluate themselves
and for some people to say no I really
want to be monogamous with somebody
long-term but to consider actually that
both men and women have desire for
sexual and romantic variety that wanting
to have sex with somebody else doesn't
necessarily mean that you've fallen out
of love with the person that you're with
and also to examine how this this very
isolated culture that we've put together
where people don't live in any kind of
communal way where they live really you
know isolated from everyone else about
how that's also contributing to this
monogamous culture where people are
really starving for even outside
friendship and I think one thing that
polyamory does is because you know when
you have lovers or friends who are also
sometimes lovers you actually just
develop closer bonds with them and it's
helped me have a much more whatever I
think clothes expanded network than
people I know who are monogamous and
that's nothing a big difference between
people people who go to church tend to
be happier than people who don't but
also people in unique sexual subcultures
tend to be happier in their
relationships because they're extended
network has this this pleasurable
component which knits them together more
tightly than other kinds of groups would
would be
together I saw Brett Weinstein tweet the
other day saying so he's a skeptic about
polyamory but he said if anyone can pull
this off then Jeffrey and Diana can pull
it off I think someone else novella
bellows but we'll do that you say that
too so that's kind so if you can't then
I guess nobody can
are you comfortable holding that much
responsibility no I mean no because life
is stochastic and like we could fuck it
up and hopefully we won't yeah but we
couldn't fuck it up and this is why it's
so important to have a wider variety of
people kind of coming out and saying
we're swingers were open or poly and
people who like actually have like paid
jobs and not and who don't necessarily
live in Southern California and who
don't necessarily just hang out with
other Burning Man people to kind of
normalize it right the way that gay and
lesbian culture got normalized in the
90s with like sitcoms that showed oh you
can be gay and employed right and in a
committed relationship and I think you
know it's very kind for for folks to say
well if we two can't succeed nobody can
but it's not like we have some weird
poly superpower it's just that we're
smart people who've worked really hard
to get in touch with our emotions who've
learned all we can about poly culture
who have the appropriate degree of
skepticism about it and to have a deep
and abiding respect for tradition and
monogamy and marriage and don't just
reject it all those bullshit and who go
like like polyamory to me like might be
30% better than monogamous marriage but
it's not like eight thousand percent
better yeah and I do think that it you
know comes down to you know people
trying things out their personal
experience jealousy can be desensitized
it takes a really long time but you know
when you talk about the elephant in the
Ryder this kind of analogy about the
mind people just imagine how jealous
they would feel if their partner went
off with somebody else right and then
right away that makes them have a moral
problem with any talk about polyamory
and I've heard people you know had
conversations with lots of people who
were otherwise totally rational about
you know they can be totally rational
but like organ markets and legalized
prostitution and all this other stuff
and then you get to polyamory and
they're just immediately thinking about
their partner in flagrante delicto with
somebody else they're like no it's super
wrong it's terrible and you know you
have to think about where your response
is coming from all of us endorse or or
or have serious problems with the
ideologies based on how we would think
it would affect us so I think this kind
of idea about civilizational collapse is
just one way of people actually managing
their own feelings
Geoffrey Diana thank you very much
[Music]
you
[Music]