I never ever thought of sharing cultural
work or my own history it comforts my
heart knowing that I'm allowed to do
this without getting a strap whipped or
thrown in a closet anywhere
I speak for me really big for me because
we sure took a lot of punishment they
took a lot of punishment for being a
native person too and this is just one
of our ways of showing that we're alive
and well
every second
got permission from elders and my Chiefs
to be allowed to use all these all these
different meanings all the different
designs I almost cried when they said
use whatever you want this reason why
almost it√≠s because remembering how much
we wait to not allowed to draw a curve
or talk our language
it's tough
did your mom always speak I was really
lucky when my grandparents were at home
there that's all I heard
yeah and then went to school to take my
grandparents to the bus when they had
private house services yeah I used to
walk my brownies there and listen to
your granny and him sing songs and what
used to make me real laughing as leaving
music we'd have a house full of elders
house full of elders all sitting on it
and as they're walking in so I grab a
Bible or book that year you know that
people's reading are the hymns that yeah
and not one of them know how to read but
it's I guess it's just a thing to do is
grab a Bible and sit down I don't know
but when I sit there with my granny i
sat there and lost and checking it
earlier yes see what they do in there
and I watch that God and I seen them
every one of them would grab a Bible or
not one of them would open up the book
could just sit there and start singing
hymns in corpore yeah that's why I
thought it was cool as ever do it in the
park ball
[Music]
when you become a prisoner it's not an
easy life and that's the reason why my
son
Boone decided to do this because that's
the only way he could heal and when you
start healing the changes of your life
starts again that's when you become who
you really are because we've carried so
much pain so much hurts
no grannies no Grandpa's allowed to be
close to us not allowed to speak our
language many things songs taken away
from us our dances and we were not even
allowed to embrace our families anymore
we all leave this world and when it's
time for us to leave this world you've
half the story you'll have something to
tell your children of what happened to
us and our great-grandchildren that we
were not just drunks we're not just
alcoholics and drug addicts we picked up
things that wasn't ours because we
wanted to hide the pain and now today
we're gonna bless it so that we don't
pull the pain out anymore
okay
ah wait what can paint