howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show.com that's Jim ruts show com
today's guest is Jordan Hall a good
friend as well as one of the broadest
and deepest thinkers around about the
future of society economics politics and
more thank you Jim it's very nice to be
back by the way and I've been quite
interested to listen to the various
podcasts you put together and perceive
the things that are going on in your
piece of podcast land yeah it's quite
amazing I you know when I jumped into
podcasting in June I didn't know if I'd
like it or not afore I would feel that
was adding value to the world but I
think both have been true I've enjoyed
it and I think I hope fingers crossed
I'm adding some value but yeah great to
have you back we're gonna be talking a
lot about game B today but in the
previous podcast that Jordan was on in
August episode 8 we talked a lot about
game a so if you want to get the back
story definitely go and check that out
either go to our website Jim wrote calm
or just Google Jim rut Joe Jordan Hall
and it'll turn up a little bit more
about Jordan before he set out to save
the world from itself Jordan was a
successful tech exec and tech investor
today is the chairman and co-founder of
neuro hacker collective a nootropics
company in fact you'll like this Jordan
know you'll make your quarterly numbers
I actually ordered a bottle today I've
finally got curious enough to give it a
try huh well that is a quite
groundbreaking you're a tough guy to
sell yeah exactly right old school
pretty much but I'll give you a report
on how it did yes I'm the neuro hacker
website Jordan said something I think
which sort of sums up where he's at and
I'm gonna read it and we'll go from
there as Jordan said Humanity in them is
in the midst of a world historical
transition which will likely kill all of
us
Mad Max but just might end up in a truly
amazing future see Star Trek getting
there is gonna require many things of us
notably a significant upgrade of our
individual and collective capacity for
thought and action that's I think a
really great way to sum up Jordans view
of the world and those are his words
we'll talk very briefly about how the
world could kill us but we're gonna try
spend most of our time today I'm talking
about how to get past that and on to a
better world so where are we what's
happening in the world of game a where
is the status quo headed if something
isn't done okay well I think to make it
quick
right cuz we all you know spent a whole
previous podcast I think do me a deep
dive on like a meta theory that
describes why this would be the case but
one way that I've thought about it a lot
over the past is something along the
lines of in the context of Game a which
is to say in the context of the way that
we've done civilization things forever
the very first time that we actually
found ourselves in a situation where the
way that we ordinarily deal with things
at the civilizational level ie at the
end of the day if people really really
don't agree on something they just fight
it out it could actually be really bad
like truly truly catastrophic was right
after world war two so we suddenly found
ourselves in this existential awareness
of oh like we actually have to do a
whole new thing we have to really be
good at something in the in the
direction of peace because now if if the
people who are nuclear powers start
throwing nukes around it could end
everything and you know you in your
generation were the first generation to
be developing in that consciousness the
consciousness of war is not merely bad
and war is not merely you know destroys
cities and nations but actually could
kill everybody it was a big deal or a
massive impact yeah I very much remember
the duck-and-cover drills during the
Cuban Missile Crisis I think I was in
third grade of course it was kind of
 and wishful thinking since we
were seven miles from the White House
but nonetheless for the baby boomer
generation the fact that you know we
thought there was a goodly chance we'd
be blown up before we grown up it was a
significant part of who we were yeah
exactly and that that that way of
deciding imploded before we growed up
it and we really had to figure out how
to grow up as as a species pretty darn
quickly and we did right we've so far at
least have dodged that bullet and if you
look at the history of it we actually
did dodged the bullet there are certain
points where we got awfully close but
and this is I think is a key insight is
that one of the drivers one of the
things is that the deep deep code of
game a is an increase in technological
capability and always in a context of
competition but what my friend Daniel
would refer to as a rival risk game
theory and so what that means is we've
gotten a lot better at all kinds of
things but among those things is
destroying stuff and what happens now is
this the footprint of the degree to
which we have to grow up continues to
have to accelerate at a pace that is
equal to our capacity to blow up and so
now we can look at things like say
CRISPR which makes possible both in
terms of impact and in terms of the
number of people who can deliver that
impact the the risk risk footprint that
we're looking at biological style
warfare that you know makes the scares
of the 70s look well your depressant or
inadequate to the reality and so the
technology of gene editing is now
crossing a threshold where large
criminal enterprises will have the
capacity to do things that only the
United States and the Soviet Union could
have done up until recently and it's
getting easier and easier and stronger
and stronger right which means of course
that what was pretended by nuclear
conflict back in the in the 50s 60s and
70s is now opening up into genetic
conflict and of course we can just sort
of we can generalize that if you're on a
curve of accelerating change in the
technological domain one of the
characteristics of that is the capacity
to destroy things and I should add so
not only do we have an increase in
capacity to to break stuff and we have
an increasing distribution like more and
more people have access to that capacity
we also noticed that a deeply
technological civilization has a lot of
fragility built in and so 150 years ago
shutting down the power grid
wouldn't have made much difference now
shutting the pad down the power grid
would be catastrophic and the capacitors
shut down the power grid is increasingly
possible to an increasingly large number
of vectors right it could be an EMP but
it could also be a distributed drone
swarm that just hits weak points or
perhaps a purely computational cyber
warfare attack on smart grids like each
iteration as we move up this
technological curve the fragility of the
system or the availability of the system
to particular perturbations that have
cascade effects as well as the
distribution of the capacity to deliver
those perturbations and then the
consequences that the magnitude of the
consequences of those perturbations
increases and there's nothing in the
context of game a that is well designed
to deal with that problem and so there's
sort of a careening towards the edge of
the cliff sensibility and in fact quite
the opposite if you if you talk to the
good folks at Google for example about
the AAI research that's the people who
are in the center of it who really had
fun today I researched they are aware of
the arms race problem they're aware of
the fact that there is a an arms race
that is driving a certain let's call it
heedlessness or even recklessness in AI
research we know we're dealing with big
stuff and yet at the same time we feel
like we have to just keep running
forward as fast as we can because if we
don't we fall behind somebody else who
does and that's kind of at the bottom of
it like the very bottom of game a is
that that logic the logic of we're all
ultimately competing for the capacity to
deploy or wield power in some domains
it's not military its economic and
therefore we're all willing to make
choices that even we ourselves realize
are reckless because if we don't we'll
lose and losses real bad we're forced
into a game theoretical trap in many
cases right in the AI case this way the
story is often told is it well if we
don't get there before the Chinese were
 right and so therefore people cut
corners don't don't do what they should
be doing with respect to safety etc
we're
it had one other part of the game a
nearing the end of its cycle which is it
certainly seems to me that we're
reaching the limits or perhaps have
already exceeded the limits of the long
term carrying capacity of the ecosystem
to support 8 billion people at the
current average lifestyle and we also
know that our population will peak at 10
or 11 billion and that more and more and
more people are moving up the lifestyle
curve I do a closer to Western society
oh it's it so it seems that even if we
don't kill ourselves with game
theoretical traps we're caught in
another trap which is there's no way to
slow the Machine down before it on its
own just drives over the cliff yeah well
from my perspective that's that's more
or less the same thing but through a
different lens so when we say blow up we
could talk about blow up in the sense of
like TNT who could also talk about it in
the sense of you know puttin toxins into
the water supply they were we're
breaking the feedback loops that
maintained the homeostatic equilibrium
of our physical bodies and the larger
systems that support that going out and
so if you think what the logical you
just said exactly as lifestyle is is
cybernetically enhanced by technology
we're outputting externalities into the
environment that are more and more the
magnitude just continues to increase and
as more and more people are enabled by
that technological footprint we just
have more energy and resources that
enable work it would be alive there
creating more externalities blowing up
and now the micro micro corrosion or
toxicity and also as more and more of
those people are themselves
participating in more technology they're
increasing their power their access to
get what they want from the world that
externality vector continues to increase
right so you can can in fact should look
at it through both those lenses and I
think those are kind of the same machine
that's delivering the same impact and it
leads to the conclusion that this
unconscious drive and this game
theoretic drive if I don't do it then
I'm just I'm not helping anything
because everybody else is or even worse
I'm losing
uh leads to the conclusion that it ends
like the game just has a finite point
again Daniel's language I think is quite
nice is that it's if you just run the
logic forward it's just you know put out
the model you see this crossover point
through multiple different possible
vectors but it's an extra balloon self
terminating Daniel also had a beautiful
line I don't think I got the words quite
right but it was pretty close that we're
approaching the power of gods without
the wisdom of gods yep that sums it up
very nicely Jim can I just add one more
piece to it because I think this is or
this is very salient and I think it's
important to grasp because you know we
mentioned power in the context of just
macro explosive power and then we
mentioned power in the context of our
relationship with the niche of the
ecosystem of the context that that we
sit on and depend on but we should also
talk about it in relationship with
ourselves and the languaging here was
the term that I used the war on
sense-making
which is you can see it in terms of say
AI enhanced marketing on social media
for example where the power here now is
the increasingly sophisticated nuanced
understanding of cognitive neuroscience
being used against a very large number
of people right billions of billions of
people feeding this science generating
input into algorithms that are using
that science to produce events that
circumvent our own neuro cognitive
structures to manipulate our choice
making and you can you can use any way
you want I could just be banal marketing
just pointing in my mind my attention at
buying a widget as opposed to doing
something that is actually in service
with me or it could be a political
propaganda it doesn't matter because the
end of the day what happens is that our
own capacity to shoot in our own front
yard or something like that but our own
capacity to make our own cognitive
systems the way that we ourselves make
sense of the world and then are able
make effective choices our own capacity
to disrupt our own capacity to make
sense of the world and make choices is
also part of this accelerating curves
and part of the race to the bottom so
you've got all three these guys old
fashioned just big disruptive
perturbation power you've got kind of
like decay or toxicity in the complex
systems power and
you have this war on sense-making power
and they're all linked and they're all
mutually supporting each other and
that's a bad thing so yeah hopefully
that gets us to the end of okay it's at
least reasonably plausible that this
story ends badly and maybe even in not
too long as you start looking at the
numbers and see how they've been
evolving that then leads to the okay
well what that what might else we do yep
let me guys one last thing before we
transition out that last bit about sense
making I've come to start calling the
autoimmune disease on sense-making
because essentially it's the tools we
could be using for sense making that
have turned upon themselves just the way
the an autoimmune disease our immune
system which is supposed to protect us
from disease actually becomes the
disease you know diseases like lupus
being a classic example I think it's a
reasonable model to say that what's
happening to our sense-making is
literally an autoimmune disease where
the tools of sense-making have been
turned on themselves in a diseased
fashion but with that note it's time to
move on so we don't spend all of our
time talking about game a you and I and
many folks we know call a possible
better world or a trajectory towards a
better world game B and for those people
out listening to the podcast who are
interested in going beyond what we
talked about today there's some
resources that are starting to become
available on the Nets about game B
there's a game B Facebook group a lot of
interesting things going on on Twitter
hashtag game B will bring you lots of
interesting conversations and there's a
really cool Google Doc with pointers to
lots of things about game B excerpts
from podcasts really a cool thing and
we're gonna put a link of that up on the
episode page of this podcast so come to
the episode page at gym rat show calm
that link to the Google Doc and you'll
get all kinds interesting things so
let's go talk about Game B but just
before we do that I'm gonna put a
warning or a flavor or something and
this again something you said game B is
notoriously difficult to think and talk
about for the very good reason that if
you were using the conceptual structures
that came out of game a to do so you may
well be poisoning the well nevertheless
can you try and give us a reasonably
succinctly
yeah sure one of the ways that I've
noticed it seems to work in navigating
the problem you just brought up is to
almost do a sort of parallax perspective
like try several different succinct
constructions and then notice that there
there's something about them that is the
same thing and then you can say okay
that in that direction so it's not any
one of them but if you think about all
of them and you kind of say hmm what is
the union of these feel like then you're
getting in the right direction so for
example one of the constructions that
I've put out is game B is building or
developing capacity to navigate
complexity without resorting to
complicated systems obviously invoking
concepts like complexity and complicated
to use that phrase but if those land in
any way that's a nice pointer that's it
say okay we need that we need to figure
out how to build an approach or a
skillfulness in ourselves as as people
individuals and groups to be able to
respond to complexity and notice by the
way we can actually now think about
multiple different kinds of complexity
there's natural complexity of the
natural environment and there's also an
anthro pokum plex to the complexity of
people and possibly even techno
complexity the complexity of the way
that people can create technologies that
changes the state of possibility in the
national environment and these may be
ontological different but to navigate
complexity without resorting this is an
obligate or knee-jerk requirement to use
a complicated approach that's what game
B is that another way of putting it
which I quite like is that the game B is
a meta protocol for hyper collaboration
which would be fun to double click on
that sounds real interesting why don't
you double click on that one a little
bit sure so you mentioned that one of
the reasons why we're even having this
conversation is that we've actually
observed that there seems to be a
totally from our perspective at least a
totally spontaneous emergence of people
gathering around and talking about and
sort of Co discovering and co-creating
this thing game B and what I mean by
that is that you and I and a bunch of
other folks will
working on this as a group there's a
group of people who are meeting together
in physical space and talking about this
notion and coming up with the language
and beginning to try to understand it
years ago like six years ago and then we
kind of stopped we just said you know
okay we can't go any further from what
we're doing right now we wouldn't do
what you called spore mode and we just
sort of all spread to the four corners
and did our thing and I suppose that
some of us somewhere had some
conversations that it percolated out and
and some for some reason some portion
but we said was interesting and people
began to upregulate it and that is led
to what is more or less a spontaneous
emergence meaning that I didn't have a
direct conversation with essentially any
of the people who are part of the
Twitter sphere about any of this as far
as I can tell and and yet they're doing
something and they're doing something
that is really good it's really much in
the right direction so we have is like
an emergent distributed cognition you
know it's a bunch of people who are not
coordinated formally and don't have any
top-down structure that drives their
coordination and yet they're able to
actually collaborate and they're
generating things that are real and
useful and here's a here's a key piece
this was meta protocol they're
generating things that are able to
support the orientation of other people
who want to begin to participate in the
distributed cognition so it's a bhoot
protocol it's a way for a person anyone
anywhere to be able to suddenly have
this sense of who for example things are
really up but what might I do
when they start looking around huh this
person over here who's having this
conversation seems to be saying
interesting things let me follow that
thread a little bit and as I follow the
threat of one one person who just
happens to catch my attention is having
something that seems relevant and
interesting I might notice that they
have hash tag game be in their Twitter
identity so I'm like okay that's
interesting and so I search for that and
as you say I see this huge conversation
of people that are going on and one of
the things that I find is I find a
Google Doc and so I go into the Google
Doc and inside the Google Doc I see that
people have collaborated on creating
pointers to podcasts and pointers to
other
and linkages to conversations and
there's actually a you know a permanent
coffee shop like a virtual coffee shop
that people are having conversations at
and meetups are beginning to
self-organize and now I can on my own
not necessarily with any top-down
guidance begin the process of orienting
myself on what this is and finding my
way into participation that seems
meaningful to me and then allows me to
begin the process of on the one hand
discovering more and more on my own
terms using my own way of knowing the
world what the hell's going on and
finding ways that I can actually add
value to it that again are
simultaneously meaningful for me they
seem like a good idea and add value to
the whole they are creative to the
larger project and so that's one that's
that's the that's the thing that's
actually happening and so in the in that
context if we if we take this phrase
that game be is a meta protocol for
hyper collaboration what I would like to
say this phrase hyper collaboration
makes the proposition that in funny I'm
really stealing this from a from Eric
Weinstein who taught me this this move
that apparently is the thing that one
does in in certain kinds of mathematics
is that everyone is currently playing
game bay but you might be playing game
be at level zero meaning that it is
always it's fully present its
omnipresent it's in the field of what of
play and at any point you could simply
choose to step into it and if you did
you would be able to move from zero to
something epsilon greater than zero and
then you begin to the process of more so
it's not like there's a ten people are
playing game B but rather everyone is
but most people aren't consciously
choosing to do so in a in a way that
will increase their skillfulness and
collaboration with other people so
that's when I say hyper collaboration
it's something like that then the other
piece of it is this if that's the case
if everyone is playing game b-but it's a
matter of how skillfully and consciously
are you doing so then you get this
really interesting event and it looks a
lot like a really neat way of
understanding this notion of
synchronicity which is
today so whatever it is nearly noon my
time on Wednesday I don't know that
there's this this woman in Toronto who's
currently working on something with the
collaborative team in Bulgaria
consciously in the space of game B but
very much from their perspective and
what I really don't know is that that
what they're working on is exactly the
thing that I'm going to need in six
weeks and yet perhaps it's the case and
perhaps what happens is is that in six
weeks precisely as I'm getting to the
point where I really need this thing
something has happened that has
increased my capacity to be aware of or
at least to find quickly those things
that I need and so exactly like I show
up on a look well I need this thing and
I kind of come back up and I look back
out and I look into the larger game B
meta protocol and I start seeing asking
questions and suddenly somebody said oh
yeah I was talking to this group in
Bulgaria that I think we're working on
something like that let me connect you
to them and two conversations later I'm
having exactly the right conversation
with people who on their own have
actually been working on something which
perfectly supports or at least
meaningfully supports what I'm doing and
so I'm calling that hyper collaboration
meaning it's something like we're not
explicitly formally defining the terms
of our collaboration but because we're
all actually looking at a real problem
it's just a problem in reality that's
out there we can each take a look at the
pieces of it that make sense to us and
if we each are able to focus on those
pieces with clarity and then we
communicate with fidelity and with we
might call it integrity out what we're
doing why we're doing it and are ready
willing and able to support each other
in orienting our attention towards those
things that seem to be most fully in
alignment with our own direction the
things we're trying to do and with what
is emerging in the larger whole then
what happens is we start finding that we
are actually collaborating with people
we didn't even know that makes sense
absolutely it's amazing because you know
our first run at game B never quite
caught fire but I'm now seeing that the
deep principles we laid down are
actually an important part of the self
booting and self growing I mean
I think the three we chose as kind of
top-level architectural attributes of
game be watching two of them are
architectural that's and the third is a
goal heuristic for a goal is it would be
non hierarchical network oriented and
long-term metastable and all three of
those things seem to be the metastable
we'll see how long-term it is but the
other two things really seem to be or
what's driving the self booting and self
growing aspect of game B 2.0 it's
actually doing it just like we said that
it would but we somehow didn't figure
out how to do it back then it's very
interesting to me that those principles
turned out to be right they just had to
have a different set of people on
different set of Technology tools and a
different mindset people's minds have
grown over the last six years to the
point where I think this these ideas are
much much more accessible and people are
willing to lease and also of course the
situation and game a has become more
obviously worse and so people are
willing to do a bit more work to explore
an alternative right so I apologize if
what I'm about to do feels like a like a
oblique turn but it feels like it's a
good thing too right now talk about why
we might have optimism that this
metastable is possible and almost like
I'm meta frame for why we might have
optimism that the game B is not just
possible but actually has a lot going
for it both in the context of the
magnitude of the challenges that we're
trying to deal with and the context of
its struggle with game a does that seem
like a good place to go right now
hilariously you went there cuz that was
my next point which is game a is huge
and powerful game B doesn't even exist
yet all right but why should we be
optimistic so we're on the same page go
for it okay and there's there's a lot
that's about to happen as this is we
move into this so I would just my sense
this is probably going to be quite rich
and there's going to be a lot of
different implications which can't be
explicate it in the time that we have so
I would just want us to listen closely
and allow exploration to come so
recently on your podcast we had a
conversation with Stuart Coffman who
discussed the adjacent possible and he
talked about something in the adjacent
possible that has this characteristic of
a faster than exponential growth just to
kind of compress it to make sure that
there's foolish people who don't listen
to all of your podcasts i've have access
to this concept it's something that i
think Stewart is noticed in a number of
different domains so as diverse as
chemical primordial soups and
technological economies but it's
something along this line which is
you've got stuff you've got basic
components and to the degree to which
there are ways to combine these
components in ways that generate
something that has novel capacities
which is to say we cannot describe it as
a new thing we're now expanding the the
set of components and so we haven't lost
a component we've gained a component so
never sets larger and then we can run a
combinatorial against it and again to
the extent of that combinatorial
generates an expansion some new
capacities emerge you get a an expanding
field but the number of possibilities
expands and expands faster than
exponential and so it very actually goes
to infinity in a finite time which is
its own problem we'll deal with talk
about that later
but like in the thing that moves faster
than exponential as a characteristic of
being quite flat for a while is it
starts relatively slow and then it has
this curve and as it goes into the curve
it gets steeper and steeper and steeper
I bring that up because if we look at
the relationship between gaming and game
B what we might say is that the game a
is defined by a very high state or stock
of power it is big and powerful
it's like a big oil tanker that's
driving forward there's a lot of
momentum and inertia to what it's about
and for that matter it actually has a
pretty high rate of increase in power
but when you're in the acceleration and
the deepening of the adjacent possible
differences even small differences in
capacity to ride that curve to find
common
or elles faster make huge differences
you know the slightly higher exponent
makes all the difference in the world so
what's happening and by the way I would
say that this is something we can just
we could just notice if you if you look
at the way the game a itself has had to
evolve to maintain competitive advantage
inside game a let's just do it in the
context of military so for a long time
just having more people matter that's
just the raw capacity of the human body
was the decisive factor you know even
sticks and stones and thence you
suddenly went swords say for example or
Spears were developed if you didn't have
that level of technology you were deeply
in trouble but once you did it fell back
on the human body right and you just
keep going here's watch the evolution of
military power but as you start moving
past the the beginning of the 20th
century you begin moving into one more
one and particularly as you move through
World War two it becomes increasingly
obvious the human power ain't the thing
and technology power innovation power
has become the thing and these are
different the approach to sort of
amassing a large number of people and
disciplining them into a fighting body
that has the capacity to throw human
power
strategically had a problem that's a
game a speciality but creating a
collective intelligence which is more
capable of searching an increasingly
large field of possibility in the
adjacent possible and doing the
combinatorial that actually deliver on
an expansion of technical capacity is a
very different kind of thing this is a
bunch of distinctions and within the
internet um mysterious like if you just
take a look at the the subspecialty of
how we want to go about increasing
creative collaboration which we could
just literally say that's the tool
that's that's how collective
intelligence creative collaboration is
another way of saying the kind of
collective intelligence that can exert
the expanding sphere the adjacent
possible
and just compare for example the
motivational infrastructure of peak
gaming which has things like bonus
structures and carrot-and-stick and
hierarchical control and that's like if
you want to make a really really good
Factory that's what you do in fact if
you want to make a really really good
technology Factory you still have that
as a big piece of what you're doing is
because most of what you're doing is
pumping out widgets so if I'm making you
know computers I have a small amount of
innovation a large amount of production
and so most of what I'm doing is that
kind of structure but if you look at the
cutting edge of how you go about
supporting creative collaboration you
see for example that extrinsic
motivation inhibits creative
collaboration because you're whatever
extrinsic motivation you're imposing on
the system is actually distracting from
the free play of exploring the actual
space of possibility you're pre
orienting people's minds towards things
that are probably not necessarily the
right answer if they were you wouldn't
need them and hierarchical organization
also inhibits creative collaboration so
what we notice is that if we want to
support creative collaboration if we
just look at what those people who are
most focused on figuring out how to make
that better and better how they're doing
it they're beginning to orient towards
something that begins to look an awful
lot like I'm at a protocol for hyper
collaboration which is to say begins to
look a lot more like how do we actually
create individuals who have in
themselves the maximum what I call
sovereignty or the maximum capacity to
consciously respond in effective way to
an increasingly diverse number of
contexts and we're increasing the the
capacity for people to rapidly enter
into what I what I call coherence which
is to say rapidly enter into a way that
they themselves are able to be in
integrity with themselves but also
entering into in a liminal relationship
with other people that has a high degree
of possibility of insights which I just
said a lot of words right there we can
go into that it would like yeah if you
would define the word liminal when you
use a lot which I don't think is known
to a lot of people if you just define
what you mean by that
be helpful sure yeah what I mean that
that is really just a reference to a
state of not-knowing a state of what the
Buddhists would call child's mind a
state of really truly being in a place
of being like whoa wow I wonder what
like as opposed to a place of like when
you're solving a puzzle you're in a
space of having a pre decent sense of
how to go about doing it you've got a
even a strategy you know find the edges
find the corners you know build it in
from the outside and there's a strong
sense that there's an end and objective
you can look at the puzzle you know the
box and say that's what it looks like so
you're processing something that is a
puzzle but you're you have all these
characteristics when you're in the space
of an actual mystery one of the
characteristics of a mystery is you
don't even know what to hold on to to
make sense of what's happening part of
the mystery is deep disorientation of
your basis of sense making so to be in a
liminal space is to almost well first
you can fall into a liminal space we do
more powerful ease to consciously choose
to put yourself in a place of what I
call listening or what Benito Roy calls
still hunting meaning you're maximally
not trying to project meaning on the
phenomena that you're experiencing but
instead are actually trying to perceive
with a lot of with as much subtlety as
possible which is to say without
prefiguring so you're really just trying
to perceive before making sense and well
before making meaning because there's
just going on that you know for
sure you don't understand so anything
that could be signal you have to be very
very sensitive to and hunting is a good
metaphor right when when Bonita uses a
spray still hunting the metaphor of you
imagine that you're you're a very
skillful hunter but you're in a niche
you've never been in before
so you don't know what the signs are the
indicate pray and what indicate predator
you know you're a desert hunter but
you're in the jungle and so you don't
know if that sound is the sound of a
predatory cat that's about to leap on
you or it's the sound of a pig that you
could eat so you're just listening
you're tuned in like crazy and anything
that happens you're like okay I don't
know what that is but it may be the kind
of thing I should be
a little bit more attention - that's
what I mean that make sense yeah it does
and now I would use it more perhaps a
more prosaic term from evolutionary
computing called premature convergence
turns out that there's a trade-off
between exploration and exploitation and
game a has a tendency to move to
exploitation very rapidly because it's I
would argue is driven by exponential
discounting around money on money
returned while a wiser world would spend
more time exploring and learning and the
hunting analogy is bang-on as you know a
hunter with 50 years experience and
there's a whole bunch of things that you
know about the ecosystem in which you
hunt and the prey in which you hunt that
you only gather over a very long period
of time and if you were thrown into the
desert you'd have no idea what time of
day the animals are active how often do
they have to go to the waterhole etc
yeah exactly I see even as she is you
use that and very concrete example one
of the key insights here is that this is
all it's all what I would call embodied
meaning that you've experienced it
you've actually learned it through
experience and we can think about that
is to say that it's it's almost like
recorded in a very very rich way like
think about your whole body as an
instrument for perceiving and also for
making sense and your as a hunter with
50 years of experience you have what we
would call wisdom in the domain of
hunting and one of the characteristics
of wisdom of the domain of hunting is
you've got a like a deep sense like a
sense like because kind of into your in
your bones of how this this dilemma of
hunting how rich and complex it is and
so you're like able to say with no
hesitation if I'm a woods hunter and
I've shift to the desert I definitely
know what I do not know very true yeah I
like to go to the tangible as you know
an example of say woodland deer hunting
it takes a while to develop is really
valuable and important is you know how
to master multiple modalities
particularly vision and sound it turns
out you can waste a whole lot of time
learn jumping around looking for what's
that sound is that a deer or not and in
fact as a young hunter I remember
doing that way too much once you have
enough experience it all depends on the
person some of them get it earlier so
I'm get it later you have a high
fidelity ability to say nope that's a
squirrel or that's two squirrels one
chasing the other not a deer in which
case you keep your eyes where the higher
probability of payoff for vision is
while your auditory senses continue to
scan horizontally looking for sounds of
deer and this is important because you
can only look in a relatively narrow 60
degree angle with high fidelity and yet
the deer could be sneaking up on you
from any direction or trying to bypass
you from any direction and sound is your
second sense that often times will give
you a warning that a deer is trying to
sneak by in which case you then orient
your vision to what where your sound
tells you to look but that only works
well if you can filter out the non deer
sounds mm-hmm yeah and my I guess from
exploring these sorts of things and you
can do this in and it literally any-any
this is a kind of liminality or the
thing that you're talking about which is
to say beginning and liminality and then
building from direct experience in a
holistic way I was no prefiguring of
what the right answer might look like
actually just sophisticated real
capacity the way that uh John would make
you would talk about is participatory
knowing meaning that you are yourself
actually changing your capacities in
relationship to the domain or to the
arena that you're in you're becoming
capable of conforming to the problem
domain that you're in I would imagine
that as you begin to become more and
more mature more certain more capable as
a hunter you would even begin to
describe it as sort of sixth sense right
you've got one sense to sense and you're
like wow at a certain point I'm
beginning to realize that you know
analytically I can't really talk about
vision or sound but there's some way for
me to just kind of be call it like
perceiving and I just kind of have an
inkling that this is the right place to
go and that's like that difference
between you know we're learning how to
juggle when you go from two balls to
three balls and there's a point where
you are trying to juggle three balls
like a two plus one and you notice like
that really doesn't work and there's a
shift that happens that you can't
analytically name because it's super
complex that's the whole point
a very large number of subsystems of
your body or perceptive and agenda or
actuating functions but once you get
over that hump and you get it like oh
yeah well how do you juggle three balls
well you kind of juggle three balls like
you you realize that it's an embodied
capacity to you it's completely
available and you can become very very
very good at it but it's not the sort of
thing that is analytically describable
as a simple set of algorithmic processes
because it's actually an extremely
complex set that well that's that so
that's that that direction let me just
have a couple just you know get tangible
examples in hunting because you're right
that no longer your hunting the more
you're starting to juggle a very high
dimensional space that you cannot even
think about doing analytically for
instance there's you know there's vision
and they're sound but you also
eventually unconsciously bias both of
those based on time of day where you are
on a corns versus grass as the leading
food source right so and that varies by
year some years are great acorn years
some are spotty acorn years some are
completely busted acorn years acorns are
stronger earlier and gradually get eaten
so they go back to grass etc so there's
a whole number of these dimensions that
are kind of hard to be explicit about
but once you become a an experienced
hunter it goes into your real-time model
how you tune your vision and your and
your sound based on all these other
parameters that you've only gradually
learned so anyway we're over here in
time let's let's not go too far down oh
we both have that tendency yeah so it's
just a good thing here to sit to say it
it just comes from this if anybody's
listening so to convert this from a
digression into something useful is that
humility is the handmaiden of liminality
and humility is a primary capacity to
play game Blee well and as I'm listening
to what you're saying one of the things
that I remember is humility which is you
know hunting is a thing and it's got
richness and depth and complexity that
I'm not going to be able to read the you
know the users guide on hunting and then
jump into it and be a hunter it actually
takes real-life capacity-building and
that's I think is
in sight like this inside of humility
and an increasing awareness of
complexity is complex and I need to
always be in relationship almost even
beginning at humility before I step into
anything so that I'm able to be truly
open to the full reality of what it is
that I'm about to do to myself into
sorry so that's that yeah let me try
summing up what you've said so far and
you can tell me if I'm full of or
not or or closer or off which is that
the answer to the question of at least
an answer a beginning answer to how game
B could beat game a despite the fact
that it's tiny today and game a is huge
and powerful is that game a if it's
crafted correctly we'll do a better job
of processing the world in a nonlinear
high complexity fashion and even though
it starts small it will have a higher
exponent and those of us with a little
bit of quantitative background know that
over long enough period of time you can
start mighty small and if you're growing
at a higher exponent you'll eventually
beat the big guy who's growing at a low
and growing in a broader sense of
solving the world's problems then then
the bigger guys that getting something
near the sense of what you were trying
to communicate yep as prematures i think
you may have started with game a but it
became evident thing you definitely
meant game B there and yes so that would
be that okay and this is particularly
the case when this rate versus state
trade-off is so important you know so if
you've got a starting gate where the
ability to be able to do this innovation
thing the raw material for doing the
innovation that the adjacent populace
the phase space of possibility is now
very very large and so the leverage of
increasing your capacity to do
innovation to to to move this the
adjacent possible is is very high you
know so if we had tried to do this game
B thing in 1750 we couldn't have gotten
there because there wasn't enough stuff
in the space of possibility even if we
tried ruin EIN teen 50 we couldn't have
gotten there but but now we can't or at
least at least in principle it's
possible that we can and so it's kind of
this weird thing where almost exactly
the same characteristic that causes
Gainey to be
so challenging which is to say
accelerating change happens to be the
same exact characteristic that drives
the possibility of game-based and we can
exactly say that game B is just designed
from the from the get-go to be
substantially better at innovation than
game a and okay that's that's what you
kind of simplify okay so we're trying to
do we're trying to figure out how do we
take a look at this thing called
creative collaborations and how do we do
that thing how do we design something
which is just a whole lot better at
creative collaboration recognizing that
we're now in a place where escape
velocity through the innovation vector
is available we might actually be able
to do something was just so much better
that it just lifts off let's say that
the gaming right now has a million power
and this is I'm just gonna read in
numbers just Rio to create what you just
said now game gaming has a million power
and it's rate of change is a hundred
thousand per unit time and so the next
unit you know T plus one it's a hundred
a million one let's say game B right now
is starting out at ten thousand power
but its rate of change is actually
something like compounding curve so it's
not a hundred thousand per unit time
it's one point one times its current
number and so it's gonna take a while
for a while ten thousand times you know
one point one is not getting a lot
bigger but obviously if you just draw
the curves there is a crossover point
and that crossover point by the way is a
crossover point with wings because you
know you've crossed over and within a
not very long time after you've crossed
over you've blown right past and not
very long time after that
you've actually gone so far past that
it's not even clear what the hell just
happened and we can actually be in some
sense even very concrete about this I
think it was an SSI book but maybe it
wasn't taking him in the origin if well
and there was a conversation about you
know what it meant actually maybe it was
Matt Ridley's book where they were
talking about like to have been lured
xiv and you know in the one hand to have
Bentley with the 14th at his time frame
had a was massively massively better
than just being an average person and on
the other hand almost everybody alive
right now is better off than Louie the
fourteenth the simple fact of say for
example we have toothbrushes
and obviously the telecommunications
transportation air conditioning indoor
plumbing antibiotics like
fill-in-the-blank and you know the the
rate of innovation compared to the state
is one where we have all blown right by
so if you imagine that you had a choice
the lulu xiv was sitting there and hit
her choice he could either ride train a
where he gets to be lu xiv and gets me
the top dog but train a has a particular
rate of change or he gets on train b and
train b has a characteristic green no
longer gets to be lua the fourteenth it
just has to be appear along with
everybody else but it has a different
faster rate of change he may be hard
pressed to make that choice he may be
like man i really prefer to be lu xiv
but it's actually a better choice if you
like things like toothbrushes and and
indoor plumbing and modern dentistry in
general whenever people talk about the
good old days I just say modern
dentistry right and of course when I'm
right now a lot of the languaging is
focused on stuff like technology like
physical technology like modern
dentistry or toothbrushes but in the
context of game B what we notice is that
a large amount of the innovation field
actually has to happen at the level of
people relationships human beings
innovation happening in the domain of
how human beings are able to show up in
relationship with themselves with each
other and with nature for the obvious
reason that if you all you do is run
forward at a faster pace along the
technology vector you're just going to
blow us up faster so we have to actually
do something and this is okay this is
one of the reasons why I at least spend
a lot of time thinking about it in terms
of meta design and not in terms of just
engineering if we're going to develop
something which is just a whole lot
better at creative collaboration we
actually notice from the very GetGo that
we also have to design something that is
a whole lot better at cultivating
collective wisdom that is at least
symmetric wit and probably is more
superior to the power that we're
generating through this creative
collaboration so like this is a meta
design constraint yeah game be must must
must orient its primary innovation
capacity
first and foremost towards cultivating
individual and collective sovereignty
which is to say wisdom and maturity and
a an awareness of how choices actually
show up in the world more than the rate
at which it increases individual
collective power
that makes a lot of sense it's one of
two ways we could go here I think it's
time to get more tangible yep a critique
of game B is that it's too intangible
too much stock not enough action and so
you know you and I have had an email
conversation over the last few days
talking a little bit about how to
describe the phasing zuv game a and what
some of the sub components might be and
I've kind of taken that a little further
and I'm gonna be a game B game babe all
right if I'm saying something about the
future its game B even if the game a
comes out of my mouth and I'm gonna
spend it extended it to a whole bunch of
fairly tangible topics or so I'm going
to run through relatively rapidly so
let's both try not to go down the rabbit
hole of digressions first we both agreed
that a reasonable way to present the
current state it we could call the
pregame be world or pre beef or short
where there doesn't actually exist a
hole of a functioning game B group not
even a small one but there's lots of
things that people are working on to get
ready for that first real step and first
you called this out in 2017 finding the
others and that's starting to happen
right through Twitter through Facebook
through all traveling around the country
and meeting to people and telling people
about game B so let's let's let that one
go because that one seems to be
happening and though of course we'd
encourage any more listeners who think
they would like to play game B to reach
out to these connection points we talked
about earlier the game B group on
facebook and hashtag game B on Twitter
and find the others but then the next
one I know you spent a lot of time
thinking about this and also started
applying it to your own life is making
changes in our lives to be more game B
READY
things like building courage and
optimism integrity honesty and good
faith escaping the matrix of status
oriented consumerism and being
programmed by psychologically astute
mass and social media what are some
other things in the in the changing
one's own own life that would you would
say fit to this freebie world hmm well
three things pop up immediately and
there I don't know if they're related so
one is that I've noticed that
many people who come with a hey let's
get going
attitude have often not done a lot of
work on what I would call a transparent
agentic mind and so there's a what I
would call a naive assumption that's the
paradigm that they are very familiar
with whatever it happens to be is the
right paradigm and when it's up
happening of course is that then they
reshape the story of game B into
something that is a like their paradigm
so one of the things is to actually take
quite seriously this notion of
liminality even down to the level of
what I would call transparent agrammatic
mind which is a real thing like that is
not a trivial capacity to be aware of
the the axiomatic assumptions that you
are bringing into your sense making and
to be able to actually shift between
different paradigms as the the arena
that you're in changes so that's one two
is building a capacity for orienting
your choices on the basis of sense to
meaningfulness and these two things are
actually very connected so in game a we
have where we're very very separated
from developmentally and socially
separated from our capacity to orient
our sense-making on the basis of sense
of meaningfulness so for example we
spend more time on at work than
with our kids and so something is off
and yet we don't actually choose the
thing that if we were to spend real time
on it is the more meaningful we
rationalize and or just delude ourselves
or ignore and that has to be broken like
you cannot do game B because that's the
primary piece of the capacity is this
primordial or prefigured capacity in the
human body to be able to just notice and
be able to be aware of what is more
meaningful than other things just to you
like what feels more meaningful just
that and being able to be like this
really concrete self-discipline to make
sure you've got straight in order
so if you're sacrificing that way if
you're if you're there radically unaware
of what is most meaningful fix that and
then if you are noticing that your
choices aren't actually in accords with
the values that you think you hold fix
that and then notice
what is the capacity in you that
actually allows you to sense what are
the what are the values that are going
to orient towards meaningfulness what
are the values that you hold what's the
sense that gives you that and what's the
sense that allows you to use those
values to actually notice what seemed
like really good choices in in front of
you did you have to relearn a lot of
machinery that was pounded out of you
largely by both education and the
economy
and being able to know in yourself what
you actually care about and make choices
in the business of what is actually
important to you god that's so insane
how hard that is because I find many
many people are actually running
ideologies which is to say that they
they substitute somebody else's code
somebody else's proposition for what is
important in exchange for their own so
instead of listening to my own sensing
of what I actually care about
I actually override myself in favor of
some particular ideology that is somehow
been able to impose itself on me as
being more important and and therefore
more more valuable than the values that
my my whole self is are actually
yearning for that that's a piece it has
to be done let me throw in a tangible
you know you know me I like the tangible
you know to the you know the
introduction piece I said you know we
need to deprogram ourselves from status
oriented consumption so person thinks
they need to have a fancy BMW to be who
they are and therefore they have to take
a high-pressure job with a 90 minute
commute hmm so that they can afford this
BMW the result is they're not gonna have
the time to spend with their children or
their spouse or their friends and so
they have taken this ideology which
programmed into them by psychologically
astute media and advertising and have
inserted that instead of their actual
really meaningful goals yeah absolutely
and you can see that happening in all
kinds of interesting ways but for
example rather than you know hanging out
with friends and family they go to a you
know an upwardly mobile business meeting
with people that they have very little
sense of actual connection with because
in the back of their mind they don't
even like the jobs that they've got
right just you got this huge explosion
and what's interesting about is if
there's
there's a synergy value that shows up
because the way I'm describing it it's
kind of like freeing your mind and
increasing a capacity to make more
meaningful choices but at the same time
it's also freeing your economy because
if you're not addicted to this
particular vector of status consumption
you're obviously not necessarily
dependent on as much of a flow of money
and this gives you a lot more actual
freedom exactly and you know at least in
my mind I strongly suspect that one of
the roads to getting ready for game B is
to get one's financial life in order and
that doesn't mean making more money it
may well mean just spending less less
less having your buttons pushed to make
you think you need x y&z right right
let's go side bar here I have it way
down my list but you've mentioned it
several times now and frankly I'm not
entirely clear what you mean by it so
I'd love for you to take a five minutes
no longer I'm gonna blow the whistle on
meaning what does meaning mean and what
is it to be meaning full five minutes on
meaningfulness five minutes so now I'm a
rely on old-school skills and do a
compression so first is embed reference
to John Verve a keys
you know 43 hours series on escaping
from the meaning crisis go watch that
you will then have a much better sense
of what that means but to say John has a
good framework so I'll use that as well
as I can for ways of knowing
propositional procedural perspectival
participatory and and they're in a stack
which is say the participatory is more
fundamental and propositional is more
rapidly changeable you can you can move
propositions around faster opposition
was like what we're doing right now
language I'm conveying language to you
you're absorbing language to some extent
you're moving your ideas around in
relationship to what I'm saying
anticipatory has to do with it's almost
like the the fitness of your way of
being in relationship to the world that
you're in so if you actually use just
evolutionary Fitness and extend that to
include the whole way that a human can
be in relationship with with the the
kinds of Nicias that we find ourselves
in that's where meaningfulness comes
from that is meaningfulness so
meaningfulness has to do with the the
wholeness of your entire mode of being
in the world all the different ways that
you respond to what is coming at you
that gives rise to your increasing
capacity to respond well to what is in
the world
so meaningfulness is simultaneous that
the means to the end of being able to
respond to the world in a way that
furthers your capacity to respond to the
world in the next moment of time you you
are fit in that sense and also it is the
the capacity in yourself of how you
sense what kinds of changes in yourself
are more affordance to increasing that
capacity does that make sense almost
what exactly is the capacity let's make
that clear the language I think has
patinas talked about the notion of
conformation to conform so there's a
there's a pistol let's do that I have a
pistol in front of me it's a Glock
actually and so what I noticed is
there's a way for my hand to be
configured so that my hand is holding
this Glock in a way that is actually
able to pull the trigger effectively
does that make sense yeah
that is in a very large number of ways
that my hand can be conformed that isn't
in conformity with with the the
affordance of the pistol
so meaningfulness is simultaneously on
the one hand the practical which is if I
get my hand in the right conformity to
the pistol I can actually pull the
trigger in fact if I get it my whole
body in the right relationship with that
with the affordance of the pistol I can
actually shoot with accuracy and so
that's meaningfulness from the point of
view of effectiveness in in world in
relationship to it the world does offer
and then there's the sense of
meaningfulness which is the how do I go
about figuring that out well what I
notice is that if I sort of experiment
with it there's something about the way
that I knew I'm holding the gun upside
down and I've got like all my fingers
stuck together like a submit there's
something in me that is telling me that
that ain't the right way and so the
sense of meaningfulness is the capacity
to be able to discern in reality in this
case with the pistol what are the
affordances of that pistol and how does
my capacity as a body relate to those
affordances and how do I change myself
to conform to that so as to increasingly
realise a capacity to be an effective
relationship with reality now expand
pistol to be the whole world so
essentially you're saying is a meaning
is figuring out yes figuring out
how to actually live in life well which
is to say by well what I mean is not
just to live now but to live ongoingly
right this this double order I have to
be able to be in effective relationship
with what the world is throwing at me
now but by effective relationship what I
mean is that what I do how I how I
actually show up increases my
possibility of being an effective
relationship with what the world is
throwing at me in the future
that's it okay I'm gonna push back a
little bit one could argue that in the
current world that would say to be
meaningful is to become a very good game
a player well
if game a was in fact a really valid
future then that would be true and it
was at some point so there was a time
that being meaningful was figuring out
what are the affordances of game a
getting damn good at it for a period of
time that was very true and this is
actually quite challenging because
remember I said and this is I think this
is actually a very interesting piece
when I said the game be is sort of
omnipresent but we may be playing it at
a level zero I mean that quite seriously
I mean that like 35,000 years ago game B
was present but game a and game B are
co-present and so there's this really
interesting tension that we can feel in
ourselves that as we sort of follow the
meaningfulness vector in the direction
of game a we can notice a tension or a
lack of integrity a fragment
tation of ourselves in relationship to
the meaningful inspector in the
direction of gain be because there's a
discontinuity between the two and I
think that is is really really a deep
point like it it speaks to why we may
have a subjective sense of the is
rut talking about or what is Paul
talking about when he says that to play
game a well was meaningfulness in say
the 1950s or say the 1300s and that's
because in the end the larger scheme of
things right we've been doing this this
human thing for a million years and so
the 35,000 years where game a was a
certain had a certain conformity to it
it's just a blink of the eye so we might
say is that our deep deep deep sense of
meaningfulness has kind of always felt
the game a has this this taste of
short-termism a taste of I'm making
trade-offs between things and maybe they
are the right trade-offs anyway I have
to make those trade-offs I want to
continue to be able to play the game but
I also feel a certain wrongness to it
and so one of the things we might say is
that the fulfillment of game B is a
recovery of that and moving back into an
alignment that the that even our
evolutionary selves can feel is a hoof
now I no longer have to in order to
pursue this path of what is actually
meaningful I can actually pursue a path
that is feeling increasingly meaningful
all the way down and all the way out
which is a very nice orientation
essentially you talk about the sense of
wrongness that keeps popping up and I
give two good examples that were
actually pretty major and had some
result in game a and and twice challenge
game a one is Marx's idea of alienation
you know the idea that the ever
crunching machinery of capitalism all
delivers the productive goods at least
for many people alienates people from a
holistic approach to life and work and
he predicted would eventually realize
that they were alienated and revolt and
in reality it turned out game a was good
enough at buying them out off from their
alienation that their they had been in
so far willing to remain alienated the
second I think closely related
concept again a sense of wrongness was
from the 60s caught the hippie movement
or whatever whatever it was was going on
in the 60s the word there was
inauthenticity that people were walking
away from and you know a lot of people
have about my age especially once it's a
little teeny bit older got decent
college education and walked away and
built hippie commune so to speak to try
to achieve more authenticity in their
life you know the feeling that you know
putting on the gray flannel suit and
going to work and the big bureaucratic
behemoths was not an authentic way of
honoring our being as creatures in the
world yeah those both Sordi I think get
it your sense absolutely and we can say
that you know one of the words that I
think rings very nicely now in this
context of meaningfulness as we've
described it is integrity and here
integrity has a lot of like Landsman
quite nice and we think about it like
structural integrity which is to say
that all of the pieces are fitting
together well so alienation is
fragmentation where okay I've got some
pieces that are fitting together well
there's a whole other bunch of pieces
that are not and that Suellen asian is
right and in authenticity is kind of the
same thing and so in this perspective we
can look at it from a meta meta level
like oh wow so the orientation towards
meaningfulness includes within itself an
awareness of all the different pieces of
myself and in fact by the way of the
whole world that are not in integrity
they are not in right relationship with
each other and by the way therefore have
less structural integrity so as we begin
to be aware of this work okay yeah those
guys were picking things up and by the
way we can run back in time and see this
happening all the time like constantly
we were noticing that the trade-offs
that we were forced to make by the
reality of the world that we were in and
you know that's just been the reality
whether it was the trade-off of which of
your children dies because you haven't
got enough food or the reality of your
going to kill that other sentient human
being because you're a war whatever it
is is a separation from a larger
integrity a larger movement of
meaningfulness that is
subject to the contingencies of now but
we feel in ourselves of wrongness to it
and it's like a pragmatic acceptance now
I'm saying okay we're going to be very
aware of how do we move more and more in
that direction of a greater and greater
rightness non utopian right I'm not
proposing and by any stretch of the
imagination either that we're going to
be able to teleport from here to there
we have to actually grow our capacity to
include more and more of ourselves and
the world in this meaningfulness and
also non utopian in the sense of there
is no end point where there's just an
ongoing nosov an increasing capacity to
include more and more of ourselves and
other people and the world
in something that has deeper and
stronger and richer integrity all right
it's 11 minutes not bad for Jim and
Jordan trying to talk about meaningful
and asked
let's now ratchet down a little bit more
into the tangible in our pregame be
world one of the other pieces that we
agreed is very important I think you
called it transition I decided to rename
it experimenting with the piece parts
you know game B is going to have a bunch
of things that have to be solved for it
to be holistic it to be able to create
the first whole game B and it seems to
me that you know game B is gonna have to
think about design find I think we have
we don't have time to design everything
we have to find some existing things
that work or can be modified a little
bit and a whole bunch of domains and I'm
gonna run through a couple ease domains
and see if you can just say a few things
about them and we can move on Akai got
15 when we run out of time I'm gonna
stop but before you go down the line let
me just put a little bit of a frame on
that a little bit more color on the
space of transition because there's
three characteristics that I think are
important to think about so one
characteristic is this this notion of
the adjacent possible so if you kind of
think about it through the metaphor of a
series of steps if the thing that is
metastable in game B is three steps away
the transition is to say well we're
actually going to have to go through
step two one and two before we get to
three and you know gets it serene unless
you go through one and two so it's
actually very important to recognize
that there are things that need to
change from where we are now that are
not the end State or at least are not
the game be piece of it but nonetheless
are actually necessary for us to get
there that's one side another piece of
transition is the kind of like the the
Noah's Ark piece or the the lifeboat
which is we humans we individuals and we
as a species have to make it so it
doesn't do us any good if we've got a
really cool design document for a game
be it looks like and nobody makes it it
doesn't do you any good if you and the
things that you care about don't make it
so another part of the transition is how
do you create what we call back in the
day zones of cultivated security so that
as we're moving forward into this effort
to get to a place we're calling game be
we and as much of what we care about
make it into that place so that's
another piece of the transition story
and then the third piece is the one that
you mentioned which is to say
experimenting with the piece parts
really recognizing that in many cases we
really don't know how to do a lot of
this stuff and we have to start learning
all right now and they're all tied
together you can't build the zone of
security until you have pieced parts
that were core right and that don't have
toxic side effects and if we look at the
history of people trying to build for
instance intentional communities almost
always they've failed due to bad design
or lack of understanding of human nature
so there's these things are not linear
these are all non linearly interrelated
anyway let me hop down start down the
list a bit I probably will stop after I
get through a few of them parenting what
this game be have to think about how
children are raised Wow how they relate
to their parents and how spouses relate
to each other all right so here's here's
here's what I think is probably the
easiest piece so I'm gonna play a game
where I'm just gonna try to say the
thing that I think is the most
fundamental and not do a lot more
because there's a lot great so if you
have an intuitive sense that the
relationship between parent and child
has a strong fundamental asymmetry like
it's a it's a relationship between
master and student or its own
relationship between boss and employee
then game be would would will have some
surprises for you that within the game
be context there remember humility is
super important there is a deep D
awareness of the degree to which really
effective parenting has a sense of
symmetry which is to say and here's the
way that I've set it to people and I
have a one-year-old daughter so this is
like very concrete for me I am aware
that she is a fully realized soul at
least as rich and fully realized as I
write as a human being we are equal I
happen to have been in a body that's
gone around the Sun many more times than
her particular body so when it comes to
a lot of the kinds of things that have
to do with how bodies maneuver ends time
and space I've got a lot more experience
and so I play a particular role of a
symmetry in terms of supporting her
building the capacity in herself to
become more capable of being in the
world and noticed by the way what I said
- I said supporting her and building the
capacity in herself I don't mean
impressing the things that I've learned
on her propositional ease top down
because that gets in the way that's what
a teacher a bad teacher does to a
student you're not learning how to
finish I'm just giving you the fish in
this metaphor but at the same time I
certainly have noticed that in terms of
my own developmental journey my own
building of integrity of myself and my
own learning and growing she has as much
to teach me in terms of like liminality
she's the master of liminality because
she really is coming with the child's
mind to reality and so if I look at that
and say wow so what's really happening
here is that we are teaching each other
this question of meaningfulness and I'm
opening myself up to the possibility of
how deeply she can change me and
honoring the responsibility I have of
how deeply she's opening herself up to
the possibility of how much I can change
her and we are now peers collaborating
in this crazy show of parenting
child's family and reality that's a game
being way of looking at that problem
cool let's go on to the next one making
a living and this is a fun game it feels
like a 50s game show alright so we have
a couple of different things here and
for me it has this it's like a double
loop so so one loop is that what I'd
like to put out there it says good
old-fashioned language of vocation voco
or calling and in that one of the things
is this
in the notion of vocation is the
capacity to perceive what in fact you
are being called to do and that's a very
game B thing because remember if we if
we propose that we're engaging in hyper
collaboration each of us has some piece
that is the piece that we are ultimately
responsible for and we can invoke kind
of the Japanese mission of iki guy which
is to say that which you are for
whatever reasons you know the way that
you happen to have been thrown into this
world are uniquely capable of actually
doing with exquisite care and capacity
and also that you are drawn towards that
your sense of meaningfulness really
lights up and you feel like becoming
conforming yourself for that reality
feels quite right and also is good as
most people in the larger story so
building in yourself the discernment to
be able to move more and more by
building experience by actually trying
in the world more and more towards that
which is your ikigai
moving more more towards that which is
your calling this becomes the Right
Livelihood this is how you actually play
the role that is yours to play in the
context of game B and then we can notice
in that that we then have the subsidiary
challenge of how do I make how to accrue
to myself the resources that are
necessary to be able to continue to live
while I am pursuing that vocation we can
talk a lot about that but I'll stop her
there okay next and this is a word which
I've probably known since I was 15 but I
see coming at it from many different
directions and I've now come to believe
this is goddamn near the key to making
game B happen and that is conviviality
hmm
that's a beautiful word isn't it it
really is might we start I probably not
a word known to everybody why don't you
start by defining conviviality and then
explain how do we make that piece part
work better it's so important for game B
well so the easiest part is conviviality
literally just means living together
living together this at a certain point
in my life about 12 or 15 years ago the
word came into my vocabulary and then
almost immediately I ended up actually
running into it in the context of this
really beautiful 70s author Ivan Illich
who wrote a book
tools for conviviality and the proper
use of how we humans can create culture
of which technology is a subset right
technology is something that we create
to afford our ability to be in the world
so what is the right relationship
between how we create culture to support
our actually living as human beings in
the world with ourselves and with each
other so conviviality for me at least
this is the way that I understand it is
the conscious design of culture which
includes rituals and tools and
techniques and gatherings and events
that are are able to increasingly fully
support our personal growth our
capacities in ourselves to be more
richly living and our relational growth
our capacity to find and be in
relationships that are themselves
inclusively rich and our sort of
relationship with the bigger picture
like with the whole with the whole life
I would add maybe this is my loading on
conviviality I put a strong emphasis on
face to face our actual primate being
and that learning how we live with other
people and get a tremendous amount of
positive valence from that as opposed
nothing you know on things that really
pisses me off you know you go into a
restaurant you see four people sitting
around a table all of them on their
phones that to my mind is the opposite
of conviviality they should be enjoying
each other as humans and interacting
with each other as peers in a convivial
style yeah we could we could say to like
really really hit it with some poetry we
can say that the conviviality is taking
relationship as being sacred and taking
the sacred as being most appropriately
realized in the absolutely ordinary I
like that sitting around a campfire
singing goofy songs it doesn't get much
better than that as it turns out yeah it
doesn't if you're under the stars and
you're with people who you truly love
and you're connecting in this way on the
one hand absolutely ordinary I mean what
could be more ordinary than that and at
the same time we've been doing it for
200,000 years right yeah and at the same
time like if you really are in that
place you begin to notice oh like
this is what they mean when they say
connected to the sacred that's it
all right so that's conviviality I love
it and I'm more and more convinced that
if conviviality can really be triggered
this may be game B's secret weapon and I
suspect that a lot of people would give
up the BMW and the 10,000 square-foot
house or the rat race to live in the 600
square foot house in Palo Alto in return
for a life with real conviviality well
you know who would agree most wrong with
that who's that our old game B
co-conspirator Joe Adelman remember him
oh yeah a fact I'm still in fairly
regular communications with Joe at least
electronically not convivial II though
when he went into sport mode he went to
Berlin and he's been working on that
which is his like that's his heart
forever
and I mean his arguments trait forward
like if you actually look at at what
people he did a real work on having
people do certain kinds of things like
say here's what I care about
then do various things then report on
over time like many many different
check-ins what felt more meaningful like
what felt like it was actually
fulfilling their needs and what he
discovered exactly what you're saying
is that a potluck picnic was universally
perceived short medium and long term as
much more fulfilling than a fancy dinner
or an expensive vacation and free yep
Joe's time well spent
research yeah that's exactly it I'm good
remember hey Joe why don't we get you on
the gym rut Joe I think we should talk
about conviviality and nothing but for
for the whole show okay we're gonna move
on conviviality maybe the secret weapon
for game be we talked about sense making
and I'll give another little sidebar to
a resource there's a Facebook group
called rally point alpha which was
started in response to one of Jordans
essays and the focus on rally point
alpha it's sense-making so if people are
interested in thinking about sense
making and learning how to do sense
making not necessarily very well but
maybe better than we do now check out
rally point alpha but after since making
and this is one of the one of the
critiques of sense making sense making
by itself isn't all that important until
we then use that for action taking and
it strikes me that we need to do a lot
of exploring and experimenting and how
we go from sense-making and meaning
and meaningfulness to action taking one
of the people I've talked with about
this it's impressed me a fair amount is
Forrest Landry who's done some very
interesting work on how do we go from
making sense to taking action so
thoughts you have around action taking
well I mean if we're going to invoke
forest I'll just refer to force just
find a way to have a conversation with
him there's nothing that I could say
about this that would be close to what
he could say about it and so it'd be bad
fence making for me to put noise into
the signal with my poor version of what
he could be doing it at a much more
exquisite level so you've just got
another person at least last I checked
he had not put out his ideas and a
relatively condensed incoherent form
maybe he has I'll go look if he has I
put a little link up on the episode page
and people go check it out if not off to
get forced on here which I like to do
anyway okay next a health and that
doesn't mean just health care but health
yeah so what I've what I've done in the
past I've I've actually taken this
framework of saying okay health and then
well-being and put them next to each
other so I've described health as we
have to think about it in terms of the
whole being the whole person in life so
obviously we've got physiological help
and you've got psychological health and
you got relational health these are all
characteristics and they're all part of
the whole human being and we have to be
thinking about all of them and we need
be thinking about this mission in terms
of symmetry and synergy which is just
say that if you optimize for it's funny
I actually had a really really really
skilled body worker which is just say
torturer come by two days ago and maybe
there's last night I can't remember I
think I blacked out and he was giving me
he asked like if you want to do on a
relaxation massage or release massage
and said man I've been feeling pretty
worked over give me a release massage
and it was really painful like I'm not
kidding I think I may have blacked out
somewhere around minute 90 and
afterwards he comes and says you really
need to stop the exercise regime that
you're doing it's working in the sense
that you're becoming stronger and you
have certain levels of fitness but it's
also not working in all
your body is hitting the wall in a bunch
of different dimensions so health of
course as a whole systems thing you
really have to be mindful of the nature
and characteristics of the whole system
and mindful of how to actually support
all of those without making
externalities or trade-offs that are
falsely optimizing for certain
subsystems and then of course you have
to have embed that whole thing that
whole healthy self in time like it's
moving through time and so this is that
that that meta notion of from health to
well-being is something where you're
you're finding a way to actually be in
relationship it's the context that
supports health ongoingly and so this
might be things like you know linking
back to things like in Divi ality and
location you know it's one thing to be
aware of good nutrition it's another
thing to be able to actually put food on
the table and both are necessary like an
you actually have well-being you have to
have a context that supports the
practices of health ongoingly and
ideally under increasingly diverse
circumstances and so you can find a way
of as I say travel from home to a
different location have I built a
certain you know set of techniques that
I know are the ones that support my
health in that say travel context so
that's what I have to say about that
that's cool
I'm gonna skip over a few go to another
one that I think it's hugely deepam
we've talked about a fair amount
policing and justice I'm gonna start
with a quote from David Sloan Wilson I
think I might have yanked this out of
one of your essays I don't remember
selfishness beats altruism within groups
but
altruistic groups beats selfish groups
the rest is commentary yeah this is a
this is a tricky tricky business isn't
it because you have that that trade-off
between the two we're a group that
succumbs to too much interior
selfishness becomes feed for that group
which has more capacity to maintain its
integrity and have high enough level of
altruism that it's actually strong in
the other group and this is fractal
meaning that when we say group we mean
the two people and also 10 million and a
billion as it were right so you got this
fractal set of
dynamics play so you said policing and
justice justice to my mind those are at
least in the game a world let's say the
the game be analogues the policing
injustice which are I would argue are
rough-and-ready attempt to find a
balance between selfishness within the
group and yet enough altruism to have
Liberty right at least some enough
Liberty and yet have altruism within the
group you know it's it's a very tough
ballot here are the things that come to
mind and I'm noticing if there's a and
this is good because what's happening is
that through these different questions I
think if you're able to kind of do a
meta perception and seeing what are the
commonalities I'm noticing them so in
the context of say something like health
and in the context of sovereignty one of
the things that that comes up I think I
talked about this maybe then yesterday
on a live stream so so yeah check this
out I think I think this is gonna be
really nice when something happens to me
that feels bad and broadly speaking I
have kind of two ways of responding to
it one is selecting from the different
approaches that we might call a
avoidance so avoidance in here includes
by the way just just pounding it down so
destruction like destroying that which
is coming up as a version of avoidance I
can dodge it I can delude myself I can
become dead into it I can fight it these
are all sort of characteristics of one
way I might react to something that
feels that another way of reacting when
something feels bad we might call sake
curiosity meaning there's signal here
something is telling me that there's
something about the nature of a of the
world and being me that isn't working
and rather than just trying to avoid the
signal taking the signal and the thing
I'm actually going to decouple them and
I'm gonna I'm actually going to be
coming deeply deeply curious about what
the hell is going on which means in some
sense I have to actually be able to
stand in the discomfort for some amount
of time might I may be quite unpleasant
but it allows me to have a much more
intimate relationship with what's coming
at me and begin to decouple for example
maybe the prefigured sense making right
liminality the pre-period sense making
that I have a phenomena and notice
there's some deep learning that I can
actually have that allows me to grow my
capacities in response to the world and
may in fact resolve that problem
completely in forever it turns out that
it was actually bad mapping on my part
you know when I was seven
you know something happened and I
wrapped the signal around trauma and
then every time the signal comes by I
filled the trauma and I avoid it and it
turns out that if I simply deal with it
right now as a mature adult I can
resolve it all together
for example let's do the same thing that
same kind of movement in the context of
policing injustice let's say that every
time an event occurs that shows up as
some kind of injustice some kind of
violation we can look at it as a problem
to be addressed or we can actually come
up with a lot of curiosity and say okay
what's really happening here what's
showing up oh cool
I'll invoke parenting now so now as long
as I have two kids I've got you know I'm
in the right space
I could take an approach of let's say
you know punishment or retribution you
know your brother took your your cookie
you can throw a rock out of my calls by
the way as absurd as that sounds now I'm
sure that's written in some kind of
religious text from 3,000 years ago
guarantee it but that's not very good
parenting right the good parent kisses
okay what we have is once again we have
a found opportunity to notice a
possibility for increasing capacity a
possibility for more a more meaningful
relationship whatever happened here and
part of it might be increasing the
maturity and wisdom of our archetypal
sister okay your brother's too and
here's what happens we're in
relationship with two-year-olds and
here's where you are and here's how all
of us can become more aware of the very
complex problem about human beings in a
relationship with each other and do we
have a sense of sitting still connected
to a deeper sense of love a deeper sense
of conviviality as the basis of where we
are have we reconciled the hurt feelings
first have we come to really understand
it it's deeper level ourselves and the
other relationship that would happen and
then finally let's look at the last
piece and by the way very much the last
piece is there something about an
imbalance that has occurred that needs
to be put in place to make sure that we
in
have set things right you know in that
order so that's kind of coming from the
bottom up and recognizing that any time
something that happens that ends in the
zone of injustice is first and foremost
a signal of telling us to attend and to
slow down and enter into a liminal space
and listen deeply and notice what
exactly is happening and what's the
depth of what's happening because it may
actually be quite quite deep and it may
not be easy to know how to respond to it
well and the things that need to be
healed may be deep things that need to
take a lot of work to heal and if you
don't heal them you're not solving
anything if I can be making the problem
worse but if you do attend to it you get
a sense of what it is that needs to be
healed and you're continuing to maintain
that basis of conviviality and
strengthening it from the bottom up then
you're actually building something which
is actually becoming anti fragile to
injustice and justice is now something
that is almost like hysteresis in
exercise it's actually making you
stronger
as you're learning more and more about
how to practice this act of applied came
to the allottee
alright that's that well I love that but
I'm gonna push one step further which is
we know from history both recent and
deep that societies have ways to fail
that have to do with defectors Free
Riders predators and sociopaths right
these are infections of the body social
that if they're not dealt with the body
social will die any thoughts on how that
very rich and beautiful description of
justice can be applied to these more
specific and known failure modes of
social groups absolutely so there's a
couple of things to immediately start
with so remember that I hit a couple of
times on the necessity of starting from
the bottom from the ground and staying
in this place of conviviality in this
place of love and I mean it's like even
in the sense of Bushido in the way that
a true warrior encounters another
warrior like if it turns out at the end
of the day that we are in such a
conflict that I have to kill you or you
will kill me it is nonetheless the case
that it is always best that I am NOT
attached in hate or anger what I'm doing
that so what I can do is I can say let's
talk about moving you know in the
context of justice that's also talking
about the concept of right relay
so I've got my two year old and I've got
my five year old and the little boy is
having a tantrum and he's out of control
and he's swinging fists well right
relationship in this particular moment
to maintain the integrity of
conviviality means that I need to create
boundaries around him that he can't hurt
himself or others right that's not that
 complicated that's pretty simple
parenting and I need to do it from a
place in myself that I am the mountain
right and by the way this is not trivial
I myself encountered this exact problem
last night that I'm not getting drawn
into a reactive kind of conflict like
it's a two-year-old and he's
having a tantrum I need to come from a
deeply mature place recognize what's
going on and noticed that I'm whatever
I'm doing is in his interest I'm
actually supporting him as much as I am
protecting everybody else all right and
as long as I'm doing that in every step
so something along the lines of thinking
about it in the context of really just
two things one is what is right
relationship meaning what is the real
possibility of the highest relationship
that is truly available can actually be
realize not aspirationally not ideally
but really can be realized right now
with this person and always recognizing
that I'm intending to come from a place
where I am authentically endeavoring to
in that relationship support and further
that individual but in the context of
the larger conviviality right so the
example that I was using was the example
of again parenting where my two-year-old
is having a tantrum and you know with my
Tyrael does having a tantrum he poses a
potential threat to the physical space
that is in and so there's a big
difference between me kind of becoming
reactive getting angry and grabbing him
and kind of pulling him away and me
still being the mountain being anchored
in I am supporting his well-being in
creating boundaries that enable him to
not hurt himself and other people and
property right and kind of that's that
we can make those choices we can come
from that place and with wisdom and
caring and thoughtfulness recognize that
a person who is defecting may often in
fact be making choices that seem to make
a lot of sense in the short term or
because of a deep
lack of capacity or understanding that
don't actually further their personal
interests in the medium or long term if
we do our job in game B that should in
fact always be the case by the way and I
do very much believe that that is quite
possible and or they may nonetheless be
making choices because of some
characteristic of their interior that
just makes them you know
self-destructive
so the sociopath is is sort of even part
of the DSM diagnosis of the sociopath is
that they make self-destructive
high-risk choices and so if we're
looking at that that's a way that that's
a design or an approach that helps us
figure out how we solve those kinds of
problems from the inside out if that
makes any sense I think there's a lot
more work to be done there by the way I
would tell people that the failure modes
of a lot of attempts to build new social
operating systems have been around not
getting policing and justice right
either it becomes a dictatorship or it
becomes so non judge judgemental that
nobody bothers to take out the trash and
everybody leads yeah I think I think
there's a real weird like a weird
dichotomy and it doesn't make a lot of
sense to me because I've actually
learned this term discernment and I
think the term discernment is very
helpful here because this notion of
non-judgmental it's just raw straight-up
raw just a bad idea and I think you and
I even kind of talked about this back in
the old days like you you actually
supporters like wait isn't good judgment
of virtue absolutely I hate the word
non-judgmental I said goddamn it that's
what humans do we make judgments right
hey and the key is like if I just like
use this term discernment which is in
some sense just a different term but
what I'm saying is something like like
really just being aware with what's
actually happening like the reality you
know again if the guy's got a gun and
he's you know irrational then that's
what's happening and the way for me be
in relationship with that is very
constrained by the possibility space so
now I've found her to disarm him and I
put him in a context where whatever it
was like maybe he was on some sort of
kind of my altering chemicals that's
processed through his system well now we
have a possibility of maybe exploring
something else I could have a very
concrete like very real like it's not
it's not non-judgmental it's just like
reality based relationship with how
human beings work and where they come
from and what leads individuals to
certain circumstances and what's
possible now by the way what's not
possible now like it's it's not about
being I've used this actually in the
context of a conversation I was having
around something that I think is really
harming Millennials and Gen Z which is
an ideological bias towards empathy and
that's just wrong
right it's just brutally brutally wrong
because if I turn my empathy way out
what happens instantaneously is that I
am catastrophic ly overwhelmed by the
incomprehensible tragedy of every single
human life I can barely handle my own
life there's no way that I can handle
your life and you've got a pretty
 good life but if my F of T is
way up I'm just kind of like an open
vessel what I want is discernment which
is that I want to be able to really
without like filtering or without
projecting my own framework on you be
able to perceive you as this sort of
unique singular being that has all kinds
of stuff going on but only bring into
myself that which in in a deep sense is
a something I can actually be in
relationship with without blowing myself
up but also be is the right piece of
that big story that is furthering the
relationship that we're actually in so I
think there's actually a higher-order
notion here that needs to be brought to
bear that is neither steely-eyed
pragmatism in the in the totalitarian
sense or Pollyannish idealistic
non-judgmental ism that neither of those
are even vaguely reasonable and is this
just a whole other level of kind of like
mature relationship with real people in
real context would be sort of like the
bizarre ly simple answer to that problem
in the game be way great I'm going to
skip a bunch of others I'm gonna go to
the one I have come to believe is right
up there with conviviality as the secret
to making game B work but it has some
interesting risk aspects to it it's
coherence hmm well you know first of all
we recognize that even as you're saying
it that's a word that has a lot of many
people use that word to mean many things
and so the way that I use it and in John
for baekje and I were just actually
talking about this exact issue just
before this call is something along the
lines of
the way that distinct parts can generate
a synergistic relationship which is to
say create an emergent hole that is
greater than the sum of the parts that
has a very specific characteristic which
is that this larger hole simultaneously
is autonomy enhancing for the part and
therefore and that therefore is crucial
increases the probability and the
intensity of the synergy that creates
the emergent hole and so this is a I'm
almost like just defining coherence from
a design perspective that there's many
many different ways of parts coming
together to form holes and I'm saying
I'm using two coherence to describe this
exact like slice and we see this
happening like the things that matter in
the world are coherent in that fashion
and the more you were able to be cohere
in that fashion the more well-being and
the way that I described it earlier
emerges for the parts and the whole I
like that a lot actually it helps
clarify what you're getting at because
when I hear the word coherence I start
to think a little bit like a cult where
everybody believes the same thing but
when you say your kind of coherence
should also be trying to maximize
people's autonomy then you actually have
a very interesting design problem to
make both of those thing of both you
know real coherence to get things done
but also to try to maximize or at least
do a good job with autonomy you have a
very interesting and difficult design
problem and an approach I've called
coherent pluralism that you have to find
out where should there be agreement and
where should there be liberty and
getting that design space right it's
gonna be tricky yeah it's tricky but
what's interesting is that it looks like
human beings and I think this is
something that Breton and we actually
talked about with Brett back in the day
this may be the thing that human beings
are like what makes us what we are that
the the capacity for think of it think
about it like working backwards let's
say you've developed that an organism
has emerged and this organism has the
capacity to be coherent in the way that
I'm describing it
one of the things that falls out of that
is this the capacity for division of
labor becomes a thing because now I can
have people individuals who are
specialized meaning they actually have
quite distinct perspectives and
capacities in life and it's important to
recognize that right if I've become a
doctor and you've become a farmer the
specialization in these particular
skills implies for sure also distinct
epistemologies and distinct habits of
mind and how we just relate to life
because just that's implicit in in the
becoming skillful well one of the things
that we know of course is that is
distinctness in that sense oftentimes
leads to out grooving and we see this
happening willy-nilly in our current
barment that unique distinct
perspectives oftentimes just can't find
ways to agree and so they fall apart
well but if as a species you happen to
have figured out how to maintain the
kind of coherence that I'm talking about
then you get this massive massive up
regulation huge superpower which is that
you can support enormous specialization
and division of labor while maintaining
the integrity of the whole and that will
out-compete anything that can't do that
and I think that's what that's the thing
I clean I think Brett really nailed it
when he said that that may in fact be
precisely what we are about we've got
that but that's our one of our
fundamental codes like in our bodies is
a skillfulness and being able to do that
and then we're kind of back to the
problem on the whiteboard in Stanton
which is our biological code helps us do
that kind of coherence at the Dunbar
level and for us to pop through the game
be we need to figure out how to do that
at a much larger level well now you just
hit my last bullet point on this section
which is all the above have to be
engineered to work at the Dunbar number
and and above well above and for those
of you in the audience who don't know
what the Dunbar number is Robin Dunbar a
I think he's an anthropologist studied
human three modern societies and
concluded that with remarkable
regularity around the world free
agricultural groups of hunter-gatherers
and other sorts of folks tended to have
populations of no more
150 before they fissioned and his theory
was the human cognitive architecture was
able to do the social network math on a
face-to-face community of 150 and no
more and of course we've had to build
all kinds of artificial structures to
get us way beyond 150 but one of the big
challenges of game B is to get all these
things we just talked about to work at
very much larger groups than 150 so why
don't you talk about massively exceeding
the Dunbar number and yet nonetheless
making these good things happen yeah so
here we have like here's the phrase that
they the hard problem of consciousness
this is the hard problem of game bei and
you know we came across this problem
seven years ago we drew it wrote it down
we looked at it with Banger head on it
you know it definitely overmatched our
capacity back then and I can say for
sure we still haven't got a even a
vaguely good approach and how to solve a
problem though really smart people say
like forests are working on it
diligently so here's something that the
that has come to me a lot on how how the
the solution to this problem may in fact
be let's call it discoverable and it has
to do with gluing together some of the
things we've talked about and most
notably it has to do with gluing
together this idea of the accelerating
change the adjacent possible and the the
characteristics of what is a kind of
organism in this case a distributed
cognition group of people that is able
to maintain its continuity and what's
the right it's like the visual image I
have it's like being in the middle of
the river like in the in the sweet spot
on a wave being able to actually find
where the energy of the the most rapid
coherent location on the wave of the
adjacent possible is located and so the
the proposition that I'm making is there
may be in fact be something like an
attractor in reality itself that is the
relationship between the curve the
accelerating curve of the adjacent
possible the the way that a distributed
mission is constructed such that it can
simultaneously most fully move through
or accelerate with that accelerating
curve while also not falling apart so I
so come a visual image of this like a
series of soap bubbles in a current and
there's a like a flow around the outside
of a spot that has a stability to it and
those bubbles that migrate to the
outside just get pulled out in the flow
those bubbles that stay on the inside
stay in the sweet spot it's something
like that I mean that is obviously I'm
not even sure that I just spoke to be
perfectly frank like I was definitely
I'm trying to stitch hard stuff together
so invoke rule Omega but but the
proposition is there's something about
this notion that we're actually looking
at reality where we're working with
reality here we are not the ones who are
designing this it's more like we're
discovering it and at the same time that
we are designing it and there's
something about the way that the
intrinsic dynamic certain intrinsic
relationships of how distributed
cognition comes together and is able to
maintain an integrity in itself which if
it reduces its integrity it slows down
but it actually becomes less and less
effective that is the answer to the to
the question of scaling coherent
collective intelligence yeah it strikes
me using complexity speak that the
problem here is to grow an emergence
right and we one of the things about
emergence is we don't know what it is
till it emerges which makes it damn
tricky so we're in a kind of a
chicken-and-egg problem we know that
there in the words you gave are actually
evocative they weren't descriptive but
they were evocative so they weren't
entirely nonsense even at times it may
seem like it but they're evocative of
what this emergence might be that
provides us the ability to do long span
coherent problem-solving using much
larger groups of people than than 150
yeah yeah and so we have to experiment
it seems to mean try things and and make
guesses about what what might drive this
emergence but we won't know
what it is until it gets here right
exactly and there's something about like
metal learning which is the our ability
to experiment extremely effectively that
I think is key you'll have noticed for
example that like I've had this recent
set of conversations with this guy named
guy sing stock and he has built a lot of
skillfulness in a particular psycho
technology called circling and one of
the things that happens in circling is
you build a lot of sensitivity to what's
happening right now so he's actually
aware of like what's going on at the
level of like we're we're we're mammals
interacting and at the level of like
subconscious assumptions that were
bringing in and because he has that
skillfulness he can point or move or
shift the conversation in a place that's
actually able to achieve a higher level
of quality and more we're learning more
things faster and there's a recursion
there which is that knowing that I could
say okay well let me see if I can find a
way to experiment by bringing guy into a
conversation this is gonna happen action
a couple of weeks me guy John Johnny V
and another guy Chris who I don't know
are gonna have a conversation with the
four of us and we're gonna notice is
there something about this combination
of skills that we're bringing that
actually generates a more potent
conversation are we actually creating a
meta learning community are we learning
faster about how to go about learning
and that's a powerful thing right
because if you if you're actually
working at the level of meta learning
then every step that you take actually
gets to work on the on the vector of
acceleration instead of on the vector of
velocity and that's how you how you get
places fast so there's something about
that right there's something about being
able to have lots of basics like I was a
lot of the things that I spent a lot of
time describing is look if you haven't
built your sovereign two to a certain
level you're very unlikely to be able to
participate so this whole notion of like
the pre B there's a lot of basic stuff
that we can we can now point to and say
look in order to be able to participate
in a community of meta learning here's a
bunch of pre work that you have to get
in place because these are seem quite
likely to be minimum requirements and
and then you have the the higher level
approach of okay well we're doing
community of meta learning
and meta learning is about not just
experimenting but actually using the
output of experiments to improve the
experimental protocol so you're getting
better and better and better at actually
orienting and designing your experiments
and you're getting an acceleration on
your learning instead of just a velocity
of learning I like that's a way to get
beyond the maybe get beyond a
hopeful way to get beyond the
chicken-and-egg problem
all right let's switch to the next topic
we don't have about ten minutes here so
we won't be able to get into it very
deeply but the idea is we have this pre
B pre game B world pre B and we just
talked about great depth and it's where
we are today it's what we all who are
interested in game B should be working
on some or all these things actually not
nobody can work on all of them but you
know find some of them work on them but
they'll become a time at some point in
the future where some group of people
think that we've mastered enough of this
and minimally enough of this to try to
create the first I think what you called
hole an attempt to you know to create a
integrated way of game B life that's I
think about this more mechanically I
think we probably mix and match piece
parts and wrap the piece parts in some
form of integrated operating system and
give it a world may not succeed but it
will be the first attempt to build a
coherent whole and by no means will it
be complete on day one right if we spun
up a proto game B or proto B as I'm
calling it we're gonna be very likely to
be very dependent on things from game a
things like computer chips hospitals
maybe public schools I hope not hoping
to do a better job than that it'll be a
number of things that that we may well
still be dependent on and this is the
point that you made from the very
beginning of the game B story we will
also in proto be days be consciously and
hopefully talented at parasitizing game
a essentially pulling energy out of game
a to help build game B in fact the
earliest proto B's may well be dependent
on getting good at that parasitism right
so does that seem reasonable to you this
idea of a proto B which is a mix and
match plus an attempt at an integrated
operating system that's not complete but
it's nonetheless whole yeah I think I
think the answer is yes and it's funny
because in some sense like remember I
keep bringing up this point there are
already playing game b-but maybe a lower
level my family which is a Vanessa
Eloise and I are a proto B in a very low
level because we're doing parenting from
a game B perspective which implies were
also doing education from a game B
perspective we take into account
conviviality from a game B perspective
says we're kind of looking at all the
pieces and trying really hard to do them
recognizing that almost all of our
actual lives are spent in the context of
game a so there's like this really
interesting thing like it's a what's a
term like in Co hate or possibility not
yet actuality but nonetheless something
there and the reason why I wanted to
bring that up is that I sense the the
the popping or emergence of proto B will
have a look like almost maybe even a
little bit of a level of surprise on the
part of the people who are involved like
less about we're all gonna all at once
like this 500 people gonna gather
together and try and do something but
rather a bunch of people have actually
been been actually living more and more
and learning better and better how to do
more game B living and also they
discovered that certain pieces have
dropped at pop Wow something really has
changed like suddenly there are more
people showing up and it's working or
big pieces of what we had previously
really had to be dependent on game a has
just dropped away or this group over
here at a massive insight of how to
solve for some particular problem and as
soon as we were able to share that
insight with each other it shifted
something for us and now we're holding a
bunch of capacity like that kind of a
thing I feel like that's how it will
show up
the next piece is really really really
want to distinguish this from every
intentional community that has ever
existed as far as I can tell and and a
big piece of it is this this thing that
we've I've been kind of hammering on
which is if we do game B right the thing
that game B can do really well then the
game we can do much much better than
game a happens to be at the absolute
cutting edge of generative capacity in
game a well most of the time like
oftentimes so for example you know I
remember watching a documentary around a
pretty well-established intentional
community that was established in the
60s or 70s down in Central America and
one of the problems that they had was
that of course for a lot of the time
they had to import resources from what
we would call game a and to do that they
had to get money and to do that they had
to sell stuff but what could they make
well they were making I don't know like
I know coconut furniture or like
hand-woven clothes or some artisanal
crap like that and that's very very weak
like there's no love of strength in that
relationship there they're operating at
the lowest level of game a which means
that they're extremely low resilience to
any change in the context what we're
doing in game B you know the capacity
for people to you know the highest
quality members the creative class the
software developers and designers and
scientists and even people who are
markers and you know fill in the blank
the people who actually have very very
high level capacity actually is the
generator function of almost all of the
current killer economic innovations in
game a if they choose to step into game
be one of the things that shows up is an
increase in their capacity for creative
collaboration so it's entirely feasible
and in fact I would propose more likely
than not that the next wave of highly
disruptive economic innovations that
would show up in game a will actually be
coming out of game B experiments game
proto game B experiments which would
just be like this new form of say a
startup and the blockchain stuff was
almost there like some of the blockchain
stuff you could feel like almost moving
in that direction that this notion of
widely distributed even in many ways
like
disorganized like not part of corporate
structures and getting really really
counted smart people to say it I'm
just gonna stop working at Microsoft and
work on this and move the ball forward
if you could just move that forward that
whole notion that one or two steps and
say wow if I could get the seven people
who have the best insight on on AI to
actually enter into a truly sovereign
creative collaboration you know maybe I
could get a 3x improvement in their
capacity which would be a decisive
strategic advantage against all the
other guys and I can do something which
would then have massively asymmetric
competitive advantage in game a which
are yours to a whole lot more money than
selling coconut furniture and hand-woven
clothes so that's the thing to be
thinking about I like it a lot because
it's a good you know it's to what I was
describing as smart and effective and
intentional parasitism of game a right
will essentially create things that
allow us to pull energy out of game a to
build more game B to pull more energy
out of game a and if I do that right and
if the R is greater than one
eventually game B gets bigger than game
a however I'm gonna push back a little
bit or at least put a pruning I'm gonna
propose a pruning role let me get your
reaction to this you talked about the
distributed decentralized autonomous
organizations you didn't name them but
that's what we were I think alluding to
from the blockchain world and I'm gonna
suggest that if conviviality is central
to game B that provides a very hard
pruning rule which is that a proto B has
to be geographically anchored as a
face-to-face community which constrains
the possibility space for the early
proto B's I think you're you're pretty
you're quite likely right but not
necessarily completely right so I think
there's this at least two variations on
that theme that I've seen I would say
for sure embodied relationship is
central so there's very little wiggle
room on that so no anchored physical
communities living together 24/7 is is
going to be the lifeblood of this thing
but I noticed at least two other things
that definitely seem to work one is
episodic
physical relationship so there's just a
huge difference from me collaborating
with a and a digital avatar out in the
world that I've never met
and spending a week with somebody an
embodied space and then maintaining the
relationship through through virtual
yeah there's that difference is a real
difference and if I if I think about
that as in terms of a flow like maybe
once a quarter or twice a year or once a
month being in physical proximity and
building the strong bonds and the deeper
sense of relationality and
meaningfulness and then doing other work
at a virtual level there may be
something there where you can actually
maintain continuity of coherence while
still getting the the advantage of a
much wider footprint of what's possible
now and that's once that's one piece I
have reason to believe that's true like
I've definitely noticed that for example
you and I have not met in person now for
years but because we really did do a lot
of work in person our virtual
relationship is just a lot stronger and
faster and then the other one is the
ability to engage in collaboration
between groups that are themselves
anchoring right so there's this this
mutual synergy the game be groups have
at least in principle a much higher
level to engage in distributed
collaboration so it may be the case that
it's actually you know Group one is in
either the Santa Cruz forest and Group
two is in southern France and both
groups are like really rich convivial
communities that are their own thing and
the groups are are collaborating largely
virtually but they're at nonetheless
able to be synergistic with each other
and because they're able to be
synergistic with each other
there's something about the velocity of
innovation that is actually quite
generative so that's a third piece to
add to the equation so just to kind of
make the story richer yeah that was my
exact next point that you know I would
expect there to be multiple per Toby's
and each one will be different initially
they'll have different selections
amongst the piece parts that they
incorporate and they'll even choose
different versions of the piece parts
that they do incorporate and that if
they're if there really is a holistic
game be that they can interact at long
range via online tourism and what I
would call refugees right people who
let's say they're in the South of France
game be convivial community but they
find that it doesn't really
isn't really right for them personally
but from what they've heard the Santa
Cruz one sounds more like to their taste
so they say well like I'm gonna leave
southern France and move to the Santa
Cruz community and so this way that of
interactions will happen at all these
levels simultaneously and that together
this cloud of proto bees is what will
take game B forward to the next level
and some of the perot bees will fail in
fact I hope some of them do right
evolution moves forward by failure yeah
and I think you it's funny because we
can think about almost like meta failure
because we're now we're talking about
groups so the proto B fails but the
individuals involved actually carry in
themselves the deep learning that you
can only really get when something
you're trying really hard fails and then
they bring that which would now be
called wisdom they can bring that back
out now by the way think about that
that's fun distinction as I was thinking
about it there's there's wisdom in this
trauma and it's crucial but as these
things fail they fail in the direction
of wisdom and not in the direction of
trauma so we have to actually give
ourselves permission to fail even though
we're also very committed I'm making it
work
very much like the adventure concept of
honorable failures right yeah honorable
failure exactly fail for the right
reason not the wrong reason the reason
it you know there was some just
something you couldn't have seen from
where you started don't fail because you
had a toxic culture and we're riven with
in fighting right and then and then
recognize that this makes a lot of sense
when you're part of a larger whole like
honorable failure and venture has this
really weird thing where clearly the
team failed and there's very little renu
marae ssin that they get from the larger
hole but in the context of gain be you
know if you're Pro Toby fails but it
furthers the larger progress of the
larger game be effort there is something
very real about the degree to which that
will flow back to you like certainly if
the story I'm telling us correct to the
degree to which you've furthered the
possibility of game B happening at all
and therefore a void in the katashi of
game a you know hallelujah and you
benefit from that as much as everybody
else but even more to the very nature of
game B there's something about the sorry
I just realize we see this adventure all
the time like it's so it's remember like
this looking value story up I'd always
rather hire somebody who's already been
part of two failed startups because
there's things that they've learned
absolutely same kind of idea like if
you've actually been through two proto
B's that have failed but they've
honorably failed and you've grown in
wisdom I kind of really want you to be
part of my proto because they'll
likelihood that you're gonna be bringing
some experience to this is pretty hot
yeah exactly
well I think that's probably as much as
we have time for today we covered some
amazing ground I think this will help
people who will keep asking the question
well what exactly is game B it doesn't
answer that question but I believe it to
put a lot of meat on those bones my my
thing that I just put out there for for
anybody who feels unsatisfied with the
conversation and either in terms of the
scope or the quality is that's probably
a pretty reasonable assessment but just
an invitation to recognize that if you
look at the science of anything let's
just go with lasers you know the the
underlying deep physics that gave rise
to the laser I think was 1919 and the
very specific physics that actually
describe the specific companion what it
was required to be a laser was I think
1953 which was a long time and then the
actual physical implementation of a real
live laser wasn't for another like seven
to ten years so and that was with
massively funded research industrial
labs like you know Bell Labs working on
this kind of a project and it's a very
narrow project right so that was a good
sense of the the challenge in the scope
of that kind of a deal and what we're
trying to do is a whole lot harder and
with a whole lot less resource so yes
you were quite right in the however long
we just spent on this conversation we
barely scratched the surface of even a
very small number of these deep things
probably didn't do a very good job on
any of them and probably had a lot of
cringe-worthy efforts even the ones we
did it mediocre job at nonetheless
hopefully we move the game forward at
least a little bit and the next one can
be better yeah I think that's a perfect
way to describe it and we'll have to
have you back another month or two and
take the conversation further alright
doc you later man
production services and audio editing by
Jared Jane's consulting music by