hello and welcome back this is a very
special interview for me with Nora
Bateson and I'll set some context for
that in a moment after some housekeeping
so a few things so as I've mentioned
before the circling Institute my company
we've moved all of our courses for now
online and that's working out really
well that is working out so well that
we've decided to create and put on the
main course that we do which is called
the art of circling which is a training
in becoming a practitioner full
practitioner in learning how to
facilitate and lead circles and in my
experience what it takes to learn to
lead circles is also what it takes to be
deeply even and what it takes to be
deeply and as far as I can tell is
getting is intimately in relationship
with the ontological mystery at the
center of everything so it's a course in
that it's quite a good description I
guess so we're gonna be doing one online
we've just decided that so go ahead and
click the link if you're interested in
that email us at the circling Institute
website websites below also I do
individual coaching one-on-one if you're
interested in that email me I mean we
can talk about what that entails and how
much it costs and I will that stop so
okay so this conversation this one's a
really special one for me because it's
linked to somebody somebody's work
Noora Noora Bateson's father I'm Gregory
Bateson who's been deeply deeply
influential influential for me in my own
my own work and circling and training
and and thinking at a very deep level
for a long time and I first got in
contact with Nora's work through a
a biographical movie that she made of
her father which I thought was really
good and she's since written books and
she's continued her own work in her own
way in a beautiful way and as I I would
say is a furthering and an
exemplification of what's her father
really her father and his father really
courageously exemplified themselves and
Nora is a unique human deeply well
you'll see so I want to just encourage
you to stuck like I didn't just enjoy
enjoy the conversation I think what she
has to say is is unique and paradoxical
in the sense that because it really to
me like you think what Noir is getting
at is is she's she's saying mean she's
basically saying to really really really
really really understand is to
be in relationship with how deeply being
human is contextual being in a world is
about context layers and nested layers
of context and intend to know that to
get to know that is to learn how to see
and to learn how to see is to realize
that there's so much that we don't see
and that humility can evoke a response
that's one of deep respect and integrity
and to me Nora really exemplifies that
and evokes that and just listening to
her um so I I really really enjoyed her
and and and look forward to having more
conversations with her so with great
honor and respect and delight here's our
conversation with Nora Bateson
thank you there we are
we are officially recording welcome Nora
hi it's great to be here it's good to
see you
it's really good to see you I mean one
of the things I've I've appreciated you
know since I've been a face on the
internet and and listening to all these
different conversations that are
happening is you when you when I've seen
you you strut you strike a chord of
humanity there's a humanists about you
and a warmth that I really really
appreciate and I think one of the things
we were joking about right when we were
messaging originally right is I think we
share a similar pet peeve about about
this sense of I heard you talk about
this in one of your interviews about
this sense of
how like what our perspective is so
small
okay we're like a little insect on a
huge tree trying to make our way through
it and it seems to me that your response
to that is not one of um well you say
trying to figure out what the problem is
and solving it but your response seems
to be more heartfelt and poetic which
I've really appreciated a lot that's
good to hear because I think a lot of
people don't understand it or that it's
perceived as being not practical or that
it doesn't lead to action yeah and I
don't agree with that at all I can't
actually think of anything that that has
more action in it well right because
it's it's not
it's not just that there's action it's
the the perception and the tonality the
the this the sensibility the the basis
of of what's behind the action yeah
right that that guides and changes
everything even the most practical
little things you know you can like okay
you know like I've never done this but I
have had friends who have studied the
art of tea and the the you could just
like throw a teabag in a cup and you
could pour hot water in it you could
have tea and it would be for all intents
and purposes it's a cup of tea yeah
right but then there's another way of
making a cup of tea that has all kinds
of other careful messes in it attendings
aesthetics caring's wool and and mostly
its attention to all those processes and
it's it's still a cup of tea yeah but
it's not a cup it's not the same it's
just not the same thing
so it's this is where I find that I have
a big a big piece of work to do around
how to communicate that so that it isn't
so wildly out of sync with people who
actually do care and are paying
attention and are positioned into very
linear strategic courses of action that
are are fueled by a urgency and all that
urgency is real and all those actions
are real and yet there's something about
the way that those actions are are
taking
that has a whole field of meta messaging
in it that say that a lot of other stuff
doesn't matter culture doesn't matter
families don't matter things that things
that could that context doesn't matter
is that people yeah yeah and and that
context it's right more than one doesn't
matter because what we have to do is
this piece of work right here and we
have to do it today we've got to get
organized we've got to get it happening
and
there is something desperately vitally
critically important about what what's
underneath that action besides just
passion which can be blind to so many
other positionings and points of view
and it's not that I'm advocating this
sort of endless navel-gazing what about
the context of the next larger universe
thing it's really it's really that just
deep attention that can reach around and
below and beyond and looking at lots of
things simultaneously and holding that
and responding yeah
well as he described it as you described
it yeah it's attending right it's when
it want to basically what I'm hearing is
caring right to the the layers the the
complex layers of relation that's
nestled in encode nest and everything
and it as noticing you were moving your
hands at the same time and I think
that's the the sense I get when you're
talking about action right is I don't
get it I don't get a sense I don't get a
sense of a bunch of points that you
connect I get a different sense of or
about a network of relations a unfolding
of relations and that and that you're
moving your hands in order to do that
you are in fact acting right you are
taking action right right yeah so I can
especially in these moments of this
pandemic and the pandemic response and
looking for causation imagining futures
trying to develop new treatments trying
to analyze this isolation process
[Music]
there's there's a real I think
call to deepen all of those processes
and you know it's not just about oh you
know I'm at home making new things or
you know this person is to blame or this
part of the system is to blame or we
have to envision and project some new
vision onto the future you know all of
those processes are not really in the
dirt it's like those are sort of if
you're thinking about vegetables those
would be vegetables at the supermarket
on display right but they're not the
soil that actually produces the life and
the nourishment that comes out of those
vegetables and and so I I guess that's
the piece for me where I am okay with a
little bit slower thinking a little bit
slower sensing into well into something
that spans from something that's very
intimate yeah into a much more wider and
even global set of contexts but I don't
want to get all excited about the global
and forget about the the details of
intimate experience and I don't want to
get my Opik and the intimate experience
and forget about the global consequences
either one of those becomes some kind of
[Music]
strange blind
reductionism whatever you want to call
it but it's um I was joking with a
friend of mine the other day and we saw
this atom well but we'll the pandemic be
this new way of raising consciousness
and I you know just found myself saying
I think we'll probably be raising
consciousness right about the time we
stop trying to raise consciousness right
about the time we stop talking about it
it'll be happening and it's just it's
that thing you know this is not about
solving a problem it's about who who you
are and how you respond to every aspect
of your life as I'm listening to you
it's interesting I'm feeling more
relaxed because I think I'm following
kind of to follow I was noticing that as
my listening was kind of following your
sensibility there is a sense in which I
feel as I look out I drop back right
there's this coal and I think it's I
hear that and but I actually have to do
it in order to understand you this sense
of what's happening this these both
these
what's going on in more of a sense of a
legged resting back into the background
he said context mm-hmm um I know that
work with working with people for me and
with groups and you know to get it good
to get to know a person it's so
interesting it's like don't really see
somebody it there's is not to see them
as a content right an object right or
something it's to really get somebody's
to get the layers of history that inform
how whatever it is that they're paying
attention to including the way that
they're responding is responding to you
in that moment is so wedded with so much
intelligibility right that that person
can't even know it it in an explicit way
and I I sense that right as you're
talking about like our time so what
we're talking about in a certain sense
is that there is this into India and
I've noticed to be intimate with
somebody to really be intimate is a kind
of a sinking like a sinking in like a
broadening of my vision right an open an
openness to be affected to be impacted
but just love layers and layers of
context and I think this is one of the
things about your work and is like I was
talking about before we started
recording you know my my introduction to
you is was through your dad Gregory
Bateson and I've been
I I'm like Fassett I've just been always
like fascinated with this thinking right
everything in in the deep beyond like he
is like so beyond any category you know
I I agree completely and I just love his
work yeah you know what a relief that is
there was no way out right so yeah but I
just you know and especially as time
goes on I I'm so appreciative of the
incredible bravery and you know he got a
lot of it from his dad
Oh Seymour so they they both were
willing to basically stand in the storm
to keep the door open for the
interdependencies of life to not be
defined or measured or reduced or
overlooked or limited or concluded yeah
and I mean that's not easy right it's
not easy it's it's a hundred years ago
more than a hundred years ago a hundred
and thirty five forty years ago since
William Bateson was doing this yeah and
all of the all of the Momentum's
of the culture of the sort of Western
world its premise on economies and so on
and so forth hierarchies and governance
and democracies and all of the
Momentum's drive a different kind of
rationale and logic toward a different
kind of practicality and if there's one
thing that I can say that in this moment
is very very clear is that those
rationales and those logics were
actually propelling societies and
cultures into a very vulnerable
destructive exploitative extractive mess
and that was always true it's been true
I mean William was talking about it
before the turn of the century well
right and then Gregory came along and he
explored all these interdependencies
from many different directions from a
direction of exploring culture and and
you know blind spots and the way we see
or don't see what is what's in the
matrix that you can't see or working
with information what is information or
working with questions around the mind
you know what what what does a human
being
know how do you know who are how do you
know who you are
yeah these kind of questions and ecology
and how ecology was politics yeah and
the sacred even who and so it took a lot
of courage to hold all those things open
in the midst of being a scientist and
being at least tangentially incorporated
into the realm of academia which is not
known for its wide yeah
contextual thinking yeah so it was just
so grave and and also the care if you
look at the way that my dad phrases
things in his work yeah there's
every sentence is like each word is put
there to keep away the possibility of
ossifying and concretizing things that
shouldn't be ossified and concretize oh
and it's like it's like it's concrete
proof there's things that are waterproof
and then the CSIs they're concrete proof
and his work is concrete proof all right
and it's it's not that it doesn't land
on the ground it's very much yeah it is
the ground yeah yeah but um but I
appreciate that all the time because you
know it's difficult to write things
without getting sucked into jargon izing
that becomes about being practical or
offering deliverables or defining or you
know feeding into the exact system
that's actually negating the vitality
that is necessary yeah totally I just
thought it's it for me reading reading
your dad it was almost impossible to
read your dad without having a
perceptual shift mm-hmm
like like there was this kind of quality
of Aaron
remember reading his ecology I think
it's a ecology of mind book which I've
read about 20 times this experience of -
there's a there's a way that he writes
and he puts things that it in you want
to understand it to really understand it
you get done trying to understand what
he's saying you don't know if he caught
quite understand it but then you look at
the tree and the sky and the
relationship between the two right and
then there's this experience of of
multiple levels happening in the
learning and learning him and I always
got that sense that he was that he was
teaching things at multiple levels of
context such that he yeah oh absolutely
and that's the thing is that it's it's
when you when there's a shift in the in
the those multiple of layers levels
realms whatever they are of context it
changes everything so it's you know this
like appetite to change make change or
produce change or to somehow generate
change that even that is actually it's
kind of a I don't want to say the wrong
level but it's at a level that is still
mechanistically and implied enough to
generate and to start to lean into the
same kind of thinking that got us into
this mess yes right and so it's not
really about change making
about every moment of your life being
filled with another kind of integrity
yeah yeah and and yes yes and the in the
integrity
now when you say integrity so I often
times when I hear people talk about
integrity right there's this kind of its
kind of me it's like my everything kind
of clenches and there's a thing that
kind of I'm gonna be Integris but when
you say integrity I get this sense of
like an integrity like a deepening what
why do I get that sense like what you
mean something by integrity that that is
not provoking a response of that word
that normally would be sated me what is
that sense of integrity well it's not
really about following the rules or
following a script right it's about
actually recognizing that in response to
any complex system like your own
identity like your marriage or your your
partnership like your relationship to
your kids or your relationship to the
world in any complex relationship that
there is you know what we were talking
about before this kind of attention and
that's a really rigorous attention yeah
it's not a lazy attention yeah it's not
an easy methodology it's not a technique
it's not a five easy steps
it's a look out for the blind spots use
every sense you've got all the time go
in go out go up go down go around keep
turning and in that process end oh yeah
yeah there's a way of being
in something in the way that it's
integrating right so integrity has
something to do with integrating being
in the integrity with something in a way
that's integrating this I keep noticing
your gesturing it's really is really uh
evil evoking of what you're talking
about this sense of integrity
it's kind of coming deepening and coming
out is somehow the same movement or
connected very deeply it was a long time
when I was working with sort of
complexity and systems thinking Stefan I
would find that there were some people
who were really good at it and some
people who it just seemed to just remain
elusive they could learn all the vocab
and they could know all the authors and
they could be you know very versed in
the theory but somehow the the thing
just got out of there it just wouldn't
land in their bones and one of the
things that I started to notice was that
it was maybe a majority of the people
for whom that sort of thinking was was
feasible were people who had kind of
been through the dark night well they've
been through something where they had to
really go where they've never been
before yeah where everything counted and
they had no idea who they were gonna be
or how they were gonna get through it
but they made it through mm-hmm and that
requires that a kind of attention yeah
being and this is one of those moments
at a giant scale at a personal at a
personal level this is one of those
moments where we don't no one really
knows about what's gonna happen in three
weeks no one really knows where this is
going or what changes
have already happened what what what's
already what's already gone from that
thing we used to know as normal yeah
right so this is one of those moments
where they're there the thing is once
you've been through that dark night you
have a sense that if the dark night
comes again that you might not know what
to do but you will figure it out you
will pay attention and you will you know
go carefully and you will figure it out
yeah and that's what I mean by integrity
oh is that that kind of attention that
allows you to figure it out when there
is no script and there's no nobody knows
and there's lives on the line and the
relationships between generations
between futures between life and death
are there and you know honestly those
things are there from breakfast till yes
bedtime all day every day yes things you
say to your children yes things you say
to your partner the things you say to
yourself yeah right so it's as banal as
lunchtime and it's as profound as global
Oh global survival totally seems to me
that what's happening now I
I mean first of all like being an aunt
on elephants I feel like I'm just just
finding out that it's not even an
elephant that I didn't know I was on you
know there is a sense of there's a sense
of right sized nests about
about how much I don't know right but
there's a when I think about
happening it straight strikes me is is
this is kind of more revealing a crisis
we've been in and I really heard it when
you said you know work that's that's
actually true this quality of sensing
it's all it's all here it'll take all of
our faculties to really to be with right
and when he said and actually it's all
here every day and the way that you eat
your cereal and your relationship with
your kids however it seems it seems to
me that there's that the correct the
crisis that this could be reveal
revealing seems like it's gonna expose I
mean the most II you know one of the
most obvious places to look is like the
financial system right of just it's
gonna expose to what degree we've been
on a house of cards right that like our
systems that are taking from other
systems and not accounting for them over
stacked up for a long enough period of
time where we have people and
generations that have like don't even
perceive right what's underneath them
[Music]
and so this is really good I'm my my
attention is awake to like we really
haven't gone through something like this
I heard somebody say it's like he thinks
it's been since like World War two that
we've had a at a very deep level have
experienced a real shake where we've had
to make some real decisions about some
things
and this seems to be a particular time
in in my view the particular time of
a period of forgetfulness with the age
of technology and screens and this kind
of sense where there's a sensibility
I've noticed with with the current
generation you know you and I are like I
think the last generation that can have
a memory before the internet like were
the last ones I think right maybe this
is a really interesting thing to think
about right because it does seem to me
that there's a you know one of the
things I think probably one of the most
profound things I think I heard your dad
say that I've been I've thought about
for her a long time which is he says you
know and I think he was it was one of
his points was he he was trying to
articulate our attitude towards the
earth you know and he's basically saying
like look it's not that were a bunch of
bad people right that our are doing bad
things to the earth he's like no it's
it's it's it's that we don't see right
the complex of relations the the
delicacy of those relations of the deep
integrity that makes up the earth and
because we can't see them we can't
relate to them and what I liked about
what he said about that is that it
implies that like no react in
relationship to what we can see right
and because we can't see all of the
network's right of of congruence that
make up nature right we can't respond to
them we can't act on them and then I
mean I don't think we're ever gonna see
all of them right so I I guess what I
love about that statement is the
generosity in it yeah right but I I also
just want to say that there's something
about the humility yeah that's of of
recognizing okay there are things I
can't
see here and it doesn't mean they're not
there yeah dad I hear in that just say
so even in just what you just said I
like there's a sensibility there I want
to I want to circle around because I
think it's really important did I get
from you right which is even right there
you're like as I was talking about that
you're like no it's not it's not like
first of all we're not never gonna see
all of them right
but there's what I'm what I'm what I'm
hearing in that is is basically this
this somehow understanding our size
right is seeing right like the
relationship between humility and seeing
I think is something that I hear you in
a lot of your conversations and even in
just that little moment there I see you
responding to a lot right of like this
connection between oh there's something
about humility that allows me to see
more clearly right and if there's
something paradoxical about that too
because it's on one level of your saying
look like you could barely even make up
you know you can't even explain how you
put put your shoes on in the morning
right and all the relations around that
in fact you'll never be able to see to
exhaust the mystery however I get this
sense that you're you're sharing with me
how to actually see in this connection
with humility I just it just seems to me
that that's that's something I get from
you when I when I hear when I hear you a
lot and also even in just what I would
imagine some of your your um your pet
peeves with some of the conversations
yeah I think that's absolutely true and
there's another piece to that that is
[Music]
confusing and it's
fusion that comes from this kind of the
tension between the
that everything you do is in action even
the things you don't do right and the
way in which those actions are are
brought into the world through you
whatever that means
I don't really know how to put that but
somehow we do stuff like whatever that
stuff is we do does it come from culture
does it come from like what I don't know
where is that whole mess that that
somehow brought us together it's kind of
reminds me of that Slumdog Millionaire
movie you know that like how did we get
here wow there's a lot of stories there
a lot of stochastic process so but the
thing is that that with with so little
at our actual fingertips that our is
actually ours to know it becomes really
tricky to deal with this idea of being
purposes yeah and and purposiveness
is something that is held in great
esteem you have to have purpose and you
have to have intent and there's a hole
there and my father talked about this
and it's one of them more difficult
pieces of his around conscious purpose
and how do you know you know what's the
right thing to do when if you look at
what you know you know that you don't
know very much yes so you know being
that that
I've to be purposive is always going to
be at the very least
ill-informed the conviction with which
purposive industriousness intent you
know this kind of cast a vision manifest
it there's there's there's something
inherently non complex about that yeah
right so but but I want to be very clear
that what I am NOT saying is that
inaction is the way to go because
there's no such thing as inaction even
in action and is in action yeah right
that person you don't stick up for that
thing you didn't say that moment you
didn't say I love you that you know that
all of those things have just as many
consequences as taking actions oh but
what are the ways in which you might
tread more carefully into those actions
more more humbly with a larger set of
senses that are on and on alert so that
we'd be a little careful about thinking
well I know how it's gonna work out and
what we want to do is we want to do this
this business and it's it's one thing
and then it's the habit of looking
backwards and finding linear causality
as you look to the past but right now I
think it's really important in this
moment to be so careful about applying
that linear causality to the future
there's a lot of people talking about
you know where are we going to go from
here and what's happening after the
pandemic and
what will the world be like and how can
we enact the change create the changes
that we need to create and and there it
is again it's like look please don't ask
that question yeah there's a strictly as
your as you again I just want a comment
is I'm listening to you as I listen to
you I'm hearing more of the birds right
there's a widening of my attention right
behind me and in front of me so I just
appreciate I appreciate the listening to
the music you're singing it singing that
you know don't know that you're singing
but I I really felt the sense of a a
concealed and really kind of almost like
a concealed arrogance in an in an
urgency right that seems to bank on it's
up to us to figure something out and I
never quite got it at I never quite
heard it so clearly as I was listening
to you of this sense of like oh yeah
like as if I'm an actor independent of
all this and I come upon it and then I
need to figure it out as if what I'm
inside of isn't so isn't so mysterious
um yeah that sense the sense of that
that kind of strange urgency did I often
hear with people about it's almost got a
moralistic sense to it that sense of
purposefulness right which is it looks
like on some level that your attentions
out on the environment but it seems to
presuppose a very very a very like
assertive Airy certain set of
metaphysics about Who I am and what I
could know and and those that set yes is
the set that generates the system that
is exactly broken yeah or Fred
or fraud or corrupt or whatever you want
to call it it's mechanistic its
destructive it's exploitative its right
but all the the the the issue here I
think is about how how there is learning
and mutual learning yeah and so much of
what was in the just the the basis of
the way the world societies economics or
jobs professions egos identities status
roles genders right all these all of
this business of having having a degree
in getting ahead and doing the right
thing and being somebody and that
there's been an underlying theme to that
which was that you know sometimes you
just have to step over the next guy you
just gotta do what you got to do to get
to the to get what you gotta get to
realize your purpose yeah and and nice
guys come in last mm-hmm and so what is
I want to point to you in that is that
there is a deep violence and it's not
just a violence to the next guy and you
stepped over it's not it's a violence to
the idea of what it means to be in an
inter relational interdependent vitality
oh right so this idea that well in that
case it's okay to hurt somebody in this
case it's alright you just had to go
ahead there was nothing you could do you
just you know some of there's winners
and there's losers so we have all this
this deep cultural sense making that is
competitive that is it's got a
apatite that is devour us of vital
relationships and what what I see right
now is that the most important thing we
can do is tend to those vital
relationships and yeah tend to them and
that's a whole different thing it's it's
not about remapping the world it's about
it's about the fact that every
relationship you are in with your body
with the your garden with your dog with
your wife with your husband with your
with your with your identity has to be
tended in a different way and and so
this this violence is not just in one
direction it has been in all directions
it was in it was just a violence tip to
the relationality and so right now what
I really see is that if there's any hope
that there's different ways of living
those different ways of living start by
having different relationships tending
relationship ways that's what I'm really
hearing yeah that's yeah and that's so
that's where that's where I think it's
really it's possible to be finding in
entirely new buckets of possibility
they're just waiting there in the
relationships that haven't actually been
given room to go in different directions
mm-hmm yeah I really I think the thing
that I really heard and felt when you
were talking was when he talked about
tending to the relationships right and
that they're right here like words but
wherever you look whatever you perceive
is it already you're already
yourself in a relationship there's a
relationship with you and I and there's
relationship to my body to the chair to
the sense of the the ceiling to my wife
sleeping outside and the way that she's
sleeping on the couch and in order to
allow me to have this time with you
there's so much it's interesting because
it's uh there's a reverence there's a
reverence that seems inherent in when I
feel into that I I think that's the
right word it's it's definitely about
reverence and and and relevance right
reverence and relevance just love that
coming out of the seat right now we're
making yeah I mean the thing is is that
if you look at any any ecological
process the relationships are in the
continuing shifting process of being
relevant to each other in multiple ways
and so I think so you know the reason
that it makes sense to attend to these
relationships is because if we don't
we're not relevant anymore right that's
called extinction yeah yeah yes I don't
know interesting very interesting but
not being relevant is an issue yeah and
where their relevance I'm really it's
interesting relationship relevance like
they were kind of just kind of getting
the sense of be like
what is it what is it to be human it's
to be to find relevance in relation it I
think one of the things I've noticed and
I wanted to talk with you a little bit
about you're like the work that you do
because I know in your conversation with
John you talked about you used to teach
complex systems right and and now you're
doing something else it sounds very
experiential and that's where a lot of
my work has come from - is is this dive
into relationships right basically right
and one of the things that ice I find
striking about intimacy right is I think
people think about it right like I often
hear people talk about connecting right
and it's got the sense of there's me
there's you right and that we're going
to go through this thing and then we'll
connect somehow right but but if I look
at the experience of intimacy it's
always this sense of like all there you
are but there's a sense of that which
was already the case came from the
background of the foreground
there's just this experience like oh
that's right like even if I've never met
you before
like in within two seconds if we dropped
into intimacy
there's his quality of oh yeah there you
are there you I am and there's his
quality of as if it were already there
and it just the relation revealed itself
right it wasn't so much constructed or
built in that sense of the word and so
that to me has been getting into
relationships with that with that
relationship has following that
intelligibility just paying attention to
that as we were talking in the beginning
had me end up in the whole universe you
know somehow just like connecting to
this basic I bow realizing that the -
that connects the two was primer
reality whoa and then that just connects
to everything else right and I'm really
feeling this in this conversation with
you like there's an intimacy that you
are evoking and revealing that's just
having me just in relationship more with
my world like the birds I hear you well
I there's been so much damage and I
think one of the things that worries me
sometimes is just it seems to be some
kind of backwards evolutionary notion
that you know when people are hurt they
hurt other people and the more people
they hurt the more those other people
end up hurting other people like how are
we ever gonna get anywhere when people
keep hurting each other and hurting the
the world around them and so I guess one
of the the sort of the things about this
is that there's something healing there
and it's I don't
of that okay I want to be very clear
that I don't consider this to be some
[Music]
you know kind of surface clearing
varnishing over because because we're
sitting in comfortable living rooms you
and I and those comfortable living rooms
have been made possible produced through
decades if not centuries of exploitation
so these these comforts that we can
reside in I mean how would it feel to
walk into a house that was filled with
you know elephant feet umbrella holders
and you know stuff the where our ability
to perceive the violence has already
been awakened all right so the ability
to perceive the violence of my whatever
sofa that was produced in some series of
yucky factories there's been a some
damage in that numbness that has kept me
from being able to perceive that because
if I could really perceive the violence
that has produced my life I would just
fall on the floor right and so that
where I'm going with this is that
there's there's a reveal right now it
for those who are willing to have the
reveal be revealed the emperor has no
clothes and never did and
it is a moment when it is possible to
perceive the interdependencies in which
those violence's have been wrought right
because they also exist in it in a field
of relationships that have been whirling
and we've been caught in them and when I
say we I mean you and me I mean there's
a lot of people for whom that set of
cogs and that world just chew them up
and spit them out and they've been on
the outside for generations
yeah yeah right so there's there's
something about the the ability to
perceive this reveal to be in this
reveal to be in relationship through
this reveal and to pay attention that we
don't go back but that means that that
I'm not trying to leverage up on you I'm
not stealing your ideas I'm not you know
harvesting you I'm not thinking about
the marketing of you I'm not you know
there's like all this stuff that came
with old system world that didn't attend
to their relationships yeah and some
ways in which it's been completely okay
to just be numb it wasn't just okay then
numbness people were the ones who could
win yeah yeah good right so this
sensitizing is it comes at a really high
price and I think that's what I was
saying about my dad you know to to
actually stay there and write those
words and never capitulate
was um it was an act of immeasurable
love courage and courage yeah right and
that's that thing of tending those
relationships and that's what it takes
rigor and courage and love and attention
I sense and uh when you talk about the
pain a couple of things is like I the
moment he said it I just was like oh
yeah if I could feel the ache and the
strain and the scream of the multiple
levels of relations that come into this
desk that I'm yeah I don't know if I
could sit here right is it still
beautiful
yes great beautiful but somehow it's
it's but it's
or something yeah I just I wonder you
know how long before luxury becomes a
testament to a way of living that was
deeply misguided yeah yeah yeah and I
sense I sense when you're talking about
that because I know you know with with
scheduling with you you travel a lot so
it was like it took a while like for us
to sync up but but a lot of the places I
heard that you were traveling were in
like in crisis where crisis is were
happening like it sounds like you're
you're talking to people I think you're
talking to some people in Nicaragua
yesterday like it sounds like that
you're in contact your a point right
where a lot of would imagine you're
seeing pain right a lot of people don't
have the opportunity to be witness of
yeah and that's a weird privilege but
but it is because it's very easy to go
to sleep yeah and and just not be paying
attention to you know it it's easy to
have that be over there somewhere
yeah and now what's your experience what
is you open that door that door is open
for you and you step into it and you're
actually not with people who are
advantaged you're not with people who
have the luxury of forgetting or having
it being over they're like well what is
that like for you I I mean I just have
to tell you that the first thing that I
can say about it is that if you've been
betrayed by the system it's a lot easier
to see the system yeah yeah so I
a much harder time actually talking
about you know how these kind of
inter-relational trans contextual
processes work with people who have
benefited and and it's much more
difficult to to talk about how linearity
isn't actually productive when people's
very lives have been a linear program
that they enacted that was productive
how do you convince someone that that
linear purposive process was actually
 but when they're living in the
product of it it's very real it's right
here yeah right and it's like well
actually it's that's not but that's not
what it was it was that you were already
you were already in process with a whole
lot of relational things that carried
you along and produced you through
multiple contexts into the life that
you're in and you just showed up and did
what you had to do to do it because you
were in it yeah it's the matrix you were
in yeah there's a lot of people for whom
no matter how many good grades they get
no matter how honest they are no matter
how kind and and ambitious and all of
those things they go on to try to be the
system just chews them up and spits them
out yeah all right so a it looked linear
to you I maybe or it looks linear it
felt linear mm-hmm but it wasn't right
right and so that's very difficult to
convey but when you're working with
people who who know the other side of it
what it means to be systemic ly excluded
well not there's an education and
systems oh yeah yeah there it is yeah
the likes of which frankly you and I
will never know great and when you have
a conversation with them what
conversation lake look what do you find
yourself saying where do you find
yourself how do you find yourself
responding to that what are they saying
and where are their concerns I don't
know I feel like this is a really weird
window we're in here I'm feeling really
uncomfortable about like the they right
but yeah but I also because I think what
I meant to say it's like the thing what
has me asked that question right is the
the sense of in the way that you've
talked about it it just something broke
through for me right I feel I can sense
that you're in contact with a different
set of relations with people that are
going through things that I'm sure I
don't even have a clue to comprehend and
so I feel that wisdom I also feel the
wrestling going on inside of in you
coming to coming to terms with it like
literally as we're talking about it so
there's a I mean I feel like I'm a
response in it a bulk you know I mean I
don't know it's just I just feel like
it's just it's just what you do it's
just the day you just you show up and
you just show up I mean what the hell
are we gonna do like work or yeah we're
born into this moment
yeah and we're here yeah okay and the
thing is coming unraveled and I don't
know what to do with it I don't I don't
know what not to do with it Yeah right
all I know is that there are most people
alive on the
planet have been traumatized and
violated again and again in the very
ways for the very same things that have
produced benefits for me mm-hm evel's
but that does not mean that at some
other level that there isn't another
whole set of weird blockages and and
blind spots and in casings of
epistemological just suck ups oh right
and so how do i how do i how do i how do
we hold this like at some point it's
just like look I have no idea but I'm
here yeah does your in your your your
relating I don't know responding to the
set of relationships that you find
yourself in but I'm willing to try and
I'm willing to just recognize that I
have no idea and and also that it's time
to shut it up and listen you know that's
a big one too of just there is so much
communication patterning that has to do
with perpetuating existing processes of
seeing and believing and these frames of
epistemology that we're in and I just
don't think that it's possible to talk
ourselves out of it I think it's gonna
come from being lost that feeling of
being lost of listening at the level of
I don't know what this means it's like
hearing words you've never heard before
and you try to figure out what what what
they mean and you're not going to be
able to do it
but that's what I see is that there's a
need to I'll tell you what the opposite
of it is really is ambition that's
really the opposite of everything we've
talked about today mission the opposite
is ambition yeah yeah and so that's the
thing that's just like this yeah I don't
know I don't know what to say about it I
just I just feel it I just feel like
you've said so much in that to me to me
like I think your response and your Enel
and actually you were I don't know like
just that sense was so why's it or it
showed so much wisdom for me just a
sense of so much was communicated in
just that response of yeah it's funny
cuz it's interesting I haven't thought
about this in a long time but what I
flashed to actually was what watching
your response to my question about this
like I flashed to a moment actually when
when I told my son that I was that me
and his mom are getting a divorce
like there was I just remember this this
particular like this this day and it was
like it was pretty conscious I mean we
were both pretty awake about it and it
was time to let him know and there was a
moment where we said something and he
didn't quite get it and then he went
outside and he comes back and he just
falls apart right and I could feel I
remember this this this sense of like
there was so much in me that wanted to
like make it better or turn away from it
or justify something but there is
something there's another voice intimate
like in that that happened which I'm I'm
hearing I think in what you're
saying at least it's a voguing this
memory for me I was like I know like let
it kill you like turn towards this like
all of it right and I just felt myself
kind of like resist that first layer and
just was like all right and I just got
naked and I just was with them and cried
with them and we cried and held him and
were with him and and I was just like
the mantra that I kept hearing in my
being was just like like just let it
kill you like let it all the way it look
at it directly in the eye like all of my
guilt all of the regret all of his pain
all of the consequences of that like
this is reality like really look at it
really face it that's what I'm here in
so much as you can
I mean that's the thing is that again
it's that humility you're never gonna be
able to say something yeah I you can't
even see it and that's that's that piece
of like you know like you know when your
heart is broken and you have that one
friend is like I know how you feel and
you're like no you don't know you don't
know how I feel and they're like let me
just help you it's like no just back off
you don't know who I am you don't know
who I feel you don't know what's
happening here I know you want to do
good but can you please just go away
that thing yes okay it's laughing mmhmm
yeah and you know they start in with
this psychobabble self-help memes and
you're just want to smack them yeah
totally yeah right yeah yeah there is
that
there is that that thing again I just
appreciate that like yeah as much as you
can perceive but like you don't even
know like just that that I just keep I
keep hearing that from you and I'm I'm
uh
the humility and the reverence of that
right and their remote and the wisdom of
that is just I feel T I feel that deep
in you and I I'm I feel myself in
response to it
thank you that's good I think a lot of
people think it's just kind of a pain
but mm-hmm so ask me think it's more
what that's what has me think it's more
wise we I mean we just well I think it's
a it's a moment to just get ready to not
know anything yeah and you know
everything that I know about Who I am
and it's all generated through
relationships to a whole set of cultural
processes that could easily just be gone
and in fact the world would be better if
there were so that's a you know if all
the structures that have propped you up
and shaped you and formed you and given
you the structure to to become who you
are are gone yeah
who are you yeah it's so interesting
because I my experience with as in my
experience with working with people
right especially I've worked I've done a
lot of a lot of different formats you
know I teach courses and but I've also
done do what I want to work where I'll
basically live with somebody for seven
days right we'll just have and we'll
just dive in or I'll like I'll work with
a family and I'll go move in for a
couple weeks right and then just embed
myself in the system and then respond
right I've learned a lot I've learned a
lot I've learned I've learned how much I
don't know yeah definitely but it
reminds me of this thing of we're in the
beginning what I started doing is is
and I found this I discovered this
actually kind of on accident but then it
became it became so poignant and so
consistent or it just kind of became
part of the process right which is most
of most of the things that I do now like
is a function of that so the experience
of doing it that I could have never even
of even thought to not know about right
until it happened but what we'll do is
we'll start right and they usually come
with like a lot of ambition right yeah
it's a reason they're there and there's
a purpose and there's something at stake
and so we'll sit down and I'll like have
a I'll get those you know those posts
those big post-it you know paper things
that you're writing really go okay so so
why are you here you know write it down
okay why I'll see you here okay what
else what else what else what else
and we'll usually fill up three or four
sheets of that and then I'll take it and
I'll just put it up on the corner and
then seven days later after having gone
through this whole ride right okay I'll
take I'll take it out and we'll put it
up and we'll look at it and it's every
single time right this is it's it's a
very common response we'll look at it
and they'll realize what they're looking
at wasn't even relevant right when it
was it was what they wanted was so in a
certain sense they could see was part of
the blind spots of the system that
created that in fact if they got that
thing or even the way that they
formulated right and then we started we
got out of his relationship and things
opened up and we started responding and
it's usually some version of this it's
like they had no idea that they were
sitting on a house of cards we had no
idea right and they start to realize
like a sense of betrayal like finding
out their parents were insane and they
had no idea right like hey whatever it
is that they find out and then but
looking at it and being in relationship
with it in the deepening process that
happens through that such that they
looked at what they used to want right
you see and one of those I've learned
about this is this wedded relationship
with what I want and what I how the
world how I constitute the world is the
figure that it is for me is is so
intimate in the way I'm paying attention
and that the yeah and I can all what I'm
saying and when you when you start to
shift that stuff everything changes
everything changes yes so it's no point
trying to sort out how what actions you
have to take to solve a problem when you
haven't shifted the perspective through
which you're seeing the problems yes
absolutely in order to see the
perspective like in order to change your
perspective it's interesting even that
it's about getting into just
relationship that you have water right
that in itself is bringing a perspective
right and it's not even getting a new
perspective it's just like seeing what
you've been seeing with is this there's
something that just happens with that
I've noticed it it's like has a yeah
creates different ones yeah but this has
been so fun guy it's so fun so thank you
so much thank you
nice to meet you I've been looking been
really looking forward to talking with
you and I really nice nice adventure and
thanks for being the unique being that
you are and the warmth that you bring in
the humanity and perspective that you
bring you these conversation is so real
it's a real unique strong voice mm-hmm
so thank you so much for that thank you
so much and thank you for putting it
together and yes let's do it again let's
do it again
see how it see where we are in a couple
of months from now absolutely
what world will we be in then absolutely
all right take care