all right welcome to fix the world
Friday gonna see how oh well the video
series that were released this week
maybe got people to come in come and
participate or not that's part of is
truly just letting go of having any kind
of outcome from what is happening is the
process to let it happen and it's still
a very hard process to do like okay it's
not my job to get people here it's my
job to do me to like live my life and
keep moving forward but it's still I
want people here I want to like
co-create a better world
starting ten years ago not ten years in
the future but impatience not so much
about you
alright we were talking about it before
we started the thing anyway hmm is
anything you wanted to start with or
should we just jump into no I think your
agenda looks looks good if we just one
jump into that alright so I remember
where we left off last week last week
was I was just suggesting that we find
other people and then I posted in the
game be a brief video of just that I
want people and I don't even I
understand I'm not communicating it the
best way like people I like right but
what am i coming on board for and it's
live aft it's on video edits and that
like I don't know so I rally point alpha
has a rule that I'm just trying to find
and can't find which is basically I'm
gonna butcher because that's what
stories I want to look it up was like if
there's an idea and you have a way to
make it better make it better but if
your ideas just to crap on it don't do
that right like if it's just like here's
all the holes in it but I have no way to
make it better like and there was
something I liked about that as in
restart right like we start we start
with something and then we keep
improving it and making it better and
the point isn't to find the 15 things
that can go wrong if there isn't
anything that could be done to make them
go right it's like well how do we make
this go as right as possible well doing
it and then owning the wrongness right
and putting in
little risk as possible which we're not
putting in a lot of risk this is just
our time just our time but like the
world is kind of like that's my risk the
risk is the world like that we don't do
this fast enough that we don't and so
like I know if we got a small group of
people together to brainstorm what does
it look like to have a hundred people or
a thousand people together to have a
process that those people want to
participate in then we can include them
because the point of a technology
cooperative is that there's more people
is that we don't take on a lot of the
financial risk as individuals because
there isn't this big reward coming that
we're going to get to participate in
right like we're not gonna make become
multimillionaires off of this we're
going to create a project that it's
worth trillions that we don't get to
necessarily keep right so giving people
something of value right from the
beginning and this is the thing of value
it's like to come and get to participate
in creating a better world means this
has to be enjoyable to the people
participating in it but how to explain
the difference in like this is it my
project as much as I will keep trying to
take ownership of it that's like ego and
everything else the point is is it's our
project right so what do we want a game
be organization to look like what does
the transparency look like what does the
governance look like what does the
decision-making process how do we make
decisions of five people so that we can
make decisions with hundreds and
thousands of people right like like how
do we actually use technology to create
the tools we need to collaborate on a
massive scale so I'm sitting with myself
like okay how much do I explain what I
can't explain it like do I put down this
is how we have governance this is how we
are transparent this is how we write
this is what we're doing none of it is
set in stone all of it is negotiable but
it's that starting point it is the if
you have something better to offer if
you have a better way for us to do
funding yes bring it on
this isn't these are our corporate rules
these are the starting point from the
conversation or do we even have that and
just have the starting point for the
conversations I feel like there's no
hooks for people to hang things on then
they're like what do you mean by a
governance structure it's like well we
know what a Board of Directors kind of
looks like how can we make a Board of
Directors
that's incentivized to dismantle itself
how can we make a Board of Directors
that if we weren't on it we would still
want to be a part of the organization
like how do we make it as transparent as
possible I think we are doing that with
the live videos but maybe we're not
maybe there's a better way to make it
transparent right and there is a what's
the word like a offset to that right
that there are people who would be
involved wasn't live online that aren't
involved because it is and so but
there's a reason it's live online so
that anyone who comes on later can see
what was done previously but maybe that
trade-off is too big if there were ten
people who are like I would do this but
not live online I would be willing to
not do it live online until we get to a
specific point when some of those people
are comfortable enough to do that but I
like doing it live online I think
there's a lot of benefit to it for
marketing for transparency for all of
that so finding the people who do want
to do it live it's I think and we
already have a time period so we don't
have to figure out a time period it's
like live online at 11:00 a.m. on
Fridays who wants to come and
participate but part of that
participation needs to be us discussing
how do we get people involved who aren't
available at 11:00 a.m. on Fridays right
what does it look like to have hundreds
of people all over the world in
different time zones we've already had
these conversations of a scheduler of
having those kind of things but then
that's our conversation not six of us
brainstorm you know it's six of us
brainstorming what tools exist currently
what is the bare minimum we need in a
beta in order to coordinate that right
is that it a few thousand dollars can be
crowd fun that now someone maybe have a
few thousand dollars like what you know
what I mean like it's it's everything
theoretically is better with more people
plus we will have more problems to solve
right we'll have more like this whole
game be fake I'm just gonna keep talking
so okay being it's like the personal
work right like you do the stuff to be
on t rival roman√≠s that you do the stuff
to like
tame your own ego and whatever that is a
big piece of that can only occur in a
group right it's you it's really hard to
chain your ego when there isn't somebody
else like I figure out how to save the
entire world by myself in my bedroom
right that's not actually zero because
it has to include other people there has
to be other people on board to help
create it and then there's a project
piece like what calls to people that
they want to work on that is it both
brings the interpersonal the community
and purpose and so what can we create in
a collaboration platform that is that
right that anyone can come to with their
project can bring themselves to and
we're we the technology cooperative with
a platform are offering them community
purpose and a way forward right like
it's meeting them hopefully where
they're at where you don't need to watch
all of John deBakey's 50 video series
before you start this conversation maybe
you watch one hour on violent
communication like I feel like there's a
limit to what we can expect people to
watch before they participate and even
then it's like maybe people see if
they're not able to do nonviolent
communication and if they're not they go
on on that side so I'm that's just a bit
of what up until a month in the last
week if like do I write down the
skeleton of the thing so we can take
each bone and make it better or do I
even like like I want to start with the
bare minimum possible so we can build it
but is it easier to build yeah but but
you're go right now or our goal is to
get more participation right yes
so my just taking from game a marketing
techniques I don't think it has anything
to do with the skeleton it's a clear and
precise message of where we're going or
what we want to create and then expand
on that idea enough to get people
energized the actual how we get there
is only important after they're already
participating yes yes absolutely so yes
so what feedback have you gotten so much
you mentioned a little bit before so far
well you mentioned a little bit
beforehand so one is what am i doing and
the other one is just no reaction have
you gotten any other feedback so far
with what you've posted not really
mainly it's no reaction right mainly
it's people being like oh great
someone's doing that I don't need to
like and I know there's this disconnect
between it being a technology project
but not needing technology people to
start right like the point isn't to get
a bunch of coders together that's what
blockchain is doing right like that's
already being done on a massive scale
this is how do we core how do we
coordinate a technology company on mass
right how do we actually create the
technology manage it have the
conversations and effectively create an
organization that hopefully eventually
is leaderless right hopefully eventually
is it has no authority whatsoever but
like we're not starting there we're
starting with a board of directors
because that's how thing is things are
dying and it just makes sense to have
ace since we don't have the tools to
have a thousand person conversation we
need to have a five person conversation
in real time on video part of that
conversation can be talking about how we
do that how we spread that out even now
right doing the idea cafes through time
zones if everyone can have a say I
suggest though we focus on developing
and experimenting with the pitch pitches
and see how we get some feedback so I'm
trying to look for what was the mission
statement where people could come and
this was I guess mostly just for our
idea cafe where people come for
meaningful conversation and generate
solutions together so are we right now
or I guess there's several
we could try and get people
participating with the together tech the
cooperative the tech cooperative or with
idea cafe and it can be both but which
one one of them has to be primary
because the end from the initial
statement needs to be simple enough
some people know whether or not they
need to read further I what I want is to
gather tech right what is like whose
first project was idea cafe and I would
like it to be a collaboration platform
which might be something as simple as
idea cafe and also might not be right it
might be well other people don't think
the communication piece is as important
since we have zoom and all these other
things but they'll see that coordinating
the communication is what is the problem
and therefore we need a piece of that in
the collaboration like bringing people
who are in you know human individuals
who've had their own passions their own
wants desires needs everything to the
table to say what does a collaboration
platform look like for you right like
what would you want it to be for your
projects what would you want it to be as
an individual because the idea is it's
it's a dashboard for the individual on
all of the projects they want to work on
right so they can find volunteer
opportunities someone with a project can
come and explain their project and find
people whether a tiny group of people to
work with
on their project like has been done in
the past but have better tools to work
through that with or how to create one
on a massive scale right and my gut is
we do all of those things it's like some
people are gonna want to do one tiny
project but five people and other people
are going to want to be part of more
feminized so for they're not having to
give a lot right where it's like they're
literally just having to participate in
a conversation that is their
contribution we can do that if there's
thousands of people on a project right
to get the feedback to coordinate what
the features and benefits are and let's
like rank them and then in smaller
groups have and that's where it's like
having a small group to discuss what a
larger group could look like like what
if we were creating this with a thousand
people had
we get a thousand people's input well we
can't really with current technology but
there are ways to do it right and when
we're using current technology figuring
out what the beta is right what is the
bear what is what we want because if
there's just five of us it's gonna be
just like any other project if we're the
only ones giving feedback right we're
just gonna extrapolate us five to a
thousand people and that's not quite
gonna work but if we do it transparently
and other people are like actually no
that wouldn't work for me at all because
there's an audience they are part of
that big collaboration that's part of
doing it live online having a smaller
group of people discussing a process for
a larger group of people including using
existing tech and what tech do we need
to make the bare minimum so that we can
have a contest as something with a
thousand people and then how do those
thousand people create something for ten
thousand people like it's a little
chicken and egg right what's the
priority between game gating ye and the
tech cooperative like I could see the
tech cooperative being a place to
experiment game B and that that could
even be it's the primary purpose is a
game B experiment or at least that that
may be the impetus for people to start
working on it or would you feel are you
passionate about the tech cooperative
being the primary idea I'm passionate
about us using technology to solve the
world's problems and I think game B is a
great way to that's why it was the focus
was on game B people like people have
their own individual projects game B
people already want to create something
into the world the onus is how do we
create something that's already Omni win
right that's already anti rivalries
between us and having those
conversations so yes I want it to be
game B at the same time if the message
can be more uniform or you don't need to
listen to all of John reveille key you
don't need to know who Jordan Hall is
you don't need to know do you want to
create a better world do you think
technology hat is powerful and that we
can do it together those are the people
we want on board not necessarily game B
people but game B people are already
right like that it's already there they
already care they already want a new
world they already like are doing a lot
of the personal work and community work
in order to get there and so we're like
as always both like game be if we could
create the collaboration tool for game B
specifically without requiring people be
game for you to participate that is
ideal like game like if we can create
the Omni and anti rival risks way to
create something the Omni went abroad
for Lois product that we're creating
right and and doing that all openly and
transparently online so that even if and
when we fail in little ways there's both
way less chance of overall failure
because there's input from everyone on
how to fix it as well as even if we it
was a catastrophic failure it's there
for the next person to learn from right
openly and like hey here's you can you
can see where we went wrong probably
better than weekend and you take that
into your next project right even if
we're not part of it like creating
something that doesn't fail because
you're owning where it goes wrong and
improving it incrementally means you're
probably not gonna fail doing so
transparently even if you do there's
information there for the next person to
to bring in take on board to the next so
what I'm hearing is the co-operative is
the main or co-operative focused on
technology is the main is the crux of
the concept well like yeah I don't think
we make a collaboration platform for
five hundred people and that's basically
game B's maybe a thousand people right
that could work but we're not how do we
fund it how do we get there like right
but even the the long-term vision
although sometimes you do want to give
shorter term visions to people rather
than long term but the long term vision
is the coop the tech cooperative not
even the collaborative platform right
because you could have other tak-tek
later on that's not even the
collaborative platform right correct
yeah the my priority my thing that I see
as being game B is the tech cooperative
that being said
that's my vision and it's what my little
brain can come up with by itself three
years in a bedroom by itself right it's
not what we can come up with together
that's even better than that that is you
know I mean how we fund it how we but
like yes having an organization that
runs the text that we don't have to and
there's a new idea
someone can like run with it and it
doesn't need to be all these one-off
little projects that have all of the
risk and less of the power right the
idea is is that it's more powerful and
less risky together and so doing it
together to its benefit and on its
detriment right like super like well
what about decentralization I'm like to
decentralize it just any centralized it
is stupid but if decentralization makes
any project make more sense it makes
sense to do so
creating a corporate structure that is
non hierarchical just so it's non
hierarchical and nothing gets done is
ridiculous to use something that is good
enough but is transparent and what's not
working in what we'd like it to get
better and incentivizing it to dismantle
itself eventually is I don't know like
keep bringing all the core big game B
values to day one right like how do we
make this as non rival race as possible
it's owning our own ego second it's like
dealing with our own interpersonal
of like oh this doesn't this part
doesn't feel good and this part does
feel good and I want to do this part and
like how do we live our own sovereign
lives within a project and make the
project good right like how do I get my
needs met and move it forward and
showcasing all of that online for people
to see right it's a bit like oh yeah I
could do this
maybe not live on YouTube right like I
could do this with my project and yes I
can see how this essence of this would
help my project so I want to come help
create the collaboration platform yes
nobody has to give anything up to be
part of it right you're not giving up
your individual project you're not
giving up your individual sovereignty
you're seeing the Omni win in it right
that like people bringing themselves to
the table even if there's more conflict
there also brings more through it and if
we learn from the
conflict and grow from the conflict the
conflict itself is also beneficial right
and I mean any kind of complex like
enter the inner stuff the interpersonal
like the big stuff like oh we've come
across this law that doesn't work how do
we how do we brainstorm around it how do
we like all of it OD and what's not
working and trying to fix it right
someone leaves we can just let them
leave or we can act like ask them maybe
if they're not comfortable not live on
camera like why why did you leave right
what was the was it a personality
conflict with us
was it a you know a mean like one little
feature that wasn't there was there one
thing said that was misconstrued and
there is an even a conflict but we
review because that's where most
conflict seems to sit is this like
you're on this side and I'm on this side
we're a tug of war without ever
realizing we're kind of even playing
that game and we could play any other
number of games that isn't winless but
I'm getting so off topic arts I know
you're exploring so let me let me give
me some just some random thoughts that
came up for your talking so I would let
me throw this pitch out and see then
this would be I was also thinking there
will be slightly modified pitches per
audience so just to generally everyone
like if someone asked you what do you do
would some I thought would say something
similar to our cooperative to create
technology created by everyone for
everyone does that resonate with you
what was anything missing yeah I mean
that it's not always the language that
is the language I have been using like
let's create a world that works for
everyone people like not possible they
just turn it off right it's like no it's
like okay come play on it right like
come try come try to create a process
that works for you because that's what I
mean by everyone I mean you get the
tools to create something that works for
you right and so does everybody else and
so in so doing if we empower people not
to solve their problems with an outside
entity like the government or a
capitalist corporation not to
their problems individually like
bootstrap yourself go-go DIY and entire
farm so you can feed yourself an energy
like a third option that's like or we
can figure it out together with other
people you want to figure it out right
like you're not figure out how to feed
just yourself there's a hundred people
figuring how to feed themselves which is
going to be easier than one person
figuring it out yeah so if I was going
to take that and put that and and phrase
that to the grain B group I one way of
saying it is we want to experiment with
game B by participating in a cooperative
to create Omni when technology might be
one way to say it yeah I put it in the
agenda so you can always also reference
it there and then so I thought what
would be interesting is with the game B
group maybe say that say you know here's
our pitch and then ask some questions
like what indicates to you that this is
not something you want to participate in
and I this written down thing what is
missing for you to invest time looking
further into it and then you know what
excites you about this pitch I think if
we got it's pretty easy for people to
people like I don't remember this before
after the thing that we turn on the
recording but you were talking about how
people like to criticize things I think
just opening it up the criticism like
that will get at least participation in
that manner like somebody tearing
support so I don't spend my life
endeavor doing it when it's not yeah
yeah no I love that because that's not
my strength look I'm like I realized I'm
like I'm talking at everybody and how
I'm gonna save the world instead of like
pause what do you think right like what
and so I liked those questions and I
don't even know how to word that in game
B as far as like literally that here's
our tag and then like what if this isn't
something you want to get involved in
why not if this is
something you want to get involved in
here's how right like join us here at 11
a.m.
I even like no one contact me but I was
like private message we don't send you
the link you can be on camera okay yeah
I think we could I think we could just
literally say that's that this is an
idea that we think should be attractive
to game B people in the game B community
but we're not getting much interest so
here's our pitch and then here's some
questions or you could do it without you
could just say here's an idea I mean
people will recognize it I think based
on what we've other said and then and
then just have the questions underneath
especially we can get it all to fit in
the summary of Facebook before you have
to hit more info yes do you think I
start also with so like the pitch you
just said which I love but also like
live at 11:00 a.m. on Fridays or like
leave and leave that off and just say
we're crew I would even just leave that
off just don't let the pitch and get the
questions answered cuz they also might
remember the previous one and someone
might even just say well I'm not live
what do you do yeah
right yeah yeah I think I think first
let's see if we can get them excited on
the idea and then end all the logistics
of time and and how to participate did
you write down those questions or I'm
going to need to look that yeah there so
I have potential pitches yeah yeah and
the three questions and then just some
feedback like you've also heard it's not
possible that's what I get on my other
project all the time and that is
probably my most limiting factor and
that's one reason why sometimes you'll
definitely want to scale stuff back like
when they were designing uber they did
have the concept of getting things
seamlessly from one place to another and
having this but they said taxi because
people could understand that
and then they took taxi out once people
knew the idea so you may have to scale
back but yeah it so if we get a lot of
feedback like it's not possible and
they're gonna do that then that's when
you choose a smaller bite but I think
seeing you know it's like collaborating
on a collaboration platform that's
literally what I want to do right like I
came up with a million ways to do it but
who wants to collaborate on a
collaboration platform and if not why
and if yes here's how you get involved
right like no yes and I like another
thing that there that the game be
several people the community are
correctly pushing back on is that they
have a fear when they hear things like
this that we're trying to solidify this
thing before it's known but that's not
your an AI goal or your goal is to learn
through iteration and experimentation so
I just changed one the wording to say
participate in cooperative to
experiments with creating when Omni when
technology big Anthony wants to come on
camera I'm just going to go send him a
link sure
what other well when you're not
distracted I can hear you
you can go maybe any other feedback that
you've already gotten while you're
expressing these ideas that we could
think through
I mean honestly Bentley a lot of the
feedbacks in my head like everything but
there is a lot of and like I have the
one that I did the video on of like this
has already been done before I'm like
really where is it been done before us
Romanoff's have been done before but the
the idea this has been done before it
hasn't been done transparently hasn't
been done by all of us it hasn't been
done in a way where anyone can come on
board and so you can start with
something yeah that's good do you know
there is no just view and stream yard
Anthony that's the one to produce space
you'd be on camera with us otherwise you
are where you're just watching it that
makes sense it's already posted his face
for like watching that well I think he's
saying he's ok if he can just hear yeah
but he's saying where is this stream
yard login third yeah if you follow the
link I sent you on Facebook it would get
you here to be on video or you can just
watch it where where you are we can see
the comments and so you can always just
type in a comment and we can see it okay
so you I don't it's not possible you got
this has been tried before and failed
any other feedback that we can I mean
one of the big ones which is the only
one that I see is like the world won't
let this happen
right like the powers that be aren't
gonna let something like this happen
like yes but if we do it together it's
the only solution and right they're not
gonna let anything happen they want game
a to remain who may like anything that
does anything that stirs the pot is
gonna be controversial the idea is to do
it as openly and transparently as
possible and grow as quickly as possible
so that there isn't a point where they
can be like oh and stomp it out
right like when you're transparent open
you're like oh let me just you're gonna
buy us out cool let me just go take that
to our million numbers how much you
paying us 10 billion okay that's ten
thousand you know what I mean like
you're transparent is you there is no
Mark Zuckerberg
- right there is no way to once for big
enough yes I could get murdered for this
I'd get that and also good luck like
that makes me into a murderer right it
doesn't yet please don't do it yet
because it's like it's not but even then
it might right how democracy blows up
once I'm no longer here we have to sit
through it no what the hell is funky but
all right hello Anthony
welcome to the board meeting sorry I
appreciate you joining that's awesome
setting up itself is makes other people
braver to know that they can you know
come and be on on screen as well alright
are we do our waste are we going through
the feedback or what is that well I just
wanted to I just wanted to kind of list
them out for now I don't think we need
to go into detail on defending against
them we need one of the big ones which I
get I get personally is like wait what
that sounds awesome like what are you
actually doing like they don't
understand it right because of how I'm
explaining it or I'm trying to explain
the little the little thing and I'm sure
also explaining the big huge thing I
like basically I'm explaining to all of
game be and why we need it when
someone's like okay so what's step one
and so that's my own that's having other
people on board - this is the thing
we're doing right yes okay we're doing
just idea cafe we're doing just the
collaboration platform even if I have a
vision for well that's not what we're
doing
we're doing it maybe we're doing how do
we create an entity that is Omni when
from day one this is unhireable as
possible but owning that we still need
some amount of in-group out-group
participate like technology's not there
yet for us to have no in-group out-group
but the in-group can have conversations
about how to include the over constantly
and keep inviting more and more people
in until it is a group is a group
yeah so I yeah I I think I mean I just
thought it'd be good to go ahead and
knock down some of the note down some of
the feedback we've already gotten but
I'd like I think we just need to post
the pitch and ask for feedback in game
beat the game be pitch and asked those
questions and any other think of and
just see what if we could continue to
get those we may not you know if if the
pitch is really good then we won't get
the I don't understand and if they're
asking questions for more information
that could be actually a good sign
because at least it piqued their
interest enough but then you need to
later figure out what's the second
sentence of the pitch and the third
sentence so based upon what questions we
get would would build those other
sentences but if we do find most people
are pitching I mean are saying that's
impossible then I mean we won't be able
to capture every one but this would be a
way to kind of hone the team did you
find out how the person on Twitter got
his million followers or he said he had
a million followers no I mean tons of
people have a million followers on
Twitter mainly celebrities but was it a
really easy way see try to save the
world because yes that I was like to
them we got a million followers but I
mean Twitter I went on Twitter a year
ago or systematically to try to get to
like 10,000 followers and even with
3,000 there isn't a lot of intricate
connection like there isn't a lot of
conversation on things you post or
probably because I'm not asking
questions but also if you weren't there
in the beginning you don't have the
platform right you don't have the 20
thousand followers who like follow you
and tweet your stuff and like it's hard
to get in now
it's also designed for profit and not
for purpose like I'm down with trying
and also I don't know how effective it
is to actually even if I could just get
to 10,000 followers then what like it's
not even people like the god accounts
and celebrities like don't necessarily
have it's not designed for a revolution
the platform it's designed to start
and keep you screaming at each other and
like flinging at each other not and
then you know like it can be used to get
people to hear but then who you might
have Twitter trolls also there's also
that so it was anything else in the
agenda you wanted to be sure and hit I
just I did want to mention next week is
our last week although really when I was
looking at the time period it was like
we actually could do the 27 how do you
feel about taking break-ins or not
taking right I will it'd probably be
good to take a break okay well take one
week break that is just because of how
it works I was like I'm trying to not
have the conversations I have going on
while my kids off of school I'm gonna
you know focus and have fun for
Christmas and her birthday and also I
really enjoy these conversations so it's
it's a little hard to be like okay
what's the barrier made of oh I could
take off and still think about that's
how I know this is my job this is what
I'm supposed to do because I would never
felt that about a job up and paid for
like I'm never like can I come back
early can there be more can I do more
how do pasta we do this it's like oh
vacation two weeks I'm gonna be three
weeks so four weeks like anyway um so
we're taking the 27th off back on the
3rd is that sound good or would you need
an extra week after that no that's good
oh video series completed oh yeah so I
did did you watch the video series then
I have two more left I think how good
they are at explaining it but I'd liked
the last ones more than the first anyway
whatever it
it is a way for people to get an
understanding of what oh yeah yeah
that's a it's a it's a low low effort
way and you know that's the best way to
start it is just kind of a brain dump
and see what resonates with people so I
think that's good have you seen some of
them okay I'm sorry
you can continue I was just also gonna
ask I was just going to say it's also
good because a couple of those I think
are videos you could link to when you
get certain common feedback so like this
hasn't been done before yeah it was good
Jim right on that just you just be
inviting you're just he was just the one
who was like the platform's easy it's
the rest and I kind of agree with what
he's saying like creating the platform
isn't our sticking point
nor will ours be it's getting people
together it's figuring out how to work
together but the only way to do that is
to do that so if your idea is to just
train a platform yeah that has already
been done reason it doesn't work you
don't have the marketing or the funding
who are you to create that if we're
creating it if there's different energy
and different we just have to figure
that I create it that's all in a new
process yeah any of you can stew look at
any of the videos oh oh would the the
crowd democracy series they have a green
thumb to tag at the beginning it's like
introduction technology's powerful
technologies risky together it's more
powerful together it's less risky and a
few other ones after that probably did
but I was so much stuff I can't remember
which they're not fair enough I just
yeah it was I think I did post it in
both and whatever maybe I haven't posted
in game B but I did post in rally point
alpha because I was trying to find there
it is funny that I cannot normally the
groups have like Facebook has a special
section for rules they apparently don't
either don't have that filled in or for
some reason it's not showing up on the
website
well
know where to find the members events
because it was it's not in the About
section because I do like their what
they said on there that's why I posted
it yeah I was I often wonder whether
that's intentional or someone just needs
to let them know hey if you have some
rules but no like a week less than a
week ago I read their rules I was like I
like it and like what they're saying
like right now it's menu for those
people who are clear on the strategic
situation and are trying to locate the
rest of the team we are all trying to
figure out what to do job one find each
other and get organized so I was like
yeah that's what we're trying to do so I
post it on there but there's also what I
was saying like their rural look like
fix it don't break it like if you have a
way to improve it absolutely speak up
but but otherwise right if it's like
well a technology company cooperatives
not going to work it's like that's not
helpful what would make it work right
like what's the piece that's broken that
you can add to as opposed and that was
kind of for looking at the skeleton to
start having a conversation like how do
we fund it but people understand funding
it's like we understand very basics of
what it takes to have a corporation how
do we do that with Omni win and to hire
a critical structure right so what's our
marketing strategy what's our funding
strategy what's what's all of that just
a few
yeah so they have a Facebook post on
rally point principals but that's not
what you're referring to you that might
be it
what is that principals where was that
in there can I not do a live count I
can't do comments and the live thing if
I'm participating that's it's in the
private chat you can't that's
interesting I don't see a box for that
how did he did it though but did you
post he might have posted in the oh
those those do have YouTube labels I bet
I'd should yeah I'd have to go to the
YouTube page that makes sense okay I'm
just gonna copy and paste cuz it also
doesn't let me just click on the link
come on stream yard get with the program
rally point principles rest assured
content I don't know where you I look
after a bit where's that always I meant
in good faith I'll write and say what I
actually think and I will assume good
faith from other people last weekly for
requests upon coming a member something
else though yeah this wasn't quite what
it was there was something else that I
was like or I just read it somewhere
else
who knows but the fact that Jordan wrote
these also gives them more credence
either a new post or a comment to this
post I will Jordan Creek all the
situational assessment you know this is
more agen well like agent personal
attacks that totally makes sense but
that's not and use the clearest possible
language or the evolving communal
language so at any points I make will be
understandable to all including new
members and gain attention sirs I like
all those things but that's not there
was something else that was journal
alpha phase two action plan our current
operating tactics and action plan might
know I'll have to find it because it was
pretty message creation message to seem
it yeah I can't remember I looked at
rally point alpha and there was a reason
why I didn't feel like it
would be my jam after we read this
another time there was just something
about I was like yeah I like the even
the language they used as far as like
make a suggestion and then let's help
make it better instead of tearing it
down right which is how I read into it I
was like yeah let's do that
let's I'm totally fine with dismantling
and tearing something down as well but
not not replacing it with something
right like I can critique what's going
on in the world all day long our medical
system or transportations all of it but
if there's nothing better what is like
what is the option it's either to
band-aid it or to start it from Ground
Zero and rebuild it and I think we need
to do both or basically everything but
if someone offers like that's where I do
want to work through the entire what
does it take to be a corporation a
cooperative right what does our
governance look like what is our funding
structure what is our marketing with
this is what we agreed on and then also
there's always ways to make it better
right if our funding model isn't
bringing in enough money we need to
improve it if our marketing strategy is
forgetting too many people or not enough
people how do we figure that out I how
are we growing too fast to be growing
too slow I think we've already decided
we're growing too slow we're figuring it
out right that took two of us that was
awesome really one of us but not me so
they have another one and updated they
have read first duties and
responsibilities on the website and they
have I agree that I am here to forward
the work of our PA while constructive
criticism is indispensable this is not a
place for opposition or trolling
offenders will be expelled I guess
that's not really what you were saying
though not quite what I was saying but
it was it was is it there more on that
page that is also like that no but let
me yeah I hate when I can't find things
after I found them yeah we did
completely right and then other times
it's
I also don't know if he put it in here
stop going to the introduction page and
said history yard I'm coming you know
this is kind of the same thing that was
in the other part
yeah it's writing it up just know it was
I was like I like a might have also been
in who knows like a first post or
something I'll go back and look at it
and I'll send it to you let's see if it
resonates with you but I liked the it's
kind of like the assume good it will and
other people which I also like as a rule
like assume they're trying they're
acting the best that they can in that
moment even if it's horrible right like
even if it's not coming off as a good
way of acting if you assume that it's
the best they can do and they wouldn't
be capable of doing better in that
moment then how else do you treat them
but with compassion and same with like
the idea I do think brainstorm you what
doesn't work and then fixing it is great
but if you're just brainstorming what's
broken that doesn't quite doesn't quite
work just start at the Green founder
videos awesome Anthony wiki boards your
feedback and comments in them when
they're as you watch them mister always
good with the comments not I mean we did
get another whatever five or six
subscribers did crowd amok recei and not
as many comments on it on the videos
themselves as I would like but right I
do like people questioning yet and
that's also I feel this is again in my
head not actual because no one actually
says this but I feel like people don't
want to break it because they don't want
to break me I'm like I'm not breakable
so like the world has tried I'm pretty
not breakable you're not going to break
this if you do you'll be doing me a
favor
like break it like I feel like that with
my friends and family they're like will
 all over it that it's not possible
but also won't actually like the parts
that are broken like like this is why it
won't work it just like it just won't
work like that why what part of it won't
work I got an answer
which is maybe the problem then I feel
like I'm okay back to the agenda what
else so we're taking a break not meeting
next week and then not again till
January third it was just the 27:13 off
the video series like I said was
completed this isn't really together
tech stuff but I was wondering if I'm
gonna concentrate on a next video series
to do because it seems to be pretty
effective for me to kind of do it is
like 10 I'm gonna release them all at
once so that and I might release them
all at once as opposed to daily because
I felt like they were already outdated
it was like idea cafes barely our first
project anymore but that's kind of how
the world of all's like as soon as you
do something it changes and you have
like the next up anyway if I do another
video series I can do more of what the
first project would be but that would be
kind of putting out the bones right it
would be like well what is a
collaboration platform what is what does
that look like what does the little
group look like talking about it from
the big roots and I honestly don't even
know how to do that video series so I
don't know why that's on there but I can
tell my story of which people seem to be
interested in and I'm interested in
doing it but I don't understand why
they're interested if that makes sense
like Emily said about me and my brain
tumors and my disability but it also is
absolutely and how we create a world for
diversity and so explaining whatever I
mean I think that would be useful people
do tend to understand information better
when they know the source and the story
and when it has a human you know
element yes it's kind of really one of
our biases and heuristics but you know I
also feed into it when it's useful all
right so it was my story which I can do
because I know my story the other option
was more of like the cultural self-help
portion of this like that we need to in
respect diversity which doesn't look at
all like what's going on in the real
world like token diversity and forcing
everyone to get along it's not working
and so more explaining that piece of it
but
because there is a part of that that
it's already intrinsic and game be right
that people don't need that explained to
them because they're already there to
create a better world and work with
other people and figure that piece so
but there is like one of the biggest
things we have to do as people as
individuals is figure out how to have a
non-hierarchical relationship right like
how do we have a leadership from a
leaderless revolution how do we actually
create which means owning our own ship
right owning when I want to be dominant
with someone or whether I want to be
dominant over me like I want someone
else to give me instruction which is
fine there's nothing wrong with that but
requiring things to look like what
they've always looked like because
that's what they've always looked like
is what we're trying to undo well we're
living in that world right so there's a
lot of that which honestly and the
reason I haven't done those videos is
also Who am I to be Tony Robbins Aiko
biting but I figured out parts of it
like I'm like I have figured out how to
be happy in chronic illness how to be
how to find my purpose and genius from
within my math and story and so that was
possibly the other piece of like doing
it about what I could do a 10 video
series on I just keep like hone it down
to 10 or flush it up to 10 and why it
has to be 10 I don't know but maybe I
could do my story because that's easier
well working on those ones I can kind of
do them both interchangeably as I want
to I start my own question this isn't
even the place to do that because again
this is more about ground democracy
you're not together it's a but I like
that I mean I think it would be helpful
to to do that also as one of the people
that are you know looking to help other
people get interested in the projects
that you're working on there's a little
introduction about you and how why
you're involved I think people might
respond to that see a little
introduction is not gonna be what it is
it'll be like my childhood brain tumors
is that I already have it lined out well
it doesn't work for me because that I do
every conversation feel like I have to
explain my neurodiversity my brain
issues in art like like my disability
why I don't show up in the same way but
also how positive it was for creating
this
like why we do need to honor our true
human diversity because in it is the
solutions to everything but I don't know
how to do anything in one introduction
video so you know basically my childhood
yeah just gonna search if I'm really
seen it all at once because no one has
to watch it and if they do and they want
to get deeper they can just pick that
piece of it also and then when people
are like what do you mean when you say
you're disabled I can point them to that
video without image to explain it
constantly which makes it worse instead
of better
so yeah all right that was less
important it was just what was on my
mind before right about the agenda
growing our board I think we already
talked about that and then we already
kinda although I can't find that in the
template rallypoint
rules I will see if I can find them in
the next in the next week see there all
four rules okay that's all I'm taking on
I mean I'm not even really taking on
during the video series I just but yeah
I will take that up just outline yeah or
just think it through a little more I'm
a person story as well as the other one
does the other one you've been called
see I don't even know what a name for
the other one is like yeah what the name
is but this we need a better name than
self-help for such a toward like a broad
group of like spirituality you try to
improve yourself but also the self-help
community that's so horrific sorry
yes self-improving I don't know what
I've learned I don't want to own I've
learned I don't want to pretend I'm not
an authority on but actually I'm an
authority on cuz I've spent the last 40
years figuring it out which is basically
what anyone who's forty year old you're
as old can say like however long you've
been on this planet you've been figuring
out your stuff and that makes it you
would've heard on being you
bringing that to the table is all anyone
has to do yeah some of those years may
have been repeats where you didn't learn
anything but yeah in general like
learning the same lesson on repeat until
you get it is life like that is Oh
didn't get it the first time I'm just
gonna keep coming back and you know
because it keeps coming back it's like
oh I feel like I've been here before
I've had this relationship before I've
had this conversation before it maybe I
didn't learn but I was here to learn all
right so the other big thing to take on
is what we were talking about the
beginning the main meat of this which is
creating the post for a Facebook group
for a game B that's that right now but
you've basically already written up but
do I just copy and paste it do you want
do you want to put it out there or do
you want me to put it over I you seem to
be a little bit more able to interact
throughout the day recently just because
with my response I've been off Facebook
quite a bit so I but I can try and
wordsmith it a bit more than those we
have that's always my sticking point
it's like it's never perfect and so I
just put out but like it's just like
you're you didn't have to be perfect
which is never gonna be your house it
just beats like edit one and so edit one
is what the world gets cuz that's just
is it'll never be perfect
and so I'll put it out there um do you
want me to tag you in it because I would
also I don't interrupt the line that is
I literally am like what and then I take
off like I'm like I can't have
conversations constantly this is what I
can do is have a conversation but if
we're both there to kind of answer
questions and I think that word so
what's up pretty well
like minion like I are we even answering
those on there oh he went to come be
part of the conversation and we'll
answer them there I'll probably answer
them as I go it helps me communicate
when people ask questions my brain focus
is much better on the answer and finds
the places and B I'm like what do you
mean you don't understand that part of
it it wasn't that evident in the thing I
didn't say I
I'll be like let's start a technology
company people like technologies use the
problem we need to own it together I'm
like oh didn't I say own it together
it's like you know there's always that
stuff that thing you didn't say you
can't say it all at once
it's just not possible so yeah I will
try and make it or you can just copy and
paste it if you don't have any
improvement ideas awesome that sounds
great and then I will copy and paste it
looking for feedback I love it
sometimes that stuff is so obvious that
it needs to be pointed out to me Oh ask
what doesn't work about this for you all
right and I like the questions that you
had also I think those were good like
what is the piece that isn't isn't
working yeah I'm moving it down all that
down to the little bit below so you see
I deleted what we had and also Anthony
just shared the post that shared a link
to a group it didn't I just already sure
I see but I guess it'll be there twice
now interesting okay
ambi post and you can rephrase this if
you want but I have we would appreciate
feedback on the following idea we want
to experiment with game B by
participating in a cooperative to
experiment with creating Omni win
technology questions about the idea what
indicates to you that this is not
something you want to fit in or is
missing for you to invest in this invest
time looking further into it what
excites you about this pitch I'm
changing it from pitch to idea just
because that sounds a little bit less
gamey there's a big problem in this
whole thing it's like how to talk about
game a things in game be like marketing
and Finance of like those are real
things that we need and yet at the same
time they're smarmy you just by the fact
their game a it's like how do we
innovate sorry continue
continue that was complete intro that's
good
yes well I think that's that's a good
place I sent it how we like I will
absolutely do that and yeah okay back
you see I don't have anything else as
something of I can't remember an action
item for me
yeah awesome yeah but I'll be you know
be at the next meeting
next year no not next year we have one
more on the 20th on the toy on the toys
yes sorry unless you want to skip that
one but I feel like if we're pretty
about the Steelers for like come and
participate we should have ones that
it's come for the state and then a week
off and then hopefully we're just a lot
of participation come January 3rd but
yeah our jobs to put out the apples the
universal decide what to do with the
apples yeah it's not gonna knowledge you
don't understand because of policy
whatever oh wow hard it's not that hard
to get that analogy is it yeah I mean it
yeah even without the background it kind
of makes sense nope well right at at the
end of our our weekend
nothing he's not back from he was doing
but we can say goodbye to YouTube
bye YouTube bye YouTube