[Music]
hello welcome to another episode of the
portal with Eric Weinstein and I am
pleased to be joined in studio with none
other than jackal willing Jacko sir and
I just did that Jacko didn't call for an
immediate response and so none was given
Jacko it's great to be here with you
thanks for having me on
appreciate is for coming one of the
things I'm really excited to talk to you
about is just how our military interacts
with our civilian society but before we
get there
what I'd love to do is to just have you
talk a little bit about your trajectory
through Special Forces in the SEAL
program into this situation where you're
now a podcaster I guess you were brought
to the world of podcasting by our mutual
friend Tim Ferriss and what that
trajector what are the highlights of
that trajectory so that we have some
place to begin I was born and raised in
a small New England town on a dirt road
out in the middle of nowhere I joined
the military when I got done with high
school I went through SEAL training I
went in the SEAL Teams it was now 1991
when I showed up at a SEAL team SEAL
Team One I was an enlisted guys so then
I spent several years there and then I
got picked up for a commissioning
program which meant I was going to
become an officer moving to a leadership
position and I did that and then I went
to the East Coast went to SEAL team two
from there I had to go to college I went
to college at the University of San
Diego and majored in English and went
back to a SEAL team I did two
deployments to Iraq once as a platoon
commander and once as a task unit
commander it got done with that I ran
training for the West Coast SEAL Teams
and the training that Iran was the
tactical training not not the training
where they see the guys on TV carrying
boats on their head and
logs around that's the basic SEAL
training and I ran the the advanced kind
of tactical training where seals learned
to shoot move and communicate and where
they learned their tactics and where
they learn combat leadership and that's
where I've spent my last three years and
then once I got done with that I retired
from the Navy and when I got out I
started working with companies teaching
leadership and that expanded eventually
started working with a friend of mine I
was and the SEAL Teams with lave babban
we got a lot of business consulting
about leadership eventually a lot of
those businesses asked us to write down
the concepts that we had or you have to
be able to give them something you'd
hand out of some kind so we wrote down
the concepts and that eventually became
the book extreme ownership the book
extreme ownership came out in 2015
and in 2015 I was on Tim Ferriss his
podcast through a mutual friend through
to mutual foreheads Kirk parsley and
Peter attea and was on Tim Ferriss
podcast when when I got done recording
with Tim Ferriss he press stop on the
record and he looked at me and said you
should do your own podcast and I noted
that and then a couple weeks later or a
couple months later I was on Joe Rogan's
podcast and in the middle of podcast he
told me that I should have my own
podcast so I started my own podcast
because when Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan
tell you to start a podcast you should
start a podcast so they told me I
started a podcast I've recorded a
hundred and eighty something podcasts
since then I've written a bunch of other
books a book called discipline equals
freedom Field Manual a book called the
dichotomy leadership I've written three
kids books in a series called the way of
the warrior kids series and I've written
one book for smaller kids called Mikey
and the Dragons and we've continued on
with the business at national on front
working with companies all over the
world teaching leadership I think that's
where I'm at right now well it's quite a
story something would be meaningful for
me to know more about is
yeah I've always understood that our
military has had to have really a
separate culture I'm right down to let's
say marriage ceremonies looking
different in the military than they do
outside and one of my questions is to
what extent is the military still a
separate culture do I have that wrong
and then following up on that to what
extent are the individual special forces
units really an entirely alternate world
with different practices different
disciplinary regimes things that are
unthinkable let's say in the civilian
world the military is made up of a bunch
of human beings people from America from
every different walk of life in America
and they all come in then certainly you
go through boot camp or whatever
indoctrination program that you go
through and you learn some of the
fundamental military methodologies of
living such as being disciplined such as
chain of command such as the rank
structure tactics so you learn those
things but at the end of the day those
are just overlays on a bunch of human
beings that are just human beings and so
that the military is just a subsection
of American society and it reflects that
way inside the military as far as the
Special Operations Forces sure they all
have their own little culture but you
know you go to different colleges and
they have different cultures and you go
to different businesses I work with
different businesses all the time they
all have their own little cultures going
on inside and you don't think it's more
profound the military of a difference um
I don't know if it's more profound
there's some really dynamic companies
out there that have very very deeply
rooted cultures and those are probably
in some cases even more distinct then
what what you have inside the military
one thing that's interesting about the
military sure there's some military
traditions that go back hundreds of
years but the military people come and
go in
military all the time you know as an as
an officer in the military you might
spend two maybe three years at a at an
individual unit and then you're gone and
someone's gonna take your place so it's
not like a business or a company where
sometimes you go to a company I work
with companies where there's been people
there for 28 years you know throughout
the chain of command maybe it's a
frontline worker that's been running
some machine at a company for 27 years
or maybe it's the CEO who's owned the
business or started the business or
inherited the business or bought the
business but he's been there for a long
time so those cultures can have kind of
a more unified way about them because
there's there's that there's that
continuity of human beings in it whereas
the military people move around and they
get stationed they get out they retire
but so there's there's cultures I think
in in everywhere in the military
certainly has a culture button depending
on depending on what you're into you
know if you go to a Grateful Dead show
you'll see a strong culture there that
everyone dresses the same everyone looks
the same everyone probably thinks very
similarly if you go to a Metallica show
same thing you know people are gonna
dress very similarly so I guess it just
I think everyone's got a culture and
it's present in the military for sure
but I think there's cultures everywhere
if somebody was in the military once
said to me that you have to understand
that the military values
interoperability in place of continuity
that because people are constantly being
moved around the culture is almost
defined by a kind of mental flexibility
of a certain kind and that the person
went on to say that American companies
used to move people around and have
stopped doing that largely so that it
used to be in his estimation that our
companies like Procter & Gamble or an
Exxon would be much more like the
military and that they would have an
expectation that you would be posted to
a particular place for a couple of years
there would be sort of a Welcome Wagon
there was a way of absorbing families
and that that had actually been given up
and that the military had retained some
of that but that that was in fact also
at risk I don't know whether that
resonates at all well certainly the
military you you have to be adaptable
right and when you take different people
all the time and you cycle them into
different military units you learn to
work with different people that's for
sure and you can't get used to working
with one type of human being because
even though that human being has been
through boot camp and been indoctrinated
they're still got all their own personal
emotions and drives and personality and
idiosyncrasies and things that are gonna
drive you crazy and things that work
well and things that don't work well and
you've got to deal with all those things
all right and so it is that that does
happen in the military and it happens in
the civilian sector now what I find
interesting about that statement is I
think nowadays people change jobs a lot
more than they did when I was a kid when
I was a kid all my friends parents they
worked at the same company for 29 years
so they might have been moved around by
it and now you might move around a lot
but stay in the same city yeah but you
but you might move around from company
to company right exactly so you know
following on that one thing that I had
heard that I thought was kind of
interesting at at an almost a biological
level was a description of boot camp
which was that boot camp was a
recapitulation of human development for
adults that needed to be retrained as if
they had always been meant to be
soldiers so that the idea being that you
have a civilian set of instructions in
your brain and you have to more or less
blow it away to accept all of these
differences that there really is a chain
of command and it's not flexible in the
way that your regular life might be
flexible or that you think that you
can't do something that is within your
physical capacity to do it but requires
a lot of effort for you to get to that
level and that in essence what boot camp
was was it was a second childhood that
was imposed to make you safe to be a
soldier to be in harm's way whereas if
you took your regular self
to a battlefield your instincts would be
completely counter to what would be safe
for not only you but for others who are
attached to you do you do you buy that
boot camp is effectively another version
of childhood that is overlaid over the
previous one I don't know if I'd call it
another version of childhood but I can
tell you what the military boot camps do
an incredible job of taking normal human
beings from every walk of life and
turning them into someone that is in
many cases now the military is not
perfect by any stretch of the
imagination but if you take a kid like
me well use me and as an example you
take a kid like me that was a marginal
student a marginal athlete I was very
rebellious I was getting in trouble a
lot and you put me into boot camp and
say okay here's you have a blank slate
none of your past matter so we don't
care where you're from we don't care
what your parents did we don't care
about any of that we don't care about
your history
your past at all what we care about what
you're gonna do now and if you do these
things you're gonna move in the
direction you want to move into and here
here's what you're gonna do you know
what you do in boot camp you fold your
underwear a certain way you walk a
certain way you eat a certain way and
that's what you do and if you do what
they tell you to do you can move forward
and you can advance and things work out
well now what what the the thing that
you got to remember is boot camp is a
miniscule fraction of what your career
in the military is all right so for
instance obedience to orders right
that's something that you get drilled to
do in boot camp in fact the purpose of
military drill you you know you see the
guys marching around with rifles on
their arms and they're all coordinated
doing synchronized movements that's
called close order drill and they used
to do it because when you were in battle
in ranks in in the Revolutionary War
period of course we didn't fight this
way in America that's right we won but
the the British military close order
drill hey you're gonna draw your weapon
at the same time you're gonna load your
weapon at the same time you're gonna
fire your weapon at the same time and
you're gonna follow these orders when
they come out directly that's what it
was originally for right but they we
still do close order drill in boot camp
and the reason that they do it is so
that you learn immediate obedience
obedience to orders the
why you do it now what'd you find out
after boot camp and what I tell people
all the time is the last thing I want as
a commander is people that are just
gonna obey my orders without questioning
them I want to be surrounded with people
that question what I'm saying that give
me pushback when something doesn't make
sense and the last thing I want is
somebody that's gonna blindly obey my
orders so boot camp is like childhood I
guess but it's really only like infancy
it really just teaches you get you
potty-trained and then once you get into
the military that's where you actually
learn to maneuver how to lead how to
interact with other people you learn how
to flex up and down the chain of command
like you talked about the inflexibility
of the chain of command that's actually
once you get the further you get in the
military the more flexibility you see in
the chain of command so in part wouldn't
that be because the people who rise to
positions of power cannot get there by
doing it highly egoic lee that they have
to actually recognize that the guy at
the bottom might have the best
information in this so that it's really
because we refuse to promote people who
are crazily egoic that we have that kind
of flexibility well that is an ideal
outlook and and certainly that would be
a nice thing but no there's there's
peope the you know like I said in an
ideal situation sure people are getting
promoted because they're the ones that
are open-minded there's the ones that
put their ego aside but I have to
explain this to people all the time that
because I always tell people hey you
need to keep your ego in check and I
have to explain to people yeah sometimes
that person that is concerned about
themselves and they're taking care of
themselves well I'm telling you Eric hey
don't worry about you know don't worry
about yourself take care of the team
take care of the mission and and things
will be okay
and I have to say but listen you this
other guy who's taking care of himself
he might actually get a promotion ahead
of you he might move ahead of you this
time he might even move ahead of you
next time but guess what eventually
people are gonna look at that guy
they're gonna characterize him for what
he is which is someone that's taking
care of himself doesn't care about
anyone else and that is gonna undermine
his future so in the long run Fran
you'll you'll advance because you took
care of the team you take care of the
mission maybe in the short term you
might advance because you took care of
yourself but that's not a long-term
solution so ideally yes people that put
their
and check of those are the people that
get promoted unfortunately it doesn't
always work that way sometimes some
people are egomaniacs and they they step
on people's backs and they make it to
the top that absolutely happens do you
find that there's a I mean I'm always
suspicious of the idea of really
sidelining the ego and the ego is in
some sense this receptacle before we you
know our life needs a protagonist
somehow and the ego provides that sense
that it is about us because we have one
set of eyes and that's how we tour the
world do you find that the people that
you respect the most keeping their ego
in check as you say it are people who
are really not highly ago or are they
people who have their ego involved in
like a Mexican standoff with other parts
of their personality so that there's a
tension and a dynamism to you certainly
there's something that I call the
dichotomy of leadership which are these
opposing forces that are pulling you in
opposite directions all the time and and
yes ego is absolutely one of those
things because if I if I truly had no
ego well then I wouldn't care what my
performance was I wouldn't care about
anything right I would just be happy to
be sitting watching television and
eating Cheetos that's what a total lack
of ego could do to me the other extreme
is hey I'm gonna step on everyone's back
in order and rise to the top and I don't
care whoever gets in my way I'm gonna
take them down where do we want to be we
want to be in a balanced place where
we're confident but we're not cocky you
know I went and spoke with some
inner-city kids here in LA anyone when I
ever went out I speak to people one of
the topics that I talk to them about is
hey you've got to stay humble because
normally I'm talking to people that are
CEOs of companies or you know people
that are in positions of power and so I
have to constantly remind them to keep
their ego in check and that originally
that originated in the fact that I was
training young seal leaders and young
seal leaders they're they're they're
frontrunners they're overachievers
they're they got a strong ego so they
have to be told hey you got to keep that
thing in check you've got to make sure
you're listening to other people you got
to hear other people's ideas you got to
make sure that you're taking care of
your team ahead of yourself they need to
hear that
I went and spoke with these inner-city
kids and it was an interesting group of
inner-city kids because they weren't
just they weren't just underprivileged
they were underprivileged but they had
done some kind of tests so that they
were there were there were smart kids
and I was gonna talk about the normal
topics that I speak on and one of them
is humility and I went in this room and
I immediately realized I wasn't going to
talk about humility at all because every
one of these kids in this room was was
beat down you that was eat the message
they need their their heads were hung
low they wouldn't look me in the eyes so
what they needed here is hey be
confident you you have capability you
can do this so they were there's a group
of people whose ego was was crushed too
far and they needed to have confidence
built up so again this is another one of
those classic dichotomies that needs to
be balanced you need yes you need to
have an ego but at the same time you you
have to be humble enough to listen to
other people and you can't let your ego
get out of control so I'm super glad to
hear you bring up the dichotomy of
leadership and and I was just trying to
touch it lightly can you talk more about
what that theory is and how you've come
to it it's interesting the way I came to
it the way I came to it was by Rio
actually had to have the ultimate form
of humility or myself because I realized
as I preached these many of the theories
that I had as I preached them I realized
that I wasn't always right and I'll give
an example is yeah one of the things
that I always talked about especially on
the battlefield was that you had to be
aggressive like you have to be
aggressive that's what you have to be
you have to be ready to maneuver you
have to take the fight to the enemy if
you see a problem you need to attack
that problem I talk about that all the
time
and then plain as day clearly are there
times when as a leader or as a human
being you can be too aggressive yes
there absolutely are and we used to call
that running to your death hey if you're
super hyper aggressive because Jocko
said you got to be aggressive and so now
there's a machine-gun nest on a hill and
you just go charge that thing you're
gonna die and whoever follows you is
also going to die so you you have to be
you you have to you have to modulate
your aggression either sometimes we have
to back off
and that was sort of the first thing
that I said well on the one hand I
talked about you got to be aggressive
but there's times where you can be too
aggressive and then I said to myself
well what about what about talking as a
leader because because of the leader you
have to talk right you have to
communicate with the other people on
your team right is there such a thing as
a leader that can talk too much yes
there absolutely is and if I as a leader
all I do is talk talk talk talk talk
we'll eventually people stop listening
to me they don't know what's important
what's not I over communicate to them to
the point where they stop listening so
you can talk too much but the other side
of the spectrum is I don't talk enough
and now you don't know what's going on
the team doesn't know which direction
we're headed so this is where this idea
came from is that the the the quality
that we're looking for isn't on the
extremes it's a balanced it's it's a
dichotomy of leadership and finding the
balance in those dichotomies let lead me
and my buddy life to write this
follow-on book two extreme ownership the
reason to follow on book two extreme
ownership the reason for that is because
that's as we work with companies not
only did most questions revolve around
this idea of the dichotomy of leadership
but most answers most answers that I
give are someone says oh my team isn't
taking any initiative ok well let's
break that problem down why is that
happening
that's happening because you perhaps are
taking so much ownership so much extreme
ownership you read the book extreme
ownership so you're taking so all this
ownership well now your team doesn't
have any ownership so they're just
waiting for you to tell them what to do
so when you do that their initiative
gets crushed you go too far in the other
direction and you've got people doing
things that they shouldn't be doing
working on their their stepping outside
their bounds they're they're not staying
within the parameters you've given them
because you've got them running wild so
you don't gone too far in the other
direction where do you want to be you
want to be balanced and and that's where
that dichotomy of leadership comes in so
I mean it's fascinating to have to tell
people that the best advice is to
constantly recalibrate the forces that
are in opposition
in your mind do you have any way of
helping people in general with
dialectics that need to cover their I
feel like you know I thought it was
beautiful what you said before about
these inner-city inner-city kids so much
of what I hear is people giving blanket
advice which has no sense of what
listener it's finding so you know like
you teach people to be humble who are
already humble you're just cutting them
off at the at the knees or if you teach
people you know you need to be assertive
and you've got somebody who's like
wildly over-aggressive the person just
takes it as license how how do we
responsibly push out a framework for
balance which isn't mealy-mouthed but
really has full-blown versions of these
opposing ideas with within one mind that
again that's that's why this book that
economy leadership was we had to write
it that's because because we put the
name on the first book extreme ownership
we gave it that name and and that's a
great concept when you've got people
that don't want to take responsibility
for things like listen you've got to
take extreme ownership of what's going
on but it's like you said when you give
it that to someone that's already a
micromanager right oh they're all of a
sudden they're running with it like
would you say a license it's like they
have a license now to micromanage
double-o micromanage yeah and they're
wondering why things are falling apart
on them and why no one has any
initiative anymore and why they're
having to make every single decision and
why the frontline troops aren't
maneuvering on their own well it's
because you're micromanaging them now
you're micromanaging them to the extreme
so that is why we had to do it because
these these things as you said you have
to constantly modulate all these
different balances all these different
dichotomies you have to constantly
modulate them and by the way once you
get it modulated today right tomorrow
it'll change a little bit yeah cuz all
of a sudden you know if you were if you
had no initiative Eric and I said hey
listen I might've been micromanaging you
I need you to step up more and you go oh
okay cool and
next day you show up and you start doing
some project that I hadn't even
authorized and now I got to come back
and I got a I got to adjust because now
I gotta tighten you up and say hey I
want you to take initiative and I
appreciate it but you still got to stay
within the bounds of what we're trying
to get done so I was right yesterday and
now all of a sudden same mindset I'm
wrong and I have to adjust again so
you're a hundred percent spot on there
you have to modulate all these
principles for the people that you're
dealing with and the situation that
they're in so one of the things that
I've been really curious about I don't
know whether this rate whether you react
to this in any way and in any way at all
is we always talked about teaching
critical thinking but we don't talk
about teaching critical feeling and but
what by critical feeling I mean that
most of our emotions are susceptible to
becoming maladaptive and because they're
not in analytic thoughts they're sort of
harder to access and harder to influence
I would imagine that when you were in
some situation where you're you know in
harm's way and you've got a bunch of
people that you're looking out for and
you got to get something done and stakes
are very high
the emotions that you might have around
your house on the weekend when you're
with your family are very different than
the emotions you can afford when you're
actually engaged in some sort of action
in a military context can you do you
relate to this concept of critical
feeling at all does that sound like
something that you have had to think
about am i off base I have had to think
about emotions a ton yeah and what I
have found with emotions is just like
every other thing that we have as human
beings they can get out of balance so if
I have a leader that gets super
emotional about every decision or flies
off the handle or shows a bunch of anger
and loses his temper that is not going
to be good people will not respect that
people will not trust his judgment
because they're emotional so we can't go
and and be super emotional human beings
if we're trying to be in a leadership
position
and that includes in your house right if
you fly off the handle with your wife or
you fly off the handle with your kids
that is not gonna be healthy for those
kids they're not gonna trust your
judgment they're not gonna respect you
how can they respect you when you can't
control your own temper and if they do
respect it that's actually scary because
what you're teaching them is that in
order to get respect what you have to do
is have a violent crazy temper so you so
you don't want to be a super hyper
emotional person what's the other end of
the spectrum the other end of the
spectrum is I've shut my emotions off
completely I don't I'm totally and
completely detached I have no emotional
connection with the people that I'm
leading whether they're on my team or in
my family and guess what if I don't have
that connection
as a human being as human beings are
working for me
they are not going to do what they need
to do to accomplish the mission when
they see me as a cold-blooded robot
so with these emotions you have to keep
them under control
I'm not telling people and I don't tell
people that they should be void of
emotion right because if your void of
emotions you're a robot and people don't
follow robots people follow other human
beings people follow human beings that
they're connected to emotionally however
let that go too far and your emotions
are out of control and you're making bad
decisions you fire I always ask people
when but what kind of decisions do you
make when you were super emotional the
answer is not really like this once yeah
but if you completely cut emotions out
you know if you've got a team and you're
gonna make a decision that's gonna be a
massive negative impact on them and you
don't let those emotions play a little
bit and you just make the perfect
business decision okay great you made a
perfect this business decision you saved
X amount of dollars but but you cut that
emotional connection with your people
and they saw that you didn't really care
about their emotions okay you got the
short-term win you made a little more
money this quarter guess what's
happening next quarter you losing three
people critical people that went and
found a job somewhere else somebody some
other leader somewhere made an emotional
connection with them and now they're
gone and so your short-term win turns
into a long-term loss how do you how do
you think about the concept we're used
to hearing you're overthinking this and
I've started to try this phrase I think
you're over feeling this I've noticed
that in our public square it's
become more important to constantly
explore one's feelings and to the point
where I find it absolutely distracting
the the extent to which people are now
sharing their feelings feels to my way
of thinking wrong they're not holding
anything back there's nothing intimate
you're expected to go into this
performative kind of heart connection to
you know various abstractions do you
think they're I know there's a better
way of saying it like you're over
feeling this is not an easy thing for
people to hear how do you get people to
to rein in some of those emotion no I
actually don't don't know if there's a
better way of saying that over feelings
it's a great term I I think I might have
to use that that's great and that's
explaining what I just explained right
if I if you tell me something and my
emotion is this or my reaction is this
massive emotional reaction what's
horrible about it from a strategic
perspective is if you tell me some
opinion and I just immediately fly off
the handle emotionally right you don't
listen to another word that I say and it
means nothing to you other than you know
he's super emotional you just you
discount everything that I say because
I'm emotional and that you as a human
being know that someone else being super
emotional isn't thinking straight and
isn't making good decisions and and
they're just just being emotional so I'm
better to say oh interesting point let
me give you what what my take on that is
and all of a sudden you're gonna sit
you're gonna listen to me you're gonna
you're gonna hear me out
and so yes over feeling is something
that happens all the time and again
that's just going too far out of balance
in the dichotomy of leadership with your
emotions so another thing I want to
explore with you is this question well
come at it from kind of a funny angle
are you familiar with Esther Perel at
all the relationship expert
no she specializes in thinking about
very difficult topics she's touched you
know what happens to marriage in a
monogamous setting when it feels very
constraining she's touched on infidelity
she's not talking about workplace issues
where she's exploring you know sort of
forbidden thoughts about what happens in
the workplace
and one of the things that she said to
me that was very interesting is it she
was reconsidering masculinity and she
said the masculinity is clearly an
incredibly powerful thing but did she
hadn't appreciated that it is as fragile
as it is powerful that the number of
ways of invalidating men is quite high
and that there is some sort of
dependence on kind of a bargain in which
men tend to be more disposable
particularly in times of war and
conflict let's be honest about it and
that there is something both extremely
powerful but also fragile about the
concept of masculinity itself it's very
difficult for us even in our society to
find things that are wholly positive
that we ascribe to the concept of
masculinity that we would denied to the
concept of femininity like we've gotten
to a point where we're just unsure it
would seem as to whether or not there's
a compelling reason for half of humanity
now war of course is an easy counter to
that but the more distance we've gotten
from world war two I worry that we've
forgotten exactly why men exist in in
terms of their full complement of
abilities and skills and functions do
you think that there's anything to the
concept that masculinity may be
intrinsically fragile they get subject
to veto if you say you know if you do
something that's heroic let's say and
nobody chooses to acknowledge it or like
well you're showing off you know it it's
a very hard thing to to protect do you
detect a crisis in masculinity that's a
big topic we get a lot of young people
who come to some of the shows of the
Friends of both of ours and it's very
clear that there is the search for how
do I make my way as a young man
are you are you getting this energy yeah
you know I don't get a lot of that
energy all right and the reason I don't
get a lot of that energy is because I
mean I do what I do
my friends they do what we do you know I
think the the thing with with
masculinity is just like everything else
if I take any masculine trait and I take
it to an extreme it turns back turn
stock I and you know and I should say
traditionally masculine trait because if
I take any traditionally masculine trait
and I take a turret extreme it turns bad
yeah the thing is the masculine traits
that we talked about but I have three
daughters and one son I I raised them
all the same and I want them to have the
same amount of the masculine traits hey
do I want you to be assertive yes I want
you to be assertive that's a
traditionally masculine trait do I want
you to be brave yes I want you to be
brave do I want you to be stupid and and
I'd go over all that isn't just a
masculine yeah we have to check with my
wife on that all right but so so these
but even those aren't really I mean I
wouldn't say that assertiveness is a
masculine trait I would say we have our
flavor of assertiveness has been
traditionally different than the female
flavor but you know definitely you know
I think if my wife is one of the braver
people I know and there's nothing that
contradicts the feminine and that but
she doesn't do it the way let's say my
brother would would behave in a in a
brave context and so the the question in
some sense has to do with its you know I
give people the puzzle name some
positive trait that you would associate
with masculinity to distinguish it from
femininity there's plenty of things that
we say that a feminine that are positive
but there are very few things that we
can say are masculine that are positive
without an immediate claim that that is
as female as it is male I don't know all
right
I mean III don't know I I'm over here
doing what I do
I don't know whether it's considered
masculine or whatever but this is this
is kind of what I do how I live my life
the people that I know that are men they
all seem kind of similar to me okay uh I
mean not all of them obviously cuz
you've got I mean I have friends that
are that are not like me at all
but yeah I don't know let's try another
one I don't know if I have the best the
better to answer for okay what is it
that I guess I think about the few
people I've gone through life and death
situations with and I feel a very
special strong bond to them that was
catalyzed by the peril that we went
through together and I watched how they
performed but it wasn't in a military
situation was just sort of you know
you're like you're out on a remote hike
and people perform and they come through
and you you you take that knowledge for
the rest of your life that that's
somebody I can depend upon is there any
substitute for putting your life at risk
when it comes to deepening bonds between
people particularly men going through
hard things together is what brings
people together and for sure the harder
things that you go through the tighter
the bonds gonna be so if you take the
military for example to start with the
military well the first thing you do is
you put in through boot camp like we
talked about well that's hard and you go
and you form bonds with people that
other people that went through boot camp
we all kind of have that common bond
then you go to Airborne School where
you're gonna jump out of airplanes and
that's a little bit of a death-defying
thing and you're gonna be the airborne
crews are gonna be a little bit tighter
you go to Special Operations training
and all of a sudden you've done
something that's harder than that and
and now the bombs are a little bit
tighter now you take that unit and you
put them in the combat zone and their
bonds are gonna be even tighter now you
take that combat zone and you make it
super intense those bonds are gonna be
even tighter so there's no doubt about
it now in the business world what that
looks like and especially I mean I
retired in 2010 so the companies that we
worked with a lot of them the companies
that we work with were many of them
survivors of the
economic crash and believe me they
talked about that like that was their
battle zone that's where they formed
these really tight bonds and they
weren't going anywhere now they were
tight so whether you can replace it I
don't really think so I think the harder
strife you go through with someone
the tighter the bond is gonna be and
maybe over time you form a strong bond
you know if I had to rely on you for
something and you came through for me
and then you did it again and again and
then I did it for you and we we stuck
together I mean over time you can
definitely form really really strong
bonds with people but I think the harder
something is the stronger the bonds if
it doesn't fracture you if it doesn't
break you right well then you have that
guy you'll never speak to again because
where were you when I needed you exactly
right my concern though I mean let me
just open up about the fact that my
least favorite phrase in the English
language at the moment is I've got your
back and the reason is because I think
it migrated from the military into
civilian life where civilians have no
idea what it means they think that it's
like it's a good thing to say it's like
I really care about you and I don't want
anything bad to happen but it has
nothing to do with I've actually got
your back do you find that there is this
kind of military envy and bleed where
people talk as if they're in these
situations and it actually just doesn't
match in any way I don't know if it's
envy or if it's just slang terms that
expand over time mean there's slang
terms that we use all the time I'm
farming sports and the military provide
a lot of language right right yeah so I
think I don't think that when someone
says I got your back you know you and I
are are you know hey can you I'm gonna
go to McDonald's right you know I got
your back you need anything you know let
me grab you some chicken nuggets over
here I don't think that my intent and
saying that wouldn't be like hey brother
I got your back with the chicken nuggets
deep you know I I think it's just a
slang thing that people are thrown
around yeah I percent I think it rhymes
up in a situation in which like you know
the boss is gonna come and ask a bunch
of questions and one guy says I don't
worry I got your back and he immediately
folds
because he did not even think about what
he was saying and I think in part one of
the fears I have and I don't know
whether you resonate with this is that I
think a lot of American men men in the
developed world don't have any bonds
that are comparable to the bonds that
you're talking about in other words
their closest friend is untested in any
real way yeah that's that's uh not good
that's not good you definitely want to
have some friends that you know when you
call them they will answer and when you
make a request they will deliver and you
don't need a big group of friends like
that but it's nice to have a few and one
of the things that I'm curious about is
that I'm seeing kids not be allowed to
work out their own problems and that
they're taught if that anything goes
wrong immediately go find an authority
figure and as a result I worry that
these kids are never gonna have those
strong bonds because you have to get
into trouble and out of trouble
repeatedly with the same people do you
think there's anything to that yeah
definitely form good bonds doing hard
things and also would you get in trouble
can you let spirit is there anything
that you got in trouble for that you can
discuss from like before you enter the
military yeah I mean I you know just
every other knucklehead thing that every
other boy was doing when they're 13 14
15 years old such as whether it was you
know blowing up fireworks driving like
maniacs just every stupid thing fighting
you know big giant street fights it just
dumb stuff and yeah I did it all like an
idiot like a like a 14 year old boy like
a 15 year old boy
did you enjoy street fighting yeah okay
can you so there it's a good example of
violence with probably very little point
but the pleasure of fighting you know I
think it was PJ O'Rourke who pointed me
to it's one of his writings that he said
we used to discuss the drunk delight of
battle before we decided that war was
generally a bad thing
you know I think people like competition
right and you know there's no more
heightened form of competition
what wars number one whereas I'm trying
to kill you
then you take take step down from that
and where you at your we're gonna fight
each other we're not gonna kill each
other hopefully maybe but you know so so
people like to fight many people like to
fight it's the old it's a very good
challenge and you know especially when
you're when you're young when you're 14
15 16 18 22 we're gonna fight if there's
these people up in where they up in
Oregon with their they're fighting each
other
protesting wearing masks all these guys
up in Oregon beating people up and
whatnot and everyone's all surprised and
I say yeah their guys beating people up
yeah that's that's normal that's that's
what that's what guys do there but
they're wearing masks and stuff yeah
okay that's what they're doing right now
in the 50s they didn't write in the well
you know it's just it's just a different
what they're what are they trying to do
they're trying to fight other people
they're they're they're tribal you know
and and DNA their DNA the combative DNA
is leaking out they don't know how to
control it because they're young and
they're gonna go beat people up so is
fighting an important part like physical
fighting an important part of human
development I think so I'll tell you
what I think and again this is I don't I
don't want to sit here and talk like I'm
making some sort of assertion for
mankind and I think you might have just
framed the question as if were trying to
elevate I don't know but which for human
development I don't know but let me tell
you from my experience cuz I don't like
to talk and broad you know statements
for all of humanity it's as you would
like me to do right now aye-aye-aye
for me yeah there was there was
three things that really help me I'm
gonna give a speech at my friend's
wedding yeah he was getting married and
he was a guy that I had trained
jiu-jitsu with a lot he's a guy I went
to combat with and in now I was at his
wedding he's getting married and I was
giving the speech and what I said was
there was three things in my life that
sort of made me feel secure as a man
okay and the first one was learning how
to fight so like learning jiu-jitsu and
knowing that hey if I get into a fight
with someone I can handle myself that
was number one number two was going into
combat because when you go into combat
you you want to know that you're gonna
perform your duties and you're not gonna
cower and you're gonna be brave and
you're gonna do your job so went to
combat I was good with it I liked it it
was fine and then the last one was I got
married and had kids and all of a sudden
now I've got people that depend on me
and I've got people that are a higher
priority than me ever
then I will ever be and so those three
things were very important to me feeling
secure and and you know I always say
when I was young and stupid and didn't
know how to fight I used to fight all
the time and then once I learned how to
fight I didn't fight anymore because I
have anything to prove anymore you know
I I'm not trying to prove that I'm
tougher than you and outside the
7-eleven it's like hey if you want to
find out who's tougher come to go to the
gym and we'll we'll get on the mat and
see you so you would win but let's not
do it in the street like like dummies so
those three things I think are helpful
for people to do they were helpful for
me I know that they were helpful you
know as a young insecure kid which
that's what you that's what kids are
they're insecure with who they are you
know that no one's walking around at age
15 thinking you know I'm the man and
when they project that which I certainly
tried to project what they're really
projecting is I'm pretty insecure about
what's going on right now okay cool how
are you gonna get over that then you
don't learn how to fight learn what that
feels like take responsibility for you
know when you have a wife and kids so
you have a responsibility
big one so those are things that I think
move you in the right direction so if I
take that sequence right the first one
is learning theoretically to be capable
in a fight so that you don't need to
worry that if something happens you need
to back down instantly you can assess
the situation figure out how you want to
handle it on your own terms hopefully
but then you say the second thing which
is beyond being able to fight
I really enjoy door combat helped make
me who I am can you talk about and feel
free not to if it's not right what what
is the sort of the poetry of combat that
allows you to more fully develop that
allowed you to more fully develop as a
human being beyond the ability let's say
to just handle yourself in a fight where
you're actually applying this now with
leverage in terms of weaponry in terms
of command in terms of strategy tactics
in a life-and-death situation you know
all that stuff that you just mentioned
mm-hmm I absolutely love and I've spent
my entire life trying to get good at
tactics with weapons maneuver on the
battlefield combat leadership and all
those things are awesome and that is
certainly the the the things in combat
that you get to experience but the
bottom line is is this when you go into
combat you got people that are trying to
kill you and at some point you realize
okay I could die tonight and if I die
bring it and I think for me you know the
the idea you know people people go
through life they they you got death out
there in the future and they either
don't want to face it or it's so far
away that they they don't need to face
it or they put it in the back of their
mind well when you go into war it's
coming to the front of your mind and you
get to answer that question that you
some people wait their whole lives to
answer is what am I going to do when
it's time to die and once you answer
that question for yourself
then for me I was like okay you know III
here we go and if I die okay you
familiar with this movie No Country for
Old Men absolutely well and I've you
know read the book Cormac McCarthy's
right my favorite fiction author was
that right did yes the famous gas
station scene where Anton Chigurh does
this sort of methodical hitman of
potentially supernatural origin is
offended that this guy transgresses a
politeness boundary and asks one too
many questions and he traps him into
this coin toss and he says what's the
most you've ever lost on a coin toss and
the guy says you know I don't know
he said well you have to call the point
says I didn't put anything up and the
Hitman says oh you've been putting it up
your whole life every day as you leave
the studio you're gonna be taking a risk
with your life as you walk across the
street that somebody's on their phone
texting and not paying attention and yet
you don't most people don't know that
they they've imagined the death is this
incredibly remote thing they don't see
bodies or there are fewer open caskets
probably we we cremate people we don't
visit graves there are all sorts of
things that are keeping us in an
abstraction where death seems very very
remote are you saying that combat was
liberating specifically because you were
forced to say I am playing with the full
stack and I've accepted that and your
comment bring it I mean it's a
terrifying thing to say in a
life-and-death situation how do you how
do you how do you see that if you
crossed over some threshold I think it's
a matter of acceptance of accepting the
fact that this is what is going to
happen and you know you talk about not
visiting graves I mean I visit my
friends graves all the time I go to
national cemeteries and I see you know
that there'll be some some person who
died in like let's say the 50s or the
40s and there are fresh flowers on
that particular grave is very moving so
I don't know if liberating is the is the
word but perhaps it is but I think again
and you know Sam Harris he asked a very
pointed question on his podcast he said
you know you talk about war being hell
which I do and and being awful which I
do and which it is and then you know I
say that combat was like the best time
that I've had in my life and he says how
do you reconcile those two statements
and and what I said to him was I asked
him if he ever knew anyone that had
cancer and that had cancer and lived and
he said yes and I said and when you ask
those people they're they very often
give the answer I'm glad it happened to
me this is what I learned from it they
had to face death and once they were
through it they realized you know they
wouldn't wish it on their best on their
worst enemy but they're they're glad
that they went through it because they
learned and I think I said that to me is
what combat is like you have to face
your own mortality and you have to
recognize that you know you could die
and then when you're done you get back
and you realize that the Sun coming up
in the morning is a beautiful thing
I can imagine what about so you were
most associated in my mind with with the
Iraqi theater and what I wanted to ask
you about is what was in your estimation
what was unusual and peculiar about
operating in that theater at that time
and and what did you bring back from the
particularity of that experience it
wouldn't have been the same if you'd
been in Afghanistan or posted somewhere
else one thing that's interesting is I
do two deployments to Iraq and and the
amount that the battlefield changes all
the time how quickly the enemy adapts
and then how coalition forces have to
adapt to what the enemy adapted to and
that's a cycle that just doesn't stop
and so you you're constantly trying to
keep your eyes open and be humble about
what
the enemy's doing and never
underestimate what their capabilities
are as far as the operating theater my
first deployment I was all over the
country we operated all over the place
and I was living in Baghdad or we were
we had our compound wasn't in Baghdad
and then but I waited all over the place
and we travel and fly and drive
everywhere in Iraq or to a lot of
different places and then my second
deployment where we were in the Battle
of Ramadi
I didn't leave Ramadi and then leave
that little you know three four square
miles of neighborhoods and so that was
very different and who are the
belligerents on both sides was Isis on
the other side though my first
deployment what it was was a bunch of
thugs criminals former regime elements
running around causing problems and they
were very disorganized mmm so that was
in 2003 2004 by 2006 when I went back to
Ramadi when I went to Ramadi that was
now a full-fledged insurgency that was
organized and financed and led and they
were operating as a paramilitary
organization and the same folks who had
gotten disciplined the same folks but
they had gotten disciplined that's what
I'm trying to figure out yes the same
folks disciplined but more important
they had leadership now because al-qaeda
started bringing in foreign fighters
foreign leadership to go in and run and
direct operations and that's when you
when you have a an organization without
leadership isn't an organization at all
I'm sure they can they can nipa you and
they can do some random attacks and
that'll be problematic but once you
organize an element and you put
leadership over them then that's when
they could start to do real damage and
that's exactly what happened and where
was the experience coming from was it
Chechnya or all over all over from yeah
from all over
[Music]
one of the things we talked about in
world war 2 is the sense of being the
good guys and I think in the era that
followed World War 2 we were less
convinced that we were always
intrinsically the good guys but you had
the opportunity to go up against some of
the most horrible people we've ever seen
in modern times is that a fair
characterization of the of the enemy yes
can you talk about and I would actually
like to do it somewhat unflinchingly
what distinguished Isis in terms of I
talk about a concept most people don't
react to called message violence where
the point of the violence is to be so
picturesque that it works its way into
your mind and it won't let you go
because somebody did something that was
unnecessarily unthinkable just for the
purpose of torturing your brain with
knowing that that's what's on the other
side is is that a fair characterization
yeah so the term Isis started being used
around 2007 I my last deployment ended
in 2006 but the characters are still the
same and they were they weren't as
organized as they became when they
became Isis when they started flying the
ISIS flag and then what you had was this
recruitment there's a worldwide
recruitment of of sadistic evil human
beings coming to the the Caliphate to
torture and murder and rape
systematically girls and boys and yeah
but what we saw in in Ramadi in 2006 was
it's it's the worst nightmares that you
can imagine from people being skinned
alive people being beheaded people being
tortured in all manners
rape you know rape used as a weapon of
war just everything every horrible thing
that you can family members being
violated in front of other family
absolutely and and that's why you know
for us when you ask
did you feel like the good guys oh yeah
we definitely felt like the good guys
and we especially felt like the good
guys because the local populace is who
was enduring this this this heinous
these heinous acts was the local
populace though the local people that
lived in ramadi that's who was enduring
and suffering these horrible acts so
when we came in and started eliminating
the insurgents they were ecstatic and
they were happy that we were there and
they believed me they wanted nothing
more than for to help us get those
insurgents out of the city and out of
the country what is it that you think
you know you mentioned the caliphate and
my fear is is that the caliphate was
sort of a remote dream and that what we
allowed to happen was that the caliphate
came to be a potential reality in a
world of people who hadn't been used to
thinking about it until recently that in
essence there been a couple of major
shifts in the Islamic world one is for
example the suicide bombing was an
almost unknown before the Lebanese
barracks and then it was perfected in
Sri Lanka by the Tamil rebels against
against the Sinhalese yeah populist well
and actually is back to the not everyone
in Sri Lanka I mean this Sri Lankan the
Tamils Tigers there was two meals that
were in the sin Elise or that were in
the Sri Lankan army right so it wasn't
all it wasn't all it wasn't pure it
wasn't a pure ethnic the tactic was was
very strange in the way in which it's
been a relatively modern invention and
then it came back to the Middle East and
that together with the concept of the
caliphate started to animate a kind of
sleeping islamic identity that hadn't
been wildly present I mean I sort of
analogize it to what would happen in
Judaism if somebody started rebuilding
the temple
and all of this room code that has not
never been run like where you can
reconvene the sanhedrin's to mete out
death penalties according to Jewish law
thank God we don't have a third temple
right but somehow that we we let this
idea
go from fantasy to some kind of reality
is that is that wrong that somehow we
allowed something to animate this
portion of the world and it went very
sadistic and psychopathic I think it is
wrong that we allowed that to happen and
it was it was clear to people that had
been in Iraq that there was embers of
the insurgency of this of this sadistic
insurgency that there were embers that
were still burning when we pulled out
hmm and so once we pulled out all of a
sudden you know the fire the firemen
there was a firehouse they came spread
some water on it
the flames were gone and then they left
that's what we did well the fires not
out yet right right and so then it
didn't take long for those embers to
rekindle and start completely burning
out of control and then we we let it get
to a point where I mean in in the city
of Ramadi we we had people that we knew
who when when Isis took over Ramadi
which Ramadi was peaceful from 2007 till
2014-2015 like completely peaceful when
Isis came in they rounded up about five
hundred families that had families
members who had worked with the
coalition forces and then they murdered
them all right so justjust sick sadistic
subhuman beings that should never have
been allowed to do that now they did it
and once they did and they took Ramadi
and they took Mosul you know when Iraqi
forces went back in with the support of
heavy American firepower they clean
those places out and and it took I mean
they wiped out about 40,000 Isis
fighters which is pretty much all of
them pretty unique situation where they
skilled fighters some of them were but
what was interesting is you had them
wearing uniforms carrying flags and and
trying to act like a conventional
military force in many ways not always
but in many ways and
so you know you want to get new
conventional war with basically with
America that's not a good tactic but it
was a good tactic for us for them to do
that right because you know fighting an
insurgency is much more difficult than
fighting an open conventional war now I
have a very unpopular opinion in this
country which is somewhat popular
outside of it which is that Saddam
Hussein while a horrible in all the ways
that we claim he was horrible was in
fact holding together some powder keg
and that was using it was a relatively
secular government and that brought some
order to a potentially very chaotic
communal situation his sons of course
were you know one and one in particular
was a stone-cold psychopath and he you
know Saddam Hussein did terrible
horrible things by American standards
but if we evaluated him by the standards
of the region we might come up with a
different answer is there anything to
that he's obviously a bad guy he
certainly provided stability for the
region no doubt about that yeah
have you ever seen the video by which he
took over the the bath party no so he he
shows up on stage smoking a cigar and he
says we have a special guest today and
this guy comes to the microphone and
starts saying I've plotted against
Saddam and I'm here to read the names of
my co-conspirators and you see panic
take over and the audience and names are
called and people are let out of the
auditorium and people start to
understand that everyone who's let out
is going to be killed yep and so they
starts screaming like you know long live
Saddam we love Saddam in order to save
their own lives my understanding is is
that the people who were left were given
sidearms to execute the people who had
been let out to consolidate power around
a founding atrocity
to me that's an example of this message
violence concept that for people who
don't speak other languages violence and
even sadistic language is their poetry
and there's poetry in which our fighters
who are doing the right thing and are on
the site you know the side of the angels
are engaging in brutal poetry and the
other side is engaging in some sort of
very disturbing art form is there a way
of looking at this that's profitable
that people who have not been in battle
can understand about how how these
messages are used to hold together
societies that are dangerous and fragile
well as you pointed out I mean all human
beings have a guttural reaction to
violence and violence is a language that
every single human being understands you
know you were asking me earlier what
languages I speak and I'd said English
and you said he didn't learn in the
Arabic and I said well I learned enough
to say get down
show me your hands but but wait when I
would speak those words in Arabic to you
know if we enter a building in their
home and there's you know a military-age
male and I'd be speaking to him in
Arabic he didn't he didn't even
understand that I was even trying to
speak Arabic a because my Arabic is bad
and B because it's it's just he's not
expecting that and so they don't they
don't respond very seldom would I have
until we get them to calm down a little
bit then I could maybe speak a little
bit of Arabic to them but in that
initial moment of Terror there's they
don't understand they don't understand
what you're saying they're not they're
not ready to hear it but when you have
somebody that is resistant clearly
resistant they're though there is some
nonverbal communication that you can do
that is violence and they will
understand it and the other people that
see it will understand it so there's no
doubt that violence is a method of
communicating with people a message
stronger than words in many cases and
people like Saddam people like Isis
they'll absolutely use that to the best
of their ability and then
exploit when things happen you know one
of the one of the horrible strategic
losses or strategic setbacks we had and
in the Iraq war was the the abuses that
went on at the Abu Ghraib prison because
now we had photographs of these
Americans with doing things that look
like extreme torture to the prisoners
there and and the al-qaeda elements just
absolutely took those and ran with them
to make to fuel that insurgency and it
did it did a great job of fueling that
insurgency so you have to be very very
careful about the way you treat your
enemy because if you treat if you
mistreat the enemy then the enemy will
use that as propaganda and they would do
that on purpose they they would love
nothing more for them than for you to
accidentally kill a kid or you know drop
a bomb on a mosque or drop a bomb they
love they absolutely would love that and
so we had to do everything in our power
to prevent those things from happening
because the strategic the negative
strategic impact was phenomenal when
events like that occur did you watch the
video of the Jordanian pilot who was
executed by Isis yes yeah so a lot of
people stateside did not watch that
video and one of the things that I found
very interesting about it was that it
had a point that was disguised by our
unwillingness to watch the video now
maybe it's important that Isis not be
allowed to communicate its point but the
point was you're up there in the skies
meeting out very particular forms of
death in particular incinerating people
and burying them in rubble and our aim
in this video is to subject a captured
pilot to the exact form of death that
you are dispensing from the skies and so
you're normally not here to see this let
this be your death and you know it was
cinematically beyond belief it was shot
to be gorgeous and to be repugnant and
sickening and that concept of a
Hollywood style death filmed for real a
snuff film if you will
with a point and then offering bounties
showing the homes of the Jordanian
pilots you know by Street I think in
Amman Jordan my sense was is that
Americans didn't pick up anything of
what was going on because we decided
that we didn't want our population
exposed to anything coming from the
other side even their propaganda
informed us as to how they were thinking
and feeling but it was as if we plugged
our ears and didn't want to understand
what we were watching do you do you see
that I I see yeah I would agree with the
point that when you disconnect people
from war its they lose track right I
mean in America you know we we when I
was in Ramadi in 2006 I was you know
sitting in some combat outposts in the
middle of nowhere
with mortar shells coming in and
meanwhile everyone in America was you
know going to the mall and driving
around their SUV in order in a Starbucks
I mean that's that's just the way it is
I'm not mad at that
but there's a definite detachment that
I'm mad at then no here's no here's why
I'm mad at that first of all I think I'm
slightly older than you are
and so I have some memories of the
Vietnam War as it was playing out on
American television that some of my
earliest childhood memories and let me
say this it was spectacularly gruesome
what we saw on the TV during that period
of time I believe that my parents turned
off the TV when it showed an image of a
gi's head on a pike and it was just like
okay this is too much and on the one
hand this was real information coming
from the war and on the other hand it
was propaganda
it was meant to strike fear in our
hearts there was a self-hatred that was
playing out just as there was concern
about the excesses of American kids
being turned loose in a jungle with
too little discipline and supervision I
mean there was so much happening in
Vietnam which was hard to pull apart and
what I found was is that after that war
we never went into a conflict the same
way again the embedded journalists
didn't seem to want to report in the
same way that a non embedded journalist
did and there's a need that we have to
be able to go to war without constantly
second-guessing ourselves and putting
our own troops in harm's way and not
working through all of our psychological
nonsense when we have people who are you
know definitely at risk and doing our
work as the military I don't know that
we've ever really come to grips with the
lessons of Vietnam we we don't have a
clear sense that we should go to war as
a nation where the newsreels should talk
about our side versus the other side we
don't know how to do this do you have a
sense that I got my sense is is that
Vietnam really broke something in terms
of our ability to go to war Vietnam was
we have been lucky enough to have a lot
of podcast guests that were in Vietnam
and their experiences were all different
I mean from one guy captain Charlie plum
who was shot down and was in the Hanoi
Hilton for six years I've had SOG
operators special operation or Studies
and observation group guys that were
fighting behind the lines in Cambodia
and Laos I've had helicopter pilot that
was shot down and in the jungle prisoner
prisons for months and months being
tortured and and mock executed the whole
nine yards so what was what was horrible
there's so many horrible things about
Vietnam you know I did I did a podcast
about the meal I massacre which which
really is by far the most the biggest
atrocity that American troops have
ever comitted and it was absolutely
heinous now you could go to Sand Creek
and maybe some of the Native Americans
there were some some significant
horrible atrocities there as well those
generally weren't as clear-cut you know
most of those had American soldiers that
were saying no stop right Nilay for a
while for for at least several hours it
was no no one when no one was stopping
so what you had you know what you have I
think what with the press and the media
and Vietnam was you got a lens into what
war is and in war you're killing other
people right and when you're killing
other people it's you know you you just
take one step back if you don't know
what that other person did and you take
one step back and you watch someone kill
someone else that is that is not gonna
go over well in most people's stomachs
most people are gonna look at that and
say why is this happening why are we
doing this so that's what happened in
Vietnam you take one step back and you
see you take one step back and what you
see is killing you see human beings
killing other human beings and why in
god's name are we doing this and so
that's what I think happened in Vietnam
how it broke us I mean I don't know if
broke us is the right word but we
certainly are more cautious and should
be more cautious always about going to
war I mean you know you you want to talk
to the people that don't want to go to
war it's the people that have been to
war the people that have had their
friends get killed like they're the ones
that don't want to go to war unless it's
absolutely necessary unless we've tried
every other method unless we've used
every other technique that we could use
to prevent us from going to war now that
when you have to go to war like go to
war and win that's that's my attitude we
don't want to go to war at all if we
have to go go and win win as quickly as
you can we'll just use whatever means
necessary to achieve a quick dominant
victory
I mean there's so much and that's so so
rich is an answer I guess where I want
to go back to is I think that it's
irresponsible for us as a nation to
allow this much insulation of the home
front from the raw facts of what we're
doing abroad and that if you're going to
mean you know if you take my assessment
that the United States is the most
dangerous machine ever constructed right
we do not have the right to wield that
power if we're not interested in what it
looks like and what it means if we're
not willing to celebrate heroes who come
back from the battlefield if we're not
willing to look at murderers and
Psychopaths who fought under our flag I
mean you know my belief is is that you
to have a mature relationship with your
country requires being able to look at
something like me lie and seeing it for
the horror that it was and still coming
to an understanding that there is going
to be some amount of breakdown that
looks something like that maybe not that
bad anytime we deploy troops that that's
part of what it means to deploy troops
is is that you can't monitor how every
particular unit functions and
particularly if there are no eyes on
them one of the things that I've said
before is that if you go to war you have
to be willing you have to have the the
will the will for the following two
things to happen number one is you have
to have the will to kill and when I say
kill I'm not just talking about killing
your enemy because although you'll try
and kill your enemy you will absolutely
have collateral damage in war and
innocent people are going to die and if
you think that you can pull off a war
without killing innocent people you're
wrong so you have to be willing to do
that you have to make sure that the
cause the reason that the why behind why
you're going to war you need to make
sure that you understand that you will
kill innocent people and you have to be
willing to do that even if you net save
innocent lives there will always be
innocent casual
will absolutely be innocent casualties
and the other will that you have to have
is you have to have the will to die and
that is that no matter how surgical you
are no matter how good your weapons are
know how matter matter how good your
technology is when you go to war you
will have young American men and women
being killed in horrible ways way too
young over and over and over again and
if you're not ready for those two things
then you need to stop and think about
what you're actually doing yeah what do
we do about changing the relationship
between news media and combat troops so
that we have the ability to understand
what we're doing abroad say thank you to
the people who need to be thanked and
welcomed home keep an eye on what needs
to not happen such as a place like Abu
Ghraib it seems to me that we've got a
we're developing a fragility as a people
that is incompatible with our level of
lethality and we have to get information
back to the homefront am I wrong in this
I mean we had embedded troops in Ramadi
there was combat photographers there was
photographers there was reporters they
had very open access to everything that
was going on so I think I don't know how
many clicks on the websites the normal
military news stories got compared to
you know whatever entertainment
Hollywood Brian gets well so let me give
you an example of what I'm talking about
this isn't strictly a foreign foreign
involvement but when 9/11 happened the
most famous photograph from 9/11 is this
photograph called falling man of this
inverted human being sort of doing a
weird kind of like bicycle motion and
he's falling to his death and I think it
ran once briefly in the morning it was
spiked and it didn't become the iconic
photograph of 9/11 if I think back to
Vietnam we all have the same set of 10
photographs seared into our minds and
yet I don't know
you know beyond like a statue being
toppled what we would associate with
Iraq except for the Abu Ghraib
photographs so it didn't seem to have
that kind of effect of in my mind
commemorat commemorative what that war
looked like how long were we there how
many troops did we have how many
families you know lost somebody I just I
feel I feel like it sort of took place
out of sight yeah and the interesting
thing is there's thousands and thousands
and thousands of pictures I just don't
think they were I don't think I think
more I think the prop the I don't know
if we call a problem but I think it's
more the fact that people weren't
clicking on those pictures and
remembering them because if you google
Iraq war you'll see hundreds of
thousands of pictures from all kinds of
news agencies all over the world it's
just people maybe they've seen so many
pictures that they're over it I don't
believe this actually deco here's here's
my take on it if you think about what
the cartels have been doing on our
southern border it is spectacular the
violence is so graphic and so disturbing
by design and yet so many Americans are
unaware of just how bad that the drug
wars have been in Mexico because the
information doesn't percolate and these
photographs if they were run would
capture the public's imagination I don't
think there's any question okay I see
what you're saying now I didn't I didn't
quite understand that it makes good
sense with the cartel because certainly
they're down there
I think we're terrified to show people
the extremes of what life actually looks
like anymore
yes and if that is a bad thing you all
right that is a bad you are correct
it's taken me a while to understand your
point I apologize no no no you you are
correct and and you should people should
see what you know I I would when I would
talk to young seals even now I have
pictures of of me like color photographs
of me lie which you know you don't see
very many of those but they're
absolutely horrible
look at even for a even for a young seal
that's you know in his mind super hungry
for combat they see these pictures that
I put up on on the big screen for them
and it's did stomach-turning
then so that's what they need to see
they need to understand that you go a
little bit off the wrong direction if
somebody doesn't step up and say no when
things start to go sideways this is
where it can end up that's right so yes
what you are saying is correct if you
want people to understand what's
happening one of the best ways to do it
is the same technique that you're saying
earlier that the enemy can use which is
a message of violence here's what is
happening on the southern border these
are the people that are one mile away
and this is what they're doing to whole
families in certain cases yes should
that be propagated absolutely so that we
understand the seriousness of the
situation down there
same thing with when Isis was acting
this way anybody that looks I mean you
know here's another good case was the
Rwandan genocide right yeah
800,000 people in a hundred days mostly
with machetes and what we I don't want
to say we let that happen
but we could have intervened in in a
very powerful way and and we we chose
not to and part of the reason that we
chose not to is because of the very
graphic images you're talking about from
a year and a half earlier when Somalia
took place and they were dragging
American soldiers bodies through the
streets and and and we got we got
completely turned off by that and so
when Rwanda happened it's like we don't
want it we don't know if we want to do
this is really what offends me which is
that like when you send somebody into a
position where they could have their
body dragged through the streets by
enemy combatants and they know that and
you turn away because like you sent them
there and then you can't bear to look
because of your delicate sensibilities
that strikes me is something very very
wrong as opposed to we know why we're
some place and thank God we have people
who were willing to
do this and you know I mean I appreciate
that the depth and the complexity of
your perspective you're saying on the
one hand people who've been to war the
ones who don't want to go us to go to
war on the other hand you're saying that
war can be more fun and more meaning
than you could have in the rest of your
life and these are these are really not
contradictions but they're incredible
tensions and instead of having this be
part of our makeup where people come
back from the front and they talk maybe
in measured ways about what they saw
what they participated in and what they
saw this is doing for our nation I mean
I think that these things are very
progressive in a certain sense that
we're standing up for people who you
know might be completely defenseless
what you're talking about in Ramadi and
in fact I'm very worried that what you
said was that in Ramadi the people who
got killed were the people who had
helped our coalition and so did we have
an obligation to stay there in order to
make sure that the people who helped us
weren't in harm's way we saw the same
thing with the Marsh Arabs in the south
of Iraq where they were told to rise up
by a former president and we saw the
same thing in Vietnam we saw the same
thing in Vietnam I mean it matters to me
that we're engaged enough to realize hey
we just issued an instruction and people
trusted us and now those people are in a
world of pain and hurt and where are we
and we have to we need a tougher country
there was it was it was sickening for me
when I when I saw the flag the black
flag of Isis flying over the city of
Ramadi
I mean clearly first and foremost
because of my own friends and my men
that were killed in that battle and and
wounded in that battle then obviously
the Marines the soldiers the sailors the
airmen that that fought alongside of us
who made the same sacrifices were killed
or gravely wounded and then I knew you
know as soon as we as soon as I saw that
that flag flying I mean before we even
got reports
ak we knew what was gonna happen to the
civilian populace the civilian populace
had been was going to be it was going to
be annihilated
and that that's exactly what happened
and they do it at the level of families
right yes somebody collaborated entire
family the family is done right so did
we have an obligation in my opinion
which again this is just one man's
opinion yeah in my opinion absolutely we
absolutely had an obligation to led to
hear that and the the fact that that we
didn't uphold that obligation it's it's
not good it's it's it's a letdown
it's and luckily we went back and they
were able to take back the city and
Americans did support that and but the
Iraqis they did the bolt they did the
fighting which was very impressive
because when we were in Ramadi in 2006
the Iraqis didn't didn't want they
didn't really have the stomach for the
fight but I have friends that were in
Mosul and the Iraqi troops were fighting
hard they were taking massive casualties
in fact the Americans were saying look I
don't know if we're gonna have enough
Iraqis to do this and but the Iraqis
kept fighting so so that was a really
positive thing to see that the Iraqis
were now fighting for themselves but do
we have a moral obligation I think once
we commit to something like that then we
need to see it through and there's a
certain amount of you break it you
bought it especially because you know
Lafe who who wrote the books with me he
went back to Ramadi in 2010 and during
so when we were there together there was
you know there beat 1 2 3 4 or 5
casualties a day right several of those
wounded son was killed every single day
just in the city of Ramadi
when Lafe went back in 2010 during his
entire six-month deployment there was a
one fatality one coalition fatality it
was from a vehicle rollover it wasn't
combat incident so it was completely
decided down yeah it was it was peaceful
and we took that as okay we should leave
now and and that was the wrong move that
was the wrong move and people say how
long you gonna stay there let's say
we're still in Germany
yeah well you are right we're still in
Japan even so I mean this is the thing
where I want us to think about total
cost of ownership of a conflict and I
want whoever is going to lead us and is
very concerned watching the Democrat I
come from the Democratic side of the
aisle watching these Democratic
presidential nominees and wishing more
people came from a tougher perspective
knowing that American troop deployment
is a real issue and who are we going to
follow do they have the presence of mind
the gravitas to tell the country hey we
are going to go into something and you
guys need to toughen up because
otherwise we're going to be inconsistent
sending messages to the people who are
deployed abroad and leading the the
interior of the country you know which
is going to the malls and just trying to
figure out how to have a nice weekend
somebody's got to take us along I mean
it's just irresponsible for us as a
country to be this focused on on what's
going you know keeping up with the
kardashians when we have people in
uniform and in arms ways my off no
you're definitely not off and if you
don't understand what's happening
overseas then you're more willing to
send more people overseas you're more
willing to not think about the
consequences of what you've started and
more willing to abandon those situations
before they're finished so I guess your
your entire thread of this and I think I
missed your your point in the beginning
is is yes absolutely
Americans should know and understand
what is happening overseas so that we
can make informed decisions back here
and be able to stomach it and and have
that will that I talked about earlier
the will to kill and the will to die
which is what you need do you have some
stories that illustrate not only the
will to kill the will to die but also
the genius of improvisation which is
something I associate with our armed
services in general but also
particularly with our special forces
we're really brilliant stuff was was
hatched out and and tried yeah I mean
like I said earlier the the entire the
entire war for me in Iraq which for me I
only deployed twice which is which is
not a lot but the adaptations that were
made all the time was you know I've I've
often said that war is an exercising
creativity that's right because you're
constantly looking you're looking
outward at the enemy you're seeing what
they're doing you're seeing how you can
adapt what you can change what you can
overcome you're looking at your own
troops saying okay how can I lead them
in a way that they understand what's
happening that they understand the value
of what they're doing that they're
making the right decisions out there on
the battlefield by themselves and
they've got to make a decision where
they're gonna kill somebody or whether
they're gonna let them live that's a
that's a 22 year old sniper on a rifle
with someone's life and death in their
finger and you've got to get them to a
point so how can I get that message yeah
combat is an absolute exercise in in
creativity and which is one of the
interesting things is you know you
talked about earlier about who gets
promoted right and certainly the person
that conforms to what they're being told
to do and they follow instructions
they're gonna get promoted to a point to
do fine yeah but they're not gonna be
exceptional the really exceptional guys
are the ones that look at the situation
say okay here's what I know what we've
been told to do where's what the the
doctrine says to do here's what we're
actually gonna do and here's why we're
gonna do it and and so those are the
people that you want to follow on the
battlefield knows the people that truly
step up and lead and it's the same thing
in the business world as well who do you
look up to as being a great
improvisational commander that you
served with I don't really want to name
the names of coke I don't whatever yeah
you know colonel david hackworth is a
guy that that i espouse his
methodologies and his philosophies all
the time he was a young kid at the end
of World War two he joined right at the
end of World War two
then he fought in Korea and he fought in
Vietnam he he ended up writing a book
called about-face because at the end of
Vietnam he was the guy that that went on
the prime time and said if we don't
change the way that we're fighting this
war we are going to lose he was the and
he was a full-bird colonel when he did
that and they drummed him out of the
army and like a month and he you know
went to Australia and and and he wrote
this book called about-face and
obviously part of the meaning of about
faces he turned but and he was very very
misunderstood well not misunderstood but
he was he was hated right by the big
army and then what happened was he
actually wrote an article later about
the Chief of Naval Operations a guy
named Hamill boorda and he said that he
hadn't earned some of his combat
decorations and I'm a boarder committed
suicide and so he was hated so Wow david
hackworth was hated by the navy he was
hated by the army and part of the reason
why is he was hated because he called it
like he saw it right and he ended up
writing this book and and he's he
explains and in this book is not a
leadership book at all he doesn't talk
about leadership from from a perspective
of leadership only at all ever in the
book but the entire book it's 800 pages
long the entire book is a leadership
book because you see how he led his
troops how he dealt with people up the
chain of command and you know he got to
that point and that's that's one of the
things you know he played the game and I
talk about this often with from a
leadership perspective is you know if I
work for you and you burn you know you
do some things that I don't really like
but you know what I'm gonna play the
game because I want to build a good
relationship with you and I want to get
your support and I want to give you the
support so that you give me more support
so I can go on accomplish my mission
like that's playing the game and and he
definitely played the game you know he
was a soldier soldier and he was he was
absolutely adored by his troops and even
up the chain of command the people that
he worked for they loved him and so but
he he played the game until he finally
got to a point in Vietnam where he saw
young men getting killed and he said you
know what and he tried to change it he
went over there as a battalion commander
and he changed the way they were
fighting and they they turned things or
for themselves and he cut their
casualties and took the fight to the
enemy he did all those great things but
he got to a point looked at it from a
strategic perspective and said look we
need to change what we're doing we need
to change this and or we're gonna lose
and they drummed him out so that's the
guy I would say from you know from from
a grand perspective of who I look at and
really try to emulate his leadership and
I stole all kinds of things from him you
know I I had a when I was assigned my
task unit which is a group of to seal
platoon when I was a time assigned my
task unit was called task unit Bravo
which is which is the phonetic B right -
attack letter B and in hackworth book he
changed the name of his units to
something that he wanted to reflect what
the guys were and so I changed the name
of my task and it's tasking the bruiser
and and we had that attitude of we're
gonna go you know smash but so that's
one you know leader that I really tried
to emulate and then the other one was
when I was in my in my second seal
platoon and I won't mention any names
but I had a I had an officer that I work
for who took over actually the we had a
mutiny against our against our platoon
commander and we rebelled against him
and went before our commanding officer
and told our commanding officer we don't
work for this guy he he doesn't listen
anyone Wow
and our commanding officer who was a
great guy said this sounds like a mutiny
get out of my office go do what you're
supposed to do and then a couple days
later he fired the guy and brought in a
new a new platoon commander yes and when
he brought in a new platoon commander
this guy was very very experienced
tactically tactical genius very skilled
you know good shooter just good athlete
just just just an awesome guy it was who
was held in very high regard and I
thought hey this guy is gonna come in
and it's gonna be like we're just gonna
we're gonna follow this guy and and he's
gonna tell us how to do things but he
wasn't like that at all he came in and
said hey why don't you guys plan this
operation and why don't you guys take
ownership of this and why don't you guys
lead this Patrol what was that like for
you
it was awesome yeah it was awesome
that's when I realized oh wow if you
actually give people ownership of things
they take it and they do a better job
and that was like the that was the very
first kernel the very first seed in my
brain about leadership seeing it from
the perspective of oh if you're actually
listen to people then then they're gonna
want to work for you more and this was
contrasted with their the guy that got
fired who didn't listen anyone well this
is this is something I'm glad you bring
this up I don't know whether this is
gonna dovetail properly but I always
surprise people that I talk about
followership because we always talk
about leadership and I think we have a
terrible relationship to it which is
that leadership it's like yeah I'm
kicking back I'm in the corner office I
got this thing and in fact I think
that's nothing to do with leadership I
think that leadership involves
followership and the people who hate the
idea of following other people can't
lead themselves and so when you find
that people have a finally they'll smirk
oh you're interested in followership
greatest gift I can give many people is
saying I'll take direction from you and
you know it's very weird people think
that they want to be in the top spot as
soon as they have responsibility for
somebody somebody's sort of following
their directions they're not sure that
they love it yeah well just a dovetail
into that now people are generally
surprised when I build up and I'll be
talking about build up the most powerful
leadership one of the most powerful
leadership tools that they have in their
entire inventory of leadership tools
that they can they can utilize and they
can exploit and they could take
advantage of this tool at the right time
and it's gonna do wonders for them is to
listen to people right like just be
quiet as a leader and just listen to
what people are saying and if they have
a good idea support their idea but you
know there's a sort of a weird thing to
bring up because it's not as intense as
what you do but when I have when I work
with an assistant one of the first
things I do is to teach that person to
tell me when I'm over a line like
because if that person doesn't have the
comfort with saying hey you know you're
calling me on a Sunday and this is not
an appropriate reason the Communist I'd
they you're out of line then I don't
feel great because if I'm in a
leadership role with that person then I
don't know if they're doing these things
because they want to be doing
thing is always like can I get you
coffee and I want to make sure that
somebody understands that if we're
forming hierarchy is it's not for the
pleasure of working out you know love we
didn't get as a child it's because we
actually have to accomplish something
and trying to take the sting out of it
without taking you know in some sense
the the necessity of forming hierarchies
because I think that most people don't
have an idea that if people below you
don't want to follow you there are a
million ways to sandbag you know yeah
they'll they'll they'll sabotage
yourself
they'll sabotage you I say it's all time
you know it's like if if if I if I'm in
charge of you and I say okay Eric here's
what's going on here here's the mission
here's the vehicles I want you to take
here's the people I want you to take
here's the weapons I want you to use
here's the method I want you to use
here's the route I want you to take to
the target here's a route I want you to
take home and here's what time we're
gonna debrief you take that plan and
take ownership of and go execute it and
even even a really great guy in the back
of their mind they're thinking well I
would do this a little bit different
that's not the best way to execute that
and so when you go out to execute the
mission and you hit an obstacle right
you you instead of trying to overcome
the obstacle you just call up and say
hey we couldn't accomplish the mission
sorry we're coming home you didn't think
of this your plan wasn't quite what you
thought it was so what I should do as a
leaders and say hey Eric
here's the mission we want to get
accomplished go get with your team
figure out how you want to do it and
here's some things that I'm thinking
about do you see any problems yeah I
would I wouldn't even I would say well
it depends well here's what it depends
on if you and I work together already
you already know what those things are
you already know me well enough to kind
of I've already educated I've already
trained you said you're you're you
already I don't have to say those things
like hey I'm thinking this that you you
already know that so I just say hey come
up with a plan you already know the
parameters work within ya you come up
with your own plan you actually if
you're a good leader you go go it with
your team and you say hey guys here's
the mission how do you all think we
should do it and now we have a team now
we have a plan that your team came up
with you came up with and and now
there's no talk of how do I get you to
buy into my plan right you it's your
plan you're already bought in so is your
whole team when you bring it back to me
and you say hey Jocko here's the plan
now I look at the plan and I say hey
okay that looks pretty good and maybe
there's a little nudge I gave you maybe
there's a little course correction yeah
of you but it's still your plan and and
now you go and execute the plan when you
hit an obstacle now out in the field you
go over it you go around it or you go
through that obstacle yeah because you
have ownership of the plan so no doubt
about it that's that that that
leadership thing of actually say people
always talk about leading from the front
and then you got a lead from the front
twin and you certainly do but there's
many times where I want to lead from the
rear a little bit I want to lead from
the back up but it can be you know this
is really theory of follow me where you
put the highest value person in harm's
way first and it doesn't make sense
initially but then you realize okay well
if he's willing to go over the side
first then maybe I'm gonna take
direction from him because he's putting
it all on the line yeah and there's
there are limitations to that plan as
well sure because if you're the most
experienced guy and you have the most
tactical knowledge and you have a full
understanding and you're gonna be able
to make the best decisions in the
shortest amount of time that's gonna
keep everyone alive and you decide
you're the one that's gonna go first and
you get shot the first step right that's
what he did wasn't a good didn't work
and even though I'm following you yeah
I'm following you into a bloodbath so
what I would rather have you do and this
this happen all the time with me if if I
was approaching a building and I happen
to be one of the first two guys three
guys on the entry I would take one step
to the side and my guys knew my guys
knew exactly that they didn't know but
it wasn't predicated on the idea that
nobody that everyone knew that you were
making a decision for a strategic or
tactical reason but in order to have
that known you have to do something that
demonstrates that you're not doing it
for a personal reason yes and and there
are times there are absolutely times
where no one's gonna move until they see
you move yeah and so you've got it again
this is the dichotomy you can't lead
from the front all the time you can't
lead from the rear all the time
sometimes got to be up front sometimes
you got to be in the rear sometimes you
got to be in the middle you got to be
able to modulate that appropriately for
whatever situation you're in you know
it's very is very interesting we get to
watch some of these films from
Afghanistan and Iraq and you know I
remember particularly poignant films one
of which was some convoy that they're
trying to make positive identification
they decide that its enemy then you know
light it up
fire fire along the convoy and then you
know there's sort of muted celebration
job well done blah blah blah and you're
like wait we're getting reports that
there are friendlies in the area and you
listen to just like how flipped out
these people are about what they've done
in the interpretation another one I
remember the sniper was talking and
something to the extent of you know is
do what do you think about this target
yes no yes now somebody said something
like okay well here comes pink mist and
you know this human being effectively
evaporates you know with it with a
well-placed sniper shot and the
ambiguity of the situation and the
weight that comes from taking life as
well as from putting your own life on
the line you know I think one of the
things that those videos have done for
me is to remind me of the
professionalism that we've moved towards
and how seriously people are taking
these decisions and I worry that in some
sense we need to update ourselves for
how much we changed after Vietnam in
this context well the the opening
chapter of the first book that I wrote
extreme ownership is about a fratricide
mean that took place with my guys and I
was in charge and there was a chaotic
situation I had multiple elements on the
battlefield including myself all engaged
in firefights and there was some
miscommunication there was some non
communication and there ended up being a
small element of friendly Iraqi soldiers
attacking one of the positions that my
guys were in
and one of my guys shot and killed an
Iraqi soldier
they were then attacked by the Iraqis
and then the army who then who called in
as a quick reaction force and engaged my
guys in a building with 50 caliber
machine gun yeah I had one of my guys
wounded there was several other Iraqis
wounded and all this took place in five
minutes
by the time I went down I was in it I
was a couple blocks away and when when
my guys called in the what they called
the heavy QRF for the heavy quick
reaction force which was a section or
two m1 Abrams tanks when they called in
the heavy QRF I told the guys I was with
I said hey those are my guys were going
so we went down there and all this had
unfolded and like I said in like five
minutes but it so that that's the
opening chapters how that happened in
the book extreme ownership there's two
other situations that Lafe wrote about
another situation where the very
situation you're talking about his
sniper which was which was Chris Kyle
was looking at a building he sees a
enemy with a sniper with a with a scoped
weapon and he's asking hair do we have
any friendlies in that building
Lafe who's the platoon commander calls
the army and says hey do you have
anybody in this building and the army
says nope and he says well we see a guy
with a scoped weapon they're like take
him out because of course we were losing
guys - snipers the whole time they're
saying take him out and Lafe says well
can you confirm he says I'm confirming
right now we have no one in that
building and Lafe didn't feel
comfortable with taking the shot and
Chris didn't feel comfortable taking the
shot and he didn't take the shot and and
Lafe said we're not gonna shoot he says
can you send someone into that building
and the army guys mad on the horn
thinking to you are you kidding me now
you want me to send the someone into
that building where there's a bad guy
he's like fine and there's continuing
watch that building and so we're sending
the assaulters now and the assaulters
leave the building that they were
looking at because it was a
miscommunication on where
where the bad guys were Wow and and then
the chap one of the chapters I wrote
about is a similar situation there was a
Bradley Fighting Vehicle the 25
millimeter chain gun getting ready to
engage armed sniper positions on the
rooftop of a building and as I
deciphered the situation and told him
not to shoot and eventually had them
confirm exactly by literally I said
count the buildings from where you are
to where you see the enemy and they
counted the buildings and they said I
stand by we have an adjustment oh my god
and guess who it was it was my guys so
those horrible situations they unfold
and that's the that's the that's the
reality of of combat that's the the
harsh reality of combat well I wish more
people understood that when we talk
about leadership it's not necessarily
glamorous it's heart wrenching hard in
your mouth situations where you don't
even know anything complete information
what to do and there's no one there's no
one to lean on I would imagine there's
no one to lean on and there's also no
one to blame there's no when you're in
charge every single thing that happens
on the battlefield
absolutely is on you well and this is
where I want to sort of maybe close out
this this sit down with you although I'd
love to continue another time as you
know this this podcast is known as the
portal and the idea for the portal is
how to extricate yourself from wherever
you feel trapped towards some sort of
more transcendent existence and what I
understand from everything that you do
and project and I just I feel very
grateful that I was connected to you by
some of our mutual friends this is our
first meeting is this concept of
liberation through extreme discipline
and that sounds sort of counterintuitive
it looks like you have the supress of
life where you get up in the morning at
4:30 a.m. you're taking a picture of
your wristwatch and there's sweat
everywhere and the point is you know
there's a path and you can fall off it
but if you get back on it and you own it
there is freedom and liberation even
though it seems like an oppressive
regime
can you talk about this is a portal and
as a as a way out for people who haven't
understood what they're capable of doing
by toughening their mind and sort of
making use of all of these very hard-won
lessons that you've decided to share
with us from places they'll never go for
me when I was a young new guy seal I
wanted to be a good seal that that's
what I wanted to do I want it to be a
good seal and I looked at other seals
that were respected for their
operational capability and I I'm not
gonna sit here and tell you that I did
like a Tim Ferriss assessment of
breaking down each and everything and
what what is it that makes a great but I
looked at them as a young kid and said
what are they doing that's making them
better one of the things I noticed that
they were doing is they got to work
before I did okay so guess what I'm
gonna start getting to work earlier I'm
gonna start getting up earlier in the
morning guess what else I do they work
out every day regardless of what's going
on they get that done Oh guess what else
they're doing they're studying so they
understand tactics their honor they they
trained with the weapon systems as much
as they can so they impose these
disciplines on themselves and with a
more discipline they imposed on
themselves that the better they were so
when you had somebody that was hard core
discipline they ended up being a hard
core operator I saw that and said okay I
need to and I didn't even call it
discipline I just said oh I gotta get it
to get to work earlier oh I gotta study
more I gotta train more and then the
more I did that guess what I'd go to a
training event and I would have freedom
there because I was in better condition
or I understood the weapons better I
understood the tactics better so or I
just was more prepared because I had
gotten to work at five o'clock in the
morning and prepped my gear and prepped
my dive rig before anyone else did so I
was just a little bit ahead so I could
spend a little more time doing a chart
study of the water I was gonna be diving
in so I kind of got a better lay of the
land or of the ocean in this case so
these little disciplines that I imposed
on myself made me more equipped
was gonna what I was gonna face in these
training situations and then you know
very soon you realize that the more
discipline you impose on just about
every aspect of your life the more
freedom you end up with whether it's you
know the example of financial freedom if
you want financial freedom guess what
you gotta have financial discipline to
get there if you want to have more free
time guess what you gotta have more
discipline time management and if you're
a part of a team then the way that the
you you if you saw my sealable tune
you'd see that we had discipline
standard operating procedures for just
about everything that we did and you
might think that that constrains us on
the battlefield but it actually gives us
freedom Nana and and that's the way that
it is that's the way that that's the way
that for me discipline in my life has
given me from my perspective right now
an immense amount of freedom now as far
as the portal that that allows someone
to kind of transition for me another
thing that I talk about all the time is
the ability to detach from the chaos
detached from mayhem and detach from
your emotions so that you can make good
logical decisions about what you're
doing in your life in the world and this
is something that I remember the day I
learned it I was on an oil rig and we
were doing a training operation on an
oil rig and we approached one of the the
the main deck of the oil rig with my
platoon and everyone gets out on line on
this platoon we're all lined up waiting
for a command to be made whether to go
left whether to go right whether to go
forward and no one's making any decision
and I'm I I think this is my my first
platoon so I was a new guy all right and
I'm waiting and no one's making any
decisions because everyone's doing what
I was doing which is staring down the
barrel of their gun looking for targets
and I stood there for a second and then
three seconds then five seconds and I
said okay I'm just gonna take a step
back so I lifted my gun into the high
port position so I wasn't looking down
my weapon anymore I took a step back I
looked to my left I looked to my right I
saw that no one was looking around to
make a decision and I said hold left
clear right which was a common standard
operating procedure and everyone
repeated the call because that's what
you do in the SEAL Teams when somebody
makes a verbal call everyone repeats it
so everyone says you know hold left
clear right and then everyone held left
and we cleared right and I realized at
that moment the oh I was the least one
of the least tactically experienced
people but because I had taken a step
back I was able to see things with a lot
more clarity than anyone else on that
line could so this is a phrase you use
take a step back which essentially as
far as I can tell means go metacognitive
and witness the robot that is you yes
acting robotically and find something
that is not the robot to evaluate the
situation you have to die just call it
detach you have a detach from all that
chaos and what you're really doing and
this you know makes me think of your
portal ideas you're detaching from you
right you're taking a step you're
attaching from your own brain and you're
looking at things from a different
perspective and the better you get at it
you know it got to a point where I don't
even have to move and I'm detached and
I'm looking around so that to me is one
of the most powerful tools you have as a
leader and really as a person is to
instead of be being constantly in the in
the firefight right take a step back get
out of the five versus like when you're
watching a football game on TV you watch
that football game you wonder why these
idiots on the field can't see what you
see well it's because you're seeing it
from 9 different angles or at least an
elevated angle on the television you can
see everything that's happening so if
you do that with your life you detach
it's gonna make it's gonna give you much
more visibility on decisions you should
make and directions you should be also
both at the level of cognition and at
the level of emotion and feeling
absolutely absolutely well this is some
incredibly powerful advice I'm going to
try to put it into action by the way if
you've never seen Jocko discussing a
moment of weakness where he tried to
resist eating a piece of cake eventually
succumbed to eating a piece of cake and
and he had to get back on the path it is
one of the most powerful minutes because
it's as if he's locked in combat
somewhere in Iraq and in fact he's
simply in the same struggle that
everyone else is making it human thank
you so much for being one of the first
guests on the portal I learned a ton and
I would love to have you back at another
point if you'd be willing to do it
absolutely thanks Rabb me on appreciate
sorry to meet you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]