[Music]
hello Loula hello welcome to voice cub
and welcome to the return of the
psychedelic philosopher Peter Shaw said
H and we had a great conversation
unfortunately the audio at the end and
at the beginning and the video in the
middle up I've managed to save
what I can the beginnings fine and the
end is a disaster but stick around well
the only people that will stick around
to the end anyway
might be interested in sticking around a
little longer I did might try to save
some of the audio from the phone and
camera the microphones stopped working
the file became corrupted somehow but at
least there's still 50 minutes of decent
enough quality audio and well in that
time Peter gives us a great little
expedition into the thinking of Spinoza
I asked Peter Spinoza his relevance for
thinking about psychedelics given we
were out there beyond psychedelics
conference we speak about Whitehead and
I say some things about Jung in relation
to that now I do very much hope you
enjoy this conversation and before we
get into it I do ask that you consider
supporting this channel if you enjoy
conversations like this and if you
resonate with the mission more broadly
which is to build an online and live
forum for creative vulnerable
conversations for the betterment of self
and society for the development of
individual sovereignty and collective
responsibility to really try and get
somewhere in an honest this course that
is not purely intellectual I think
that's something that individuals need
to bring to bear in conversation that
really lays something else down on the
line it's a sort of epistemic humility
is a sort of vulnerability it's a real
embodied sense of purpose and a real
attention paid to the fluctuating
meaning in your experience as you relate
to someone else
and as you find yourself in a particular
moment of your strange webs
contextualize absurd life and so I ask
you consider supporting me well the
project but I ask that you consider
supporting me to actualize this project
it's very much needed now and even a
small amount will go a long way that's
what people say
obviously it a small amount will go a
small way I mean clearly ok so large
amounts would be preferable a small
amount goes a long way it's a paying for
something not very expensive so
[Music]
thank you for listening to this and I
hope you enjoy the conversation what
have I been doing recently I've been
tracing the history of physicalism from
the ancient Greeks
you know democritus leucippus epicurus
and lucretius and so on - you know
modern day really realizing with the
intent of showing it
the notion of matter to be an
abstraction also showing that it's
basically a very vague concept Herber
Fiegel said how the fields got a great
essay on a mental and physical also that
it's sort of paradox cool when you look
at something like impulse dilemma which
I won't go into you know in Google map
anyway so in the end the idea of matter
is very vague ambiguous and my ultimate
reason for that is to make Penn psychism
a more tenable worldview yes so instead
of materialism or as it became
physicalism on one side jewelle ISM the
mind and body are both fundamental and
idealism which is a view that the mind
is fundamental and Matt is sort of a
projection of that the opposite of
materialism really you could almost say
there's a fourth strand which is pound
psychism which is that mind exists in
all matters my main study at the moment
so attacking materialism is if so facto
advocating power psychism so that's what
I've been looking at a little history
historical analysis really is not that
philosophical but I've been doing that
and at the same time because I'm giving
a talk on the great Penzance chemical
philosopher Humphrey Davy I've also been
looking at spin notes or another pound
psychist
now the reason is Humphrey Davy he was
the first scientific Psychonauts that's
how I title my em talk he he tried
nitrous oxide have received fantastic
visions from it and feelings experiences
and in his notebook he even writes
a perm about nitrous oxide immediately
after which he writes poem called the
super noticed and I thought it's quite
fast Nia fascinating how these first
Psychonauts I mean that's a later time
from 1970 of course but you know
retrospectively these Psychonauts
including his friends Coleridge saw the
Wordsworth they were having these
experiences
I mean curly Ricci was an opium addict
probably more so than Thomas De Quincey
even having these amazing experiences
and at the same time German idealism was
becoming in a very big with Kant and
fixed in shelling and then Schopenhauer
Hegel so I thought yeah you know it
would be very interesting to sort of
interpret these psychedelic experiences
under that more under that idealism from
the Romantic Age because it's not
popular today really but what I because
of my general studies and Pound psychism
I sort of looked at a specific of a
variety of idealism and which is four
notes ISM philosophy of Benedict
Espinosa and just found it fascinating
you know it's um I mean he is he was
severely punished for his philosophy but
that's because it was so original and
that's why his legacy remains today I
mean even today I think he can teach us
a lot even with regard to studies here
you know well that's interesting
topically then what do you think spinosa
can bring we're at that beyond
psychedelics conference in Prague do you
think he could bring to the general
intellectual millio here well a number
of things but I should say first of all
this so he's got his system which would
be hard to explain briefly but it's
essentially that God is nature so
there's a sort of pantheism and then
theism that God's nature in a bit more
any cause it got or nature or even
substance you call it reality or the
universe as well anyway that's
everything so it's a monism not Judaism
and consciousness or what he calls
thought is one attribute of that
like one expression of the totality it's
not part of it it's the whole of it it's
a version of it put it that way right
but another version of it another
attribute is matter or what he calls
extension okay
space space reality and these are
basically different versions of the same
thing which is God nature right and
that's a hype if you treat that as a
hypothesis that interestingly they're
also an infinite number of other
attributes expressions of reality of
which we do not have access although in
an earlier book spin notes are sort of
you know put forward the idea that
perhaps in revelation one can have these
other mm sort of enter these other
states of existence something I'll be
talking about in my talk but anyway what
can I teach us well if you took that as
a working hypothesis you would expect a
total praying to mind correlation
because they are the same thing that's
also where doesn't believe in free will
or mental causation because it would be
it's not it's not one thing that causes
another it's just two expressions of the
same thing you'd be like saying
Elizabeth the second caused the Queen of
the United Kingdom to move you know
which is obviously misuse of words and
that would be the misuse of words for
free will for spin note so interestingly
as well but but ultimately this point is
this that okay so under that very
metaphysical hypothesis I mean he thinks
it's a theorem you know I mean his
method is geometrical but let's just put
treat it as a hypothesis you would
expect a total perfect correlation
between the brain and the mind so that
means that when we trace these
correlations as is increasingly
happening that in no way indicates
therefore you know we can explain the
mind by the brain at all because this
metaphysical view would explain accept
exactly the same thing right and
moreover it's actually sort of helpful
in terms of them help problem of free
will essentially it's a nice free will
you know the mental causing the physical
to me
interesting interesting okay so so I
know Spinoza rise
been as you've just been describing and
a more recent interest of yours but I
also know that part of your lifelong
project is to fuse some of the thinking
of Nietzsche and some of the thinking of
Whitehead together you know so I'm quite
interested in how if at all
reading Spinoza has influenced any of
what you would consider your theories to
be you know Nietzsche was originally a
very big fan of Spinoza you know he said
and later I found you know my mentor my
calling
later on he criticized him a bit for his
method which he thought was sort of
pretentious but but like Nietzsche
Spencer didn't believe in free will he
wasn't a mechanical determinist I mean
isn't that it's not either/or and also
Spinoza was a moral relativists Lena
Nietzsche didn't believe in absolute
good and evil I mean he said there were
greatest states of existence which he
called good he always made it clear that
you know that there's no transcendental
it's nothing outside of nature that
could determine something as good so in
that way he's very similar to Nietzsche
and so I think him that will definitely
back that can be and should be ready
definitely em incorporated into this
fusion of Nietzsche and Whitehead so the
fusion ditch and Whitehead that I have
in mind is really the following so well
I could you can get a technical quickly
his sick I try to keep it simple as
possible it's okay I suppose the main
the main point of contact between
Whitehead and nature is what Nietzsche
calls the will to power yes she's a
fundamental drive of which again matter
and thought are properties and
properties now I should say but
underlying all force there as well to
power he reticence later books in his
notebooks and as I said before I think I
think it's an unfinished system you know
he was getting closer and closer to the
truth now in Whitehead you have a
company have a completed system right by
the way you know Nietzsche said he was
against systems at one point but he
changed his mind he changed mind
everything many things so
that's not a criticism but white had had
a straight system philosophy volcanism
also known as processed philosophy and
he his fundamental units work all actual
entities or actual occasions borrowed
slightly from William James you know
drops of experience and these drops of
experience which are smaller and of less
duration than you know electrons even
they were a probe they were units or
atomic units one sense but they were
Proust hisses right known as conch
Reston's is and it's quite a detailed
sort of analysis of of what they are
exactly but fundamentally in relation to
nature there's a subjective aim and all
of them you know they all strived to
reach what he called satisfaction which
we shouldn't after I put Morpheus but
basically there was a TV ology there
people already are right now and a
teleology year named goal-oriented
they're basically in inherent goals
within everything and for Whitehead that
was ultimately aesthetic perfection
mm-hmm that was an ultimate value of
everything and now Nietzsche I mean that
that subjective aim then that drive to
value let's call it values makes a bit
more general bit more compatible that
drive is very similar to the world's
power but furniture then is it's a drive
to power in other words doesn't mean
greed you know it means advancement
development growth you know in organisms
such as ourselves that means having more
awareness of our surroundings so that we
could potentially manipulate it or use
it to our purpose or our group's purpose
so there's a connection there to be made
between whiteheads actual entities
subjective aims and Nietzsche's will to
power
I think Nietzsche sort of lacks the more
aesthetic elements that make whiteheads
philosophy a bit more sort of erm what
should I say you know
flavorsome somehow but i think and what
it does talk about power as well but i
think he doesn't emphasize it enough so
i think unless you know there could be a
nice fusion between those two philosophy
interviews to be made yeah interesting
all right i'm gonna reset the main
camera and give it another 30 minutes
will still record okay so a fusion of
Whitehead and nietzsche and we've just
covered a little bit of Spinoza around
just oversee up a little bit of meteor
and Whitehead just little bits of things
but there is an aspect of whiteheads
philosophy that endorses the idea of a
sort of Perpetual creation perpetual
creativity and that I suppose I can see
how that relates to this striving of the
will to power to what complexity but it
was but also to an aesthetic element of
it I guess I mean I should just yeah in
surfer no there I mean you know for
Nietzsche
unlike Schopenhauer and beauty was a
 was a sort of intuition of power
you know and especially in terms of you
know mates that you know you find the
healthiest one and it was a sort of it
was a related to lust for Nietzsche
you see in complete contradiction to
Schopenhauer who said the way to quell
the will for chef an hour the will was
just a bane was to look at pure art and
that could take you away from any will
last as I might have for Nietzsche you
know he went he went completely the
other way so yeah there is actually that
link there between Nietzsche power and
at least human beauty mmm-hmm so I guess
I guess one thing that's interesting is
how how radical is the perpetual
creativity I mean because if so I guess
part of the part of the issue I'm having
conceptualizing some of this stuff is in
relationship to free will as well
because I can get on board with more or
less if there's a there's a sort of
effort
sort of its system in place I could sort
of understand how Spinoza sees it if
nature is if nature is God and that we
all expressions of that then well I
suppose I'm not sure how to build out
the argument appropriately to go from
there to say we have no free will so
perhaps I'll ask you to do that but then
also to comment on whether or not we
need to make it and add an addendum to
that argument to then take away the sort
of free will on the Whitehead Ian side
of things because I guess I've been part
of my metaphysical framework has been to
sort of a save some degree of free will
ultimately compatibilist kind I suppose
but to save some degree of free will at
least in part through the notion of a
radical creativity that we ourselves are
involved in and with and that part of
our intention and an orientation
involves well something like setting a
goal in a very unconscious way and sort
of discerning our way towards it and so
it's very little imited but at the same
time at the same time it does seem to me
we can we can we we can miss the mark
and that we're involved in that and
maybe that's enough for me to say we
have an element of freedom so I don't
know how much you know I mean you know
this is one of the big questions of life
generally the question right very well
and and I can't claim to know to know
the answer but but I put put a few views
forward okay firstly supernote sir
unlike whitehead was pure determinist
again not mechanical determinist because
you know matter was just one of the
infinite number of attributes but
nonetheless the user is sort of
ontological argument similar from
similar to Descartes switch is that you
know the idea of God is of everything of
absolute perfection so he he couldn't
have done anything other than the way it
has and will be done because that would
take away from his perfection which is
for Spinoza a contradiction like a
logical contradiction like a square
having three sides
you know the ontological argument these
kind of arguments are you know very
debatable Kant famously in a debate is
known to have them refuted the
ontological argument forgot but anyway
this is Spinoza's view and total
determinist and that means that in in
nature everything that happens happens
for a cause and we are mostly ignorant
of those causes but also in our minds
and the other attribute you know thought
as he calls it which is really
consciousness or sentience even our
thought is also fully determined but we
are not cognizant of the causes of our
thoughts so even though we might think
I've decided to turn left now you think
that's a free decision you're actually
ignorant of the prior causes which led
to that position but again I stress this
that doesn't there for me materialism at
all you know
Spinoza system was totally metaphysical
so you can have a purely determinist
point of view which is completely
metaphysical as well heating it is the
interesting thing about him also it
means there can't be free will again
then because as I say the mind is this
is another expression of matter so
therefore an expression can't cause
another expression it be a category
mistake you know so therefore they
cannot be free will for that reason as
well I mean so there's two kinds of
generally speaking there's two kinds of
mental causation there's mental to the
physical like I want a beer I'll move my
arm and then there's mental to mental
which is I thought of a leaf and then I
feel of a tree you know something like
that and but but first but notes are
then that mental mental one can't happen
because it's fully determinate because
God is perfect and the mental physical
one can't happen because it's it's
categories
what would call today a category mistake
mistake you know yeah you're saying like
him
as I said mentioned with a queen or oh
you could say you know the VIII the
morning star has caused the evening star
to rise which would be mistakes the same
thing Venus
so so yeah it's great I mean it's it's
it's sort of if you've never heard of
spinosus ism it's quite hard to get your
head around it
but why it's very different than this
unsexy believes that creativity above
God interesting me is the fundamental
tenant of reality by creativity
he means the addition of novel elements
into reality so let's say we knew all
the laws of nature let's say we knew the
positions and directions of all
particles and fields of nature you know
you purely deterministic point of view
would be therefore you could perfectly
calculate the next move but with
Whitehead although that mostly happens
in regular a on IRA's epochs and
something you can and does always emerge
I mean to extreme extents which is hard
to imagine so for example he says at the
moment we live in the electromagnetic
era you know so electromagnetism you
know light nature see magnetism Sun is
like a central force in our universe but
I'm needn't be so I mean this is from
Hume really the problem of induction you
know right you know we just because we
see regularities doesn't mean therefore
they are have been constant and will be
constant forever that's actually
impossible to prove you can't prove the
future in fact you can't even prove past
I mean even you know Big Bang Theory is
sort of you know under debate because
the same background radiation so on
redshift whatnot you can attribute to a
fluctuating universe that Sir Roger
Penrose you know it's fake you lace so
the point is we shouldn't I mean
generally called the you know the
fallacy of generalizing from the
particular you know from particular you
know even 200 years measuring speed of
light we shouldn't think that that's
always gonna be allow that right and
once you realize that you realize well
then therefore you know there could be
new things emerging into reality again
this is not niche and I obviously
believed in the eternal return or a sort
of dallied you know dabbled in that
which is that um you know everything has
to return because it's only a limited
number of you know laws and particles
whatever yeah so it certainly it's a
whitehead goes beyond that
he even goes beyond the electromagnetic
era I mean this is real speculative
metaphysics
I mean it's pure speculation he admits
but you know even an era beyond three
dimensions of space that could just be a
like a sort of them you know 500 billion
year old habits that were given you know
something like that and that's
interesting to grab some notes as well
because if there are other attributes
expressions of the universe of which we
are unaware that you know only one of
them then extension would be three
dimensionality and so that's not
necessary for both of them hmm
okay impossible to imagine so obviously
we've evolved to imagine anything
outside of us an insider's as extension
you know three dimensionality but that's
just a limitation of our minds according
to them hmm
okay so can we recapture the thread of
oh uh well mental causation you know I
suppose freewill on on Whitehead system
because to what extent is the sort of
macro consciousness we have involved in
that perpetual creativity and to what
extent if it is involved can it
orient it well yep so in where hence
every action has a with every effect
which is by the way an abstraction every
event has a multitude of in fact an
infinity of causes because you stretched
it all the way back you know forever
so if freewill is real that it's always
only a partial factor in your mood like
even to move my hand it wasn't just if
you believe in free rolls and just like
my idea it was also the fact that I have
grown muscles and the DNA that has
evolved over millions of years and so
certainly the idea of radical freewill
is is it's never made much it never made
much sense it means to me yeah I mean
radical freewill essentially it's
telekinesis right and and it's also
based on the dualist system that you
know something which is not matter can
ultimately move matter even if it's a
something in a inside the neuron
like this you know but ultimately this
is what it really ultimately comes down
to you know telekinesis right however
the alternative is also no good because
I mean karl popper's got this great I
mean the alternative is epiphenomenalism
than here which means this that it was
coined by Thomas Huxley Aldous taxi
driver and it means that all mental
states are really just byproducts of
neural operations and they actually they
have no effect upon the body or future
thoughts at all they're like a steam
whistle on and locomotive engine mm-hmm
but most philosophers in fact most
people I should say most scientists who
haven't probably haven't thought about
it really they don't want to accept that
because well there's a very good
scientific reason not to accept that
which is brought out nicely by Carl pop
and 70s evolutionary argument they says
it if you epiphenomenalism in other
words no free will or no mental
causation at least is anti-darwinian
anti evolutionary because if mentality
had no power whatsoever it wouldn't have
evolved it wouldn't have maintained
itself now some people will say yeah but
there are certain things that have
evolved without purpose and that's true
vestigial organs of course once did have
a purpose but there are the things that
have evolved which don't play any role
to sort of accidental evolutionary
things but with consciousness I don't
think that's a fair analogy because it's
not only happened to us humans
presumably so unless you're like
Descartes you don't believe that animals
have consciousness it's happened in a
vast variety of organisms if you're a
parent psychist of course you believe
it's sort of them it's attributed to
every single hold on every unit
subjective unit so it would be
excessively I mean it'd just be
statistically impossible that it
accidentally evolved in all those
different species mm-hmm so therefore it
plays an evolutionary role and most
people say that oh yeah we know we sort
of we can see so we can spot prey coming
and spot berries and flowers and helps
us of course most people believe that's
you know um that
but then that means that the mental has
to have a course on physical but then
that doesn't fit into a materialist
framework at all because that would be a
force unknown I'm you know unobserved by
the scientific method but then again
that's not surprising because
consciousness cannot directly be
observed we can only observe the
objective corylus right but then you
have to realize that you have to realize
that you're in a horrible paradox here
if you if you're sort of if you call
yourself scientific you want to be
evolutionary if you evolutionary you
have to realize that mentality has has
effects aids are survival and
advancement at the same time if you're
scientific you want to believe that
everything is fundamentally reducible to
you know the four fundamental
interactions yep and if you leave it
there you could be a happy person but if
if you compare the two you realize that
I will note that that just does not work
out you know Espinosa has a an
explanation for that it's similar to
anomalous monism from David Donald
Davidson except that it's a panic it's
version of that more profound but Donald
Davidson's really ultimately as jaegwan
Kim says a materialist and like I said
matter we don't know what matter is and
it's constantly evolving just be
ridiculous to think we know you know
there's a current understanding a matter
is is is final you know it so you know I
mean this is Hempel still mo very
quickly you know you know that we know
that looking at the history of science
we know that our concept of matter has
constantly evolved you know from you
know the four elements to atoms and then
spin mass velocity so on so forth
constant constantly adding our qualities
to it so it would be by something called
pessimistic induction it would be
foolish to say but now we know all you
know be more likely by induction to
think it we're going to advanced now
science that's advances right so
therefore if you say you're a
materialist you can't say that year
biomatter you mean what we currently
understand by matter
what's the alternative well you say well
I am a materialist so I believe in sort
of a completed state of our
understanding a matter but of course
that's them belief in something of which
you have no idea at all you know we
don't know I mean the the possibility is
ultimately this that you know man we
find that matter and by find I don't
mean by empirical means it can't be
empirical but we've but we somehow find
that matter includes sentience in which
case a materialist who takes that second
horn says oh I believe in a future
physics the matter of a future physics
suddenly loses his materialism if he
says if he opposes materialism to pound
psychism interestingly however Karl
Popper defines pound psychism as a type
of materialism so most people don't
because of something called then though
fundamental mentality principle they
would Papineau for example rights matter
which is that whatever matter is one we
can negatively define it by saying it
hasn't got any sentence any sentences
and by sentence I mean all forms of
mentality consciousness is a sort of
very complex form of that
self-consciousness even more complex but
I also include subconsciousness
so what's the function of sentience
what's the function of it something I
mean would I be on the right track to
think about a function of sentience and
an an evolutionary function of sentience
as the capacity to discern between what
enabled it to continue and what didn't I
mean it's that very basic capacity to
discern between qualities which means
goal and not gold
yes in some primitive sense the power of
differentiation right for your fault but
based upon interestingly a more
fundamental drive which is your will to
live right right and right Schopenhauer
causa and also spinouts of Legends
connect kinetise which is a will to live
or world's power interesting so links up
with with young a little bit as well in
terms of what he sort of means by the
libido
Bergson with their land Vittal a kind of
life force I mean either not too
educated in it maybe it's more of a
loose connection and a really tight one
well it's only related shopping how I
mean it mostly relates to shop on our
who was a vitalist and he even you know
in time the 18th century criticizes all
those people who say oh well vitalism
it's always used today it's like oh well
you know scientists used to believe that
and then we proved it wrong well not
actually no you haven't I mean it
depends what you mean by vitalism though
if you mean like an extra force on top
of matter I think that's probably not
right but if you if you mean by the more
subtle sense that matter itself has a
vitality yes then I I think that's
actually correct yes yeah
now the question it's a dropper how do
we come to engage with that vitality
through I mean our vehicle to engage
with that is our consciousness right I
mean we we can what recognize certain
patterns of behavior in ourselves we can
recognize where our attention is drawn
to we can we can whether by placing
ourselves in a thought experiment or
find ourselves in a particular situation
in life we have in it there is something
that impels us to live you know so I
mean so young for example his idea of
the God image as that sort of as the on
the one hand the totality of the
conscious and unconscious but on the
other hand the symbol that we engage it
engage with that's projected from the
unconscious that at once sets the goal
to which we orient towards right so it's
it's it's kind of like that yeah it's
it's it's it's the beginnings of the
capacity to it's the beginnings of
differentiation but also a movement
towards towards it I don't know and what
causes that original subconscious sort
of upsurge well I mean is that
completely undetermined or is there
reasons for it like what's he call it
individuation well I mean yes I mean I
Amin individuation is just that movement
out right from from someone because
young of course is talking when he's
he's being very careful just about just
about psychology you know and just about
the psyche he's not trying to make any
metaphysical names but then you know it
will come spectrum as well exactly
you're asking me you asked him do you
believe in God and says near the end of
his life no I I don't have to believe I
know but you know what does he mean by
God but so the the alchemists have an
idea of the sort of pre cosmogonic egg
or the the symbol of the rebus people
can google that re bis it's just a
symbol to represent the collapsing of
opposites and and the idea of the the
Prima Materia
just that it's an essence or source that
is somehow all containing I seem to want
to give it the label static because
that's what works in my mind but if
that's appropriate but we go from this
static perfection of everything all
collapsed in one to somehow then a
fracturing and then we have then then we
begin this this process I mean that
didn't somehow the wheel comes into it
somehow movement comes into it you know
and differentiation comes into it you
can never quite reach it get back
exactly everything that was there we can
just get sort of pieces of it and engage
in consistent processes of
transformation
harmonizing around what enables that
very process itself to continue and to
create ever more elaborately what can
never be totally recaptured from the
beginning because it's so a different
like it's a different something it's
like a fixed perfection it's a utopia
that's that's like an it's like a it's
an image and we're chasing an echo of it
but that but that's life and that's okay
but these ideas for me are you know I
must admit having read too young enough
as much as I should have really just you
know bits bits and bobs there because I
suppose in my education he was always
considered psychologists read and
philosopher write although of course
there's an overlap but well that's the
thing I mean I'm interested in what like
where the cycle where the cycle where
the psychology meets the metaphysics
like what is it to engage in I mean
fundamentally I think it it is the same
thing because well from my point of view
then you know if the psyche and psyche
yes is fundamental and thus you know
everything is psychology in a literal
sense right no ID and that's metaphysics
as well yep no absent
but psychology as it's known today as
more sort of really in client was
therapy in right medicine and whatnot
Ram which is of course a value but it's
not right it's not something any look
into yes well and it also you know it's
like one of my I mean I also want to ask
you what your interests are in for this
conference and what you really look to
see like what are the discussions you
look to stoke water and like you sort of
yeah what's really driving you to be
here but but but before we get to that
there's something that that uh that that
interests me about this relationship
between philosophy and therapy and and
and it's that there must surely be a
hidden yeah below the surface
stabilizing metaphysical framework that
I that actually enables society itself
to be stable enough so that individuals
can be stable in it and and our therapy
might look to to aid people to to to
live their lives better or well or heal
from trauma and then engage in something
that's you know what genuinely authentic
and then have a meaningful life from
what-have-you but but but often that
life is is it it's sort of a many of the
other fundamental things that kind of
taken for granted and and part of what
interests me about psychedelics is that
well there is a tendency for a sort of
metaphysical reshaping in someone's
views as well and so over the long term
you know while we might be moving
individuals towards better health what
does that mean for society as a greater
impact like what foundations are could
be altered or not and so I guess part of
my interest in being here is is to
really try and is is is to is to get to
grips with what practitioners who who
are moving the psychedelic movement
forward ultimately think about those
sorts of those sorts of questions and if
they can consider if they considered I
can it's not an accurate way to put it
but the
of durations you know you can consider
one person's life or or at a 12 hour
psychedelic experience and that's fine
but they're embedded in a life that
extends far longer than that and and to
what extent are you shifting someone's
orientation added at a more extended
duration or something like that is not I
could you know anyway I hope you get
some of that no I I suppose yeah I mean
I mean my talk here on Humphrey Davy is
is really just is simply trying to sort
of push the same point which is that
yeah there is this medicinal benefit and
so on but for Davey the first scientific
psych not there was also
he was mostly really interested in
phenomenological accounts that's where
he got you know the greatest writers of
the day to write a chapter on their
experiences I Wordsworth and Coleridge
as I said sorry and I mean personally
these experiences and then ones with the
opium and hashish it takes well I mean
had a profound effect on his belief
system his last book main constellations
in travel or the last days of a
philosopher I mean the first chapters
called the vision which basically was
the romantic term for what we today call
it the trip and and the last chapter is
sort of analyzing any truths from that
trip and he wrote her sister and brother
for example that and this book is really
my final philosophical views you know
and and to be taken seriously and yeah
his view was that there exists all
around us beings of which were generally
completely unaware I mean really crazy
what most people say is completely crazy
you know now I think with a sort of
so-called psychedelic Renaissance
happening you know the entry ISM is
obviously medicine and also you get
funding that way so that's the way it
has to go obviously and of course it's
great value of helping people of course
the main thing but if they became more
prevalent and society if people had
these experiences more commonly I mean
as William James says you know mystical
experiences are noetic
by which he means that people actually
believe that what they see is real
typical example AJ as psychedelic like
experienced just before he died which I
think I mentioned to you last time you
know he was a well-known atheist part of
the humanist society in Britain one
experience these two strange red space
beings you know and so on
made him actually very sympathetic
towards the notion of an afterlife not
God he point saying but an afterlife
just one and and he's like you know the
Richard Dawkins atheist of his age you
know AJ a so and mansion
if and I Spencer was just saying more
people are taking psychedelics now than
in the 60s yeah I don't know a god those
figures but that's where he said I'm not
corroborating that but it doesn't
surprise me
yeah if these noetic okay
- please conditions directly if William
James is right that mystical experiences
which we can equate the psychedelic
experience there's nothing that's fair
as he himself does yes if they contain a
noetic element in other words you
believe that what you see is at least
partly something real not just
hallucination yes yeah well I think
there are different degrees I mean I see
there are hallucinations you know but
yes yes that could be a you know
obviously it's sort of as you change the
channel they'll get a bit of both well
says whoever yes so on the condition
that more people are taking psychedelics
and on the condition that they aren't
noetic generally speaking you're gonna
get a worldview change you know yes now
I don't wanna be too utopian about that
because you know from experience from
the sixties people thought ya know yeah
give everyone else D and there be peace
in the world didn't happen then again
not everyone could take LSD and also of
course we shouldn't forget the
right-wing component of with a dark
component of psychedelic drug use as
well you know so that I don't think it
necessarily I don't I'm not convinced by
these studies that show that
psychedelics make um more peaceful and
and so on I fit I think it's rather that
if you're more peaceful you're more
likely to take them generally
interesting but I'm not sure about that
more studies need to be done but anyway
I think ultimately whatever political
persuasion you're at
certainly it will open up people's minds
to different forms of consciousness
which then would make them more
sympathetic to things like panic ISM I
mean
hearts on a great wedding philosopher
said one of the reasons that people
don't buy and psych isms because they
simply cannot imagine what it would be
like to be you know a particle or
something like that yes but if you have
experienced all these you know
completely non prosaic you know
experiences then I think at least you
can begin to imagine it yes well and and
of course William James recognizes four
marks of the mystical the most two most
important as far as I'm concerned other
noetic quality but also the ineffability
mhm
so not only are people thinking it's
real they can't find what to say about
it communicate it footnote to that
Humphrey Davy speaks about the
inevitability of no jokes as states
already in 1800 you know now William
James didn't claim originality for that
but you know you see it there nitrous
oxide is very very interesting i I do
think it's especially with cannabis and
people often use it with other
psychedelics as well and but I mean you
know I mean Humphrey Davy tried it's
shockingly I mean we take it today and
you know maybe like a two pint balloon
something like that yeah but I mean he
wait to get in small forms to start with
but then he got into this huge box look
like Doctor Who TARDIS and took him 80
quarts which is about 90 liters of it
Austin's over 75 minutes and then he
stepped out and took 20 more quarts of
pure nitrogen silt back lumen and and
then that's where his famous you know
expression you know all his thoughts you
know became sort of idealist through
that you know also had a lot of visions
and whatnot so so yeah it's it's
life-changing like I say with Humphrey
Davy he was basically a mystic you know
it's only a visionary yeah as well as a
great chemist yes well absolutely in a
great Penzance man yeah well that's
right in my local town I kind of do get
the feeling you might be a little bit
biased towards know it probably Penzance
won't be happy about what I'm going to
say about him but yeah truth needs to be
known yeah
know is very interesting so trying to
think here we've covered quite a bit so
there is there's one there was one
question I was going to ask before and I
may as well just bloody ask it so
so when Whitehead says creativity is a
higher principle than God don't you say
that's right because God himself as an
actual occasion right and it is that the
the the total of all currently fixable
actual occasions at a given moment I
know that's not technically the right
way to speak because they can't be fixed
but does God refer to the sum total of
actual occasions but not well it's
complicated so there's first of all as
two main aspects of God there's what he
calls the primordial nature of God and
the consequence of the God
the consequence of God is God as as you
say like experiencing himself through
all of us all of us beings including
plants whoa yes all the actually yeah so
that's one form of him but also there's
primordial nature of God which is the
eternal aspect where the eternal light
objects exist which a bit basically
universals they exist in timeless realm
such as Pythagoras theorem I think
though that essentially they are form so
it doesn't use that word because of the
baggage there contains but but they are
what basically they're what Plato calls
forms what Russell calls two universes
what Santa Anna calls essences yes
what frigate all's a third realm right
more or less the same thing so there's
it's a level of existence and this is
actually like this is why some people
call Spinoza an end theatre and
pantheist because pantheism is that
nature it's got right by nature you mean
carrying induration through time but
there's a there's the eternal aspect of
God as well which doesn't occur through
time
it doesn't mean eternity like infinite
duration it means something that is
actually outside of time which is hard
to kind of conceptualize but you know
the great thinkers a lot of the great
thinkers from Plato onwards actually you
know from Pythagoras onwards
have believed in this form of existence
most people say well no they you know
that that's not existence that's just a
concept but but
concepts are only their incursions or in
Gresham's as well as into duration you
know they they am interesting that's
really really interesting I would love
you to unpack their ingression into
duration there I'll give you an example
from Karl Popper actually who also
believes Eagles at world 3 what it's
part of well 3 for popper world 3 yeah
so for popper world one is matter
well tears mind world 3 is then this
eternal aspect but it's a little bit
more than that as culture as well but
I'll keep it simple so Karl Popper gave
it gives an example related to Ruslan
Frager from half so Frager attempted to
write these this matter this logical
theorem on the logical foundations of
mathematics and it was it existed there
in manuscript form before it was
published for a few years Russell found
a fatal flaw in it which Frager admitted
to ostensibly so I was really happy
about that I don't think he was but any
poppers point is this in frege's theorem
theory not theorem sir there was an
error right a logical error it existed
but how did that exist you can't say
existed physically it wasn't the paper
ink you can't say it exists as a concept
either because no one was aware of it
and also because no one had had a
concept there would be no neural
correlate of either in the brain so
wouldn't lean that way either but
nonetheless it is right to say it
existed there was a flaw in that theorem
before anyone was ever aware of fact the
where what was the ontological status of
this existence proper asks well that is
well through your part of as well
through that is what really there's an
example of what and why had caused
eternal ideas and they exist in the prep
week was a prime model and primordial
nature of God okay so so you have these
forms these eternal ideas and what any
any any bastardization of them is also
contained in there as well
like because this is an error right so
so so there's every possible error
yes and it's not only mathematical it's
not only number not all numbers for
example and all concepts it's also since
failure like red or feelings you know so
red exists whether anyone thinks about
it or not
mm-hmm you know before humans were there
before any organism with eyes was there
red existed in a in a or what Russell
says it didn't exist it and Russell uses
the example of whiteness instead of
redness but nonetheless it's subsisted
so the interesting concept there is that
it's basically is fundamental ontology
what do we mean by exists you know what
I mean by the it exists usually people
just mean solidity you know yes some
other people think mentality as well yes
this is the this is why it friggin calls
it although he limits its mathematical
objects but nonetheless he calls it the
third okay well it's a racket does this
third realm and I'll just reset there so
okay I have a question then about these
and this these these forms primordial
part of the primordial nature of God as
as Whitehead calls it by this god of
course isn't in it's not you know a
Christian God at all right right so so
the the primordial nature of God and
what's the other major come the
consequent so does the does the
consequent nature of God is it can we
understand it as filtered through in
some sense the primordial nature of God
like any possible shape those things
could take s yeah that's right and
actually what had caused his eternal
object sometimes simply possibilities
right as possibilities it you know just
think about this linguistically if you
say possibilities exist which no one has
ever thought of well well they exists
then but it's it's more than that simple
wordplay I mean you know and also like I
say there's a massive legacy of it
through the Scholastic's
and through the Greeks and and
interestingly a lot of mathematicians
and logicians believe in this third rung
because it makes sense of their much
a sense of their theories great example
of which is Einsteins best friend Kirk
girdle you know came up with the two
incompleteness theorems I mean he was a
complete plate honest in that sense he
said not only did the realization of
this third realm this frigates worth
this I'd use that word enough all of
them but not only did the realization
that this third realm is absolutely real
helped inform my theorems incompleteness
theorems which were you know Google that
I've heard of it but very influential
about the fact that you can never really
M self justify logic and maths but not
not only did it influence that but also
they the theorems themselves contribute
to the substantiation of that Platonism
and Roger Penrose whom I mentioned he's
also played honest even has diagrams of
his three worlds and so I mean most
people haven't even heard of this stuff
but it is fundamentally a footnote to
Plato know what has the most famous
expression and I I mean I I just
completely dismissed it for most of my
life since I've read about it I was
eighteen or so
hmm I think in well this is just an old
kind of quasi religious mystical obvious
error but then when you actually do look
into the I mean a great introduction to
its Russell Bertrand Russell when you
really look into it you know it actually
it is quite compelling yeah well here's
my opportunity to say something sensible
and and so I'm going to read out a quote
that someone else said and the quote is
by whitehead and it says the essence of
great experience is penetration into the
unknown
the unexperienced if you like to phrase
it so philosophy is mystical for
mysticism is direct insight into depths
as yet unspoken but the purpose of
philosophy is to rationalize mysticism
not by explaining it away
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
the
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
basically trying to gain knowledge
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]