you
co√±o I study mindfulness so insight
mystical experience and wisdom from a
scientific perspective on experiments
published papers etc I've also been 20
years so today today is a where I teach
you a new principle and today we said
for those of you who are just a course
this is not just a drop in sitting there
are regular instructions teaching you a
progressive set of skills if you're
doing this for the first time I
recommend going back to the previous
videos especially the the two
instructional videos and then join us
again this will be recorded so and
you're welcome to stay and set but if
you want to know what other people are
doing and practicing you can go back to
the previous videos in order to do that
I'm going to briefly review what we did
last time then we will sit together and
then we will have some times for some
Q&A so of course we we know how to
center now and then last time we
practice the kind of relaxation we're
cultivating in meditation part of the
core for we're finding our root we're
finding relaxation that doesn't take us
into unconsciousness and sleep we're
finding relaxation that gives us a sense
of sensitivity but also within that
flowing sensitivity stability and so
what we do is we move our attention to
four locations front back and center
hears click first locations I area in
the front heart area don.t an area
contact area back back of the skull
between the shoulders opposite solar
plexus contact area center of the skull
center of the chest center of the
abdomen center of the Khans contact
awareness with the area you're listening
that kind of sensitization you do when
you're listening out of particular at a
party to a particular conversation and
then you're loosening for the sake of
listening you relax a not to make things
feel better or make things go away but
to open up open up your awareness you're
letting it flow which means you let it
fill write your introspective awareness
so you're trying to get this deep fusion
between your introspective awareness and
your introspective awareness and then
you let it go you don't get a meshed or
attached to it and then you do the
opening and melting and draining down
you do that as I said for each one of
the center's front back and center when
you get to the base each time you
imagine it sinking into the earth three
feet like the root of a tree really
enhancing that sense of groundedness and
connectedness a sense of increased
stability and nourishment so that you
come eventually to be sitting as the
tradition says as still as they Mountain
others the stability but as alert as a
warrior
that's a sensitivity and I gave you some
martial art ideas in order to make sense
of that so when we sit first I'll take
time right at your own pace now I'll
find your Center then find your root all
three lines and there were all three
roots become one root and when you're
done adjust your Center and roots so
they you're a root feels like an
extension and deepening of your Center
and then begin to follow your breath all
right so let's prepare make sure you're
comfortable ready to go
we'll sit for 15 minutes and then we
will come out for questions and answers
begin
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate your practice with your
everyday consciousness and cognition
sorry some of you are watching I had to
come out of my meditation I have many
years in my left ear and I was having an
immense attack and so I needed to come
out of the meditation in order to
stabilize for a bit that may happen
please don't take any worry about it
just continue with your practice so
today I'd like to now move to answering
some questions that you may have what if
you need to change position well as it
just showed sometimes things happen and
you need to change positions I was
having a manners attack and so I needed
to come out of the meditation if you're
having that kind of thing of course you
need to shift position if you have a
pain or discomfort like in your arm or
your leg
and then return your breath centering
your breath as you do now it may be
though that you do that multiple times
and then the pain is becoming
oppressive so here's a general principle
and this is a principle I just adjust
myself at first I was just meditating
through the minions attack but if it
gets to the point where you're not
capable of learning as all you're doing
is trying to endure with the distraction
then shift your position right
maybe recenter reroute start all over
again so the general principle here is
if you are all you're doing is
struggling to endure with the
distraction then you make the movement
you need maybe you just maybe you need
to open your eyes for a sec and then you
go back into the practice if on the
other hand you think you need to move
because you feel that you've lost mentor
or connection to your root and just make
the minor adjustments you need to make
in order to find your Center in your
root again there's a question what's the
why the quick succession between
listening seeing relaxing etc yesterday
it felt as if more time was needed to
sense the body better this is from
Philip and yes Philip I did that because
I've done this for a long time and I
sort of try to get the average amount of
time that people liked also I was trying
to work within the time limits that we
have to work with and so you can do the
routing of course at your own pace but
you'll find over time that the amount of
time you have to dedicate to it will
will shrink so I want to thank everybody
for joining us today I want to always
thank or more and Jason for their
excellent help please subscribe to the
channel to be notified of the next video
and we'll do this every morning
Sunday mornings at 9:30 again if you've
missed the previous lessons go to my
channel find the playlist and you can
catch up so I hope everybody is able to
maintain their practice in this
challenging time and I hope you find it
helpful and valuable to you thank you
very much everyone see you tomorrow