I was talking with Zack Stein just a few
moments ago about this call and I
mentioned that I felt a certain sense of
butterflies in my stomach and as I was
kind of feeling what what the quality of
the Musk
oh yes this is the feeling that I had
and still have for sporting event
perform engaging and an athletic
remember like the butterflies in the
stomach a sense of anticipation and
nervousness but but nervous it's not
well you guys get it you get the quality
of good yeah in that trepidation but
that's sort of energizing anticipation
is that what you're describing yeah yeah
and I get that if that wasn't father
into sports
actually well both but but I was
thinking about that I was thinking about
that before the call to actually it's
interesting to hear you say that because
I had a similar feeling and you're right
it's not trepidatious but it is
anticipate ory and I think it has
something to do with the fact that these
conversations have already shown that
they because they have the transmuting
quality such that at the end of it we
cannot have anticipated where we'll land
at the beginning and so there's
something about that there's something
about that I think that provokes the
anticipation because I don't know what
you know it's like I don't know who I'm
going to be on the other end of this
call on the other side of it I think
that has something to do with the
anticipation mm-hmm yeah I think there's
something deeply aspirational about
these conversations enough in the sense
you describe Chris if we the you know
Agnes colored since we don't know who
we're going to be and what values and
perspectives we might come to inhabit
from where we are right now we can't
foresee them in an inferential manner
which I think it's one of the well one
of sort of the sacred elements of this
kind of practice it's an aspirational
component so there's momentous that it
is a momentous occasion because it
implies both a there's there's something
that will result and that result has
potency it as consequence and then to
move through it also implies
skillfulness yeah butterflies perhaps
energy coming up saying get your shit in
gear
it is time to play because this is
you're playing for marbles here this is
for real this is going to happen it's
going to push you and the more you're
able to bring yourself to bear and push
yourself and the others to the limit the
more change actually occurs so what's
what's really kind of compelling about
what the way that we're talking about
them noticing is is that yes I have this
anticipation in these butterflies that
come up right in the face of something
in the future and I'm precisely it's
it's precisely because I don't know what
to anticipate right that gives the
character of anticipation and that's
just a really interesting thing about in
a certain sense I think about it I
wonder if we could think I actually
wonder if we can think about the sense
of the future as a call right and I
think yeah I think so because I don't
think it's just the butterflies the a
ploy that we're considering undertaking
here the great feats right I don't yeah
there's a there's a not knowing but
there's also I mentioned this before for
me yeah I'm getting that sense that far
right but there's also something that
enables my commitment to the process
which is I've developed I've developed
also a sense of trust which is not the
same as knowing I'm trusting in the
process and I thought I think and Chris
and I were talking about this last night
because we're working on this chapter
about dialectic and I was I was trying
to get at I'm reading a book by Molina
and he's talking about sort of the Plato
views dialogue it's this process of
trying to get at what what's the what I
would call it as a grammar out of
discipline discourse what do we need and
one of the things one of the things I
think we need is we need a move which
sort of is fundamental to rationality
which is an ability to trust in the
process without having a predetermined
prejudicial commitment to the product
standard stalks about this as being a
crucial component of rationality and oh
I know when although we're not entering
into you know an argument towards a
conclusion I think we're doing an
inactive kind of rationality because we
are training each other in the ability
to trust in the
process and I'm interested in what
affords that trust what is it about what
we're doing that makes us trust it and
this goes back to the issue that the
conversation we had before about our
vulnerability and there is there some
way in which the world is vulnerable or
a being is vulnerable to like is there a
is there a is there something that
engenders our trust in this process the
process is certainly has vulnerability
to it that's one thing I've been
thinking about we have to care for the
process it's vulnerable and so there's a
mutual there's a mutual relationship
between my disclosing my vulnerability
and the processes disclosing its
vulnerability I don't know about the
world yet but at least I know that about
the process and then that that's to me
is one of the things that's engendering
a kind of love and then that is
engendering a kind of trust and so I the
butterflies for me are there they're not
they're not the butterflies of
trepidation they're there like when
Bilbo climbs above the trees and
Mirkwood and he sees the butterflies
take flight and they give him a kind of
trust in the journey that he's
undertaken because they give him a
moment of love they give him a moment of
realization and so I'm very interested
in about how these two come together if
John is this similar I just want to make
sure because to bring in a thread that
we've been talking about and I think we
talked about in the last conversation
when you talk when you speak of the
divine double you basically in one of
the interesting things about the divine
double is that it it it precisely isn't
what you are yet yet it's it yet is
granting the normativity in which you
are and I'm working about I'm wondering
about the is that is is it that sense as
I would say it's like that sense of what
should be on the horizon right that has
that that has us um have a kind of
normativity that we're having in this
conversation
that makes it a sense of makes it worth
being vulnerable for right again
engendering that sense the vulnerability
as a you know as distinct from something
like exposure yes
there's a courageous um in a certain
sense a willingness to sacrifice
something known or comfortable right
because something's worth it
and that connect into what's just beyond
the horizon and it feels to me very much
what distinguishes the cadence of our
conversation and perhaps what calls us
together is that that what were that
that we're constantly looking towards
what it is that's emerging in the
conversation right as we're conversing
pray as we're conversing so it's not
just like we're know something and we
record it it's more like we're engaging
and that and that what we end up talking
about is something that isn't produced
by us but emerges and is calling to us
in a way that we couldn't have known in
advance mm-hmm I think all of that
correct I'll try and respond as quickly
as possible so other people can jump in
I think that that the engendering of
trust is precisely one of the things
that distinguishes vulnerability from
exposure and I think the kind of
relationship like you said we have to
the divine double that is coming the the
the way in which we are being called
beyond ourselves because we're trusting
in the process and what emerges from it
I think is if you'll allow me this term
it's the stand-in for the divine double
to which towards which we are aspiring
it's the symbol on it's the it's the
actually enacted symbol that joins this
self to the future self that's going to
be being drawn to this conversation and
so that's that's how III see that and
I'm I'm also interested in the fact that
I think there's both this perspective
looking forward like we're describing
but there's also the retrospective we
keep circling back retrospectively and
trying to get at what's grounding this
well so we're prospecting towards the
emergence but we're also retrospective
towards the ground
what is grounding this that makes that
kind of an emergent possible because you
can really only ask about the ground
when you see some of its promise
fulfilled in the emergence and you can
only make sense of the emergence in
terms of the intelligibility of afforded
by the ground so I think there's both a
prospective and a retrospective move
that's going on also within this and as
you as that settles in and I just get
the whole of everything you just said it
the implicit sense of vulnerability the
characteristic of vulnerability just
makes when it occurs is a virtue of it
right and necessary like a necessary
structural component of it in a certain
sense exactly exactly so what I'm trying
to do is use the phenomenology and the
functionality to articulate how we can
understand vulnerability as one of the
virtues that is necessary to the good
practice of dialectic exactly
that's what I that's what Kris and I are
trying to work on right now one of the
things I think that in terms of finding
an ingress into the process itself one
of the things and you and I were talking
about this John I was thinking about it
more this morning actually and and
there's something in these dialogues
part of what makes these so commodious
these dialogues and part of what spatial
eise's the presence that the divine
double presence that you're talking
about guy there's a way in which that
apt dialogo spatial eise's that presence
it opens between the participants you
open a space in which the presence
actually emerges and I think the the
the that insemination has a lot to do
with the way that we treat our
propositions in the course of the
dialogue so I've noticed that I've
noticed in both of it Gaia and Jordan
both of you actually do this just
doesn't matter of course I've noticed is
that you treat I think this is right and
I think this is actually I think this is
a it's a profound practice that I think
you seem to do in implicitly which is
that you treat each proposition as a
kind of micro analogue for the
relationship exemplified by the
conversation oh this is great also so
that whatever else we are discussing we
are discussing the relationship right
sort of like imagine that the two hands
mutually gripping the twin logo of hands
mutually gripping one another every
object that they take into hand is
beholding them as it is beholden right
whatever we take into hand we are also
feeling we are feeling the hands that
are gripping the object and so there's a
way in which each proposition as it is
traded contains within it that
microcosmic presence of the whole
relationship and there's an assonance
between them at the different levels and
if we treat every proposition as that
micro analog for the relationship itself
and we realize that as we're treating
propositions we are treating the dynamic
in a sort of more digital form almost
holographic the way you're describing it
members yeah yeah we yeah we've been
talking about that that was beautifully
said by the way yeah like the way you
talk that was good often you're talking
actually I physically painful but not in
a bad way
[Laughter]
she were invoking and expressing and the
carefulness with which you were binding
the expressions that was able to
actually be propositional while holding
the thing that it was referring to in a
wholeness that had tightness to it me
like drinking that it was actually
feeling like very specific body parts
were actually being affected like my
right leg started to hurt and I had like
move around I didn't move my physical
body to come into some kind of afford
and conformance with what the hell was
going on it was a very deep thing you
were doing there because it has to do
with like the like think about the way
there's a relationship with oh man it's
actually related to we were talking
about earlier like what the hell is even
going on here like the Internet and
what's where where is this happening in
the very deep and profound sense there
is the hole of all is expressing itself
always already simultaneously and every
expression that's where it's happening
it is happening everywhere the whole
everything right now is sort of like my
my vocal cords are vibrating in my mouth
muscles are moving and if I think about
it that is the effect the universe's
vocal cords are vibrating its mouth
muscles are moving as these words are
expressing forth and there's the ability
I'm like feel that bigness feeling the
wholeness and I think that's very very
much what you were speaking to is that
like that that sensing so Christmas I
mean this reminds me and we've talked
about this a bit just reminds me of
Spinoza Cianci Intuit Eva right that you
get you're getting the whole in each
part and the part disclosed in relevance
to the whole and so you're saying that
so I'm trying to I'm trying to put these
two together are you saying that sort of
the retrospective prospective thing
moves towards something like us can see
Intuit Eva that's a way in which the
divine double is presencing itself and
therefore engendering trust in me I'm
just trying to gather it together is
that what you're that were you saying
yeah I think so I think so because
there's that there's that there's that
sort of gathering motion in the logos
and and it looks right that's right
that's right the gap
motion of the logos has as you said and
you said this very well to me to be
thinner in our earlier conversation but
the the motion of the gathering logos is
isn't bi-directional motion that's right
yes
and you were talking about that how it
refits it reef it's the process but it
also it also recasts its aspiration yes
yes yes yes yeah that's right
that's right and so all of that all of
that and I EJ you said that so
beautifully just now Jordan that that
that that that too and they all right
they all in the one the one in the all
idea that what's happening in these is
that is that in every instance of that
conversation that process the process is
reproducing itself all along this this
analogic chain you know what it kind of
reminds me of there's a there's a one of
Plato's dialogues I think it's the ion
he makes this analogy an analogy or this
right this is this chain of analogic
thinking going on here he makes this
analogy about the the magnetic the
Heraklion stone the magnetic stone that
attracts a link of chains and then as it
attracts the link of chains each of
those change also activates its own
magnetism it attracts more chains right
so with this so there's this there's
this there's this constant espousal in
this this this chain of connections and
eventually I mean even though it
originates in right the stone there's
some sort of central dynamic the dynamic
speciate sit self into each of the
individual instantiations right it's
like the it's like it's like the idols
rights like the putana kaiser yeah right
talking about this last night the power
of the i das its potency is such that
yes if its reproductive in the
participatory knowing right to the
participatory know the other two motions
the i das in every single instance of it
yes so there's something like that going
on that it's like a district it's a it's
in them it's and I wanted to use the
word empowering the word so tainted now
but how you
I like boy but there's a there's a
there's a kind of Cascade of empowerment
that moves in both direction if this is
what I'm trying to get up maybe you know
that sense of empowerment is the way in
which like I was talking about it and
way into which the world is calling me
not just speaking to me it's moving me
and I'm not just trying to make use that
in a romantic emotive sense I'm talking
about in the sense of restructuring my
agency affording my intelligibility to
go forward and backward gathering and
gathering and resetting and refitting
yes I think that's key to cries notion
of harkening that it that the forms of
intelligibility that are emerging
empower us they afford us they enable us
and that's part of why I trust if
something is giving me power and it's
giving me a path to my true or self I'm
gonna trust it I'm gonna trust it deeply
even if I don't know and I can't put
into propositions what it's going to
what the steps are gonna look like or
what the final product is gonna look
like that's why I'm gonna trust in the
trust being in the way the way and the
movement of connectivity right an impact
living back and forth not in not in I
keep thinking of something my dad always
said to me would say more I think about
the more profound it as he says you know
well you can boil down all human
suffering right down to a point where
it's simply where man tries to put a
period where God puts a question mark
idolatrous power guy I'm not proposing
any idolatrous power I certainly don't
want to bring a full stop to God that's
not in my job description anywhere I
hope however mentalness that I'm hearing
it sounds like what we're talking about
and this is I'm wondering if what we're
circling around here a bit
is in a certain sense what makes
something like an we're addressing
nihilism right in a certain way
right because like what you're talking
about is is it referring the differing
relationship right to where you started
talking about this Chris is a different
relationship to the proposition right
and well I think what we're saying so
far what I'm getting is that I'm finding
the fundament right in the ambiguity
right in the ever-evolving effectiveness
but there's not a thing a period that I
can find that I can just stake a claim
on but rather maybe the the sense of
proposition and this is this harkens
back to a conversation that that you and
I were having a few months ago John
where we were talking about well maybe
what the measure of the proposition is
really to the degree that it it allows
me to further question to further the
further the further reveal the mystery
as a mystery hmm like that that like and
I think you linked it mm-hmm sense of
pragmatism or a truer sense of
pragmatism that that James was actually
talking about this very distinct from
the the pragma pragmatics that the
pragmatism that's known so I'm just
really getting yeah I guess what I'm
trying to get at is I'm trying to get I
see there's a danger not in how you take
it guy but there's a danger in the word
ambiguity because M beauty can be a
ground for equivocation it can be a
ground for vagueness it can be a ground
for bullshit it can be a ground for
deception in misdirection and I don't
think Plato was trying to bring about a
resolution I mean he's very much about
pursuing understanding rather than
pursuing knowledge I agree with no line
on that so not trying to bring the full
stuff but I think what we're trying to
do here right and I think
and this is what the magic of it I think
the word the practice that's big for us
is we're trying to bring clarity right
and clarification is not the same thing
as completeness there's almost a billion
thing that right you can't you can't
have them you can't have them both right
and so I I think part of what the
vulnerability is is we give up on the
completing but we nevertheless don't
take that as any excuse for not pursuing
the clarification and that's what I'm
trying to articulate that's what I'm
trying to articulate yeah yeah you
clarified something in my I didn't even
know that there was something unclear
until you clarified it yes yeah so this
is a please Chris please no no please
join glad so there's there's something
about the when I was I was feeling the
word that came up for me was life and
life is living on the razor's edge
always balancing a board movement
between the actualized and the potential
and the possible and so every move this
movement of clarification because we
were just there we just had it right you
had John expressed in a way that
generated clarity clarification but that
clarification was simultaneously a
realization actualization a
concretization of something it made
something makes sense in a deeper way
and an opening right and that I think is
what avoids this this thing that you
were concerned about is that that's the
movement movement is one that increases
possibility and increases actuality yeah
yeah that's very well said I like that
that's very well set yes Chris what were
you going to say I was yeah no no that's
yeah so in all of this including what
you just said Jordan there's some
there's it seems to me that what's
taking shape here is that the the
clarification as opposed to the
completeness that was good
differentiation John the clarification
certainly in the Socratic spirit takes
the form of inquiry right and it makes
me think that part of what we are doing
part of the spatial izing project right
the dialogic specializing project that
we
talking about is afforded by a if I can
retrofit your anecdote a little bit guy
about your your father's little Maxim
they're all those what we're really
doing is replacing the period with the
question mark as a way of opening the
space back up right let in in a way that
the aspiring breath opens the lung full
of space what we're doing but and
bye-bye rebuy that's the kind of redress
right that we're that we are aspiring to
we're trying to - we're trying to well
we're trying to obviously this starts to
strangle conversation right and and so
part of the engendering of trust the
espousal of trust I think that we're
talking about has to do with the
authentication of the process of inquiry
as opposed to the process of assertion
and so that is and that that sort of
that metaphoric replacement of the
period with the question mark is a
spatial izing gesture that opens up sort
of that the that womb-like affordance
for for for more intelligibility to them
then to then sort of lapse into the
conversation and and then to take take
shape since it's like a it's a formal
change but it's a significant and formal
change and I think that certainly in the
Socratic tradition the formulation the
replacement of assertion with inquiry is
a is a formal way of of shifting the
mode of conversation such that it
becomes trusting yes such that it
becomes progressive
I want to add to that because I what
that does is that shifts us off of the
drive towards conclusion and as instead
like the drive towards appreciation and
allegiance says this is what you see in
the Socratic dialogue people come to
appreciate more and more self-knowledge
and the knowledge of being without
having arrived at conclusions about
self-knowledge and BA and then and they
have an allegiance to the process that
discloses and trains them in that
appreciation and I'm using appreciation
in the sense that in which you do a
music appreciation class because this is
the this is how you this is how you
properly aspire you engage in the
process of appreciation which has both
the gratitude that guy keeps reminding
us about right but it also has the
understanding the changing of relevance
and salience that Plato is emphasizing
you can play with the other meaning of
the term as well which is there which is
oh in crease in value yeah yes excellent
Thank You Jordan
thank you yes that triple play on that
word is excellent actually that's very
very helpful
hmm I'm glad we're recording this Chris
oh my gosh every time every time this is
what exactly we're talking about every
time facts come out ideas come out
collectively that I can't foresee and I
could I know I know in my bones I
couldn't come up with them on my own
yeah I don't even think you and I Chris
could come up with them just in our pair
there's oh no because the quantity here
creates a different team spirit it's a
different entity unto itself entirely
than the one that possesses to any any
smaller combination of any of us I would
imagine Wow
so I'm returning well you do happen to
be previous conversations is the
implication of the presencing of the
novel medium as you said we are
recording this which is to say that we
can record it we now live in an era
where it is possible for us to be having
this conversation in a fashion that can
be recorded for our own consumption and
for more broad share that has
implication nificant implication this is
yes the Socratic dialogues were not
recorded they were remembered and then
they were written down
yeah which thing and then our
conversations that are ephemeral may not
even be remembered particularly so
there's something about the fact that
the possibility of this kind of but I
think it's very very important this is a
new kind of possibility that I mean it
it picks up on two things
but transcends them both inhale picks up
on both of them Jordan it picks up on
guides point he's constantly remembering
us from mocking us and in sati reminding
us that every conversation is
impregnated with the other conversations
right I always get this indras net image
a guy invokes that I think it's powerful
but it also picks up as you said on in
that when Plato did something
transformative to Socrates when he
turned him into written dialogues so
that there's a meta dialogical relation
right there's a relationship between the
dialogues but we've got both of those
but they're now taken up and there's
something new right there's the
remembering guys remembering if it'll
allow me to name it after you guys and
there's Plato's internal logic relation
but that's now taken and made something
even more by what right what this new
medium is affording us the he also you
know what's really interesting is one of
the things that cuz I listen to this on
on the way up to to our last dialogue
with my wife in power on the way up to
our honeymoon
and and it was I would a lot of what I
was listening to was like how she was
hearing it and and she's I mean she's
got that you know she's married to me so
she's she's open to hearing this kind of
stuff right she's so happy I had friends
[Laughter]
ie you know I probably won't be woken up
in the middle of the night having to
listen to this stuff you know but the
but one of the things that was really
interesting is that
this this that she actually implicitly
could not be be part of the dialogue we
had to stop it at so many times and she
hadn't say oh my god this is did it
enough and and the other thing that was
was striking about it is she kept being
moved by how much affinity was built
between us right hmm if that was such a
such a a collaborative heart of and is
that at the you know and I was
experiencing the same thing as I was
listening to it and I've heard alike
lots of comments about it yeah okay I'm
interesting about the about the YouTube
where people were just really moved in
to it to a in in a certain sense a and
ecstatic kind of affinity that is a vote
through this yeah and so in terms of the
medium it does feel like it's were able
to share something that people can find
themselves emotionally impacted by and
share with us in a way that has them
spontaneously join the dialogue even
though not the inner route lockers
aren't present in a spatial temporal
sense right in a certain way so i think
i think that i think the transform and
it's funny because it I think it looks
like they required a loop which is the
John invoked it as yours
but I think the transform is the key
thing which is to say that this
particular event the particular
spatiotemporal correspondence of our
attention and intention into something
that is recorded is not the thing the
thing is the oceanic capacity that is
beginning to emerge of which this is
both a result representation and a part
so to the degree to which your wife has
a conversation that is akin to as of the
same spirit of this conversation she
cannot help but be embodying some
portion what it was she was imbibing in
that conversation and whatever she
brings into the conversation that she is
in with whoever she is with it is this
conversation at the fabric is whole it
is not part
so so I wonder if that's a design
feature of this Jordan should it be that
this practice is always practiced under
the normativity given this new medium
that we should be harkening for
participation right that we that it's
carried out in such a way that those who
listen are and try to use the guy's
sense here they're they're called into
right there they're they're called in
participation with it is that an
implication of what you're saying
absolutely in fact the and that calling
is this sort of it's omnipresent it is
always there it is being able to be in
relationship with the omnipresent
possibility and then to further that
actualization that increases the
possibility in a very specific sense and
I think it speaks to that sense of what
we were talking about in the last
conversation which was what is it that
engenders a certain kind of faith right
and in that one finds oneself already in
the conversation it's not a stepping
back in agreeing with you actually find
yourself already going oh I've been
think I didn't even realize I have been
concerned about this but in the in on
some level there is a connect there
isn't this that that's I think the
participatory element because that's the
knowing that comes from identifying with
something inside of yourself as opposed
to just asserting of proper position
applying a skill or adopting a
perspective when you say I've already
been people comment that way all the
time right on these dialogues I was
already thinking along those lines
there's an identification something in
them identifies it's it's that's what I
mean they participate in the
conversation because it calls worth but
that that means there has to be I don't
know a sensibility of the of the
participants in these dialogues like
jord the same we have to be we have to
have a sensibility to this directed
towards the fact that we have to be
speaking we have to be speaking to the
potential of calling forth from people
like there's a midwifery like Socrates
said and what we're doing
we have to we we have to touch people so
they feel that they are conceiving
they're both they're both to give birth
which is a participatory metaphor right
I think I like you see I'm sorry I keep
circling back I'm trying to get at what
are the design features what's the
normativity how is it working there so
I'm going to keep sort of redirecting
things this way I hope you guys don't
find it too imposing but because I'm
trying to well like I said I'm trying to
clarify for appreciation that's what I'm
trying to do right yeah guy please well
it's actually um one of the things that
really struck me in a conversation Chris
that you had that I think is actually
telling may be may be very telling of
what we're talking about right now is I
was struck by what the who is with the
interview or conversation that you had
with what is her name she has the the
quality Sevilla yeah so the looking
sitting in whatever the existence yeah
and one of the things that you um that
you you spoke up that really struck me
as you said something like yeah it's
funny these these conversations we've
been having I I'm finding myself having
I don't admit men I don't remember
exactly how you put a bit something in
the world of finding myself seeing my
identity legitimately as a philosopher
hmm right okay the conversation that
like and I didn't get the sense that you
were like I'm not a philosopher right I
don't believe now that I've had the
conversations this officially makes me
yes I'm finding myself just implicitly
experiencing myself as a legitimate
philosopher that's right and in a
certain sense I'm really struck by that
um-hmm it's the realization of the
divine double mm-hmm that's what that is
that's the realization of the divine
double when you've en are so giving
birth to yourself that's that's the
realization of the divine double I would
say God in yeah interesting to me about
this is that is it it may speak but it's
it's it's like through the dialogue
right yes yes through the process right
of something
that were forever like out doing our
propositions right or birthing birthing
out of our propositions and the new
propositions that lead to these kinds of
things that there's also something that
in implicitly has to do with finding
identity right in an in a in a
participatory way with each other yeah I
just that really just stood out for me
in the conversation and that
hermetically was revealing mm-hmm
thank you for that guy mm-hmm yeah it's
interesting cuz that yeah because I just
I think very highly of you thank you guy
I yeah it's interesting that that that
just sort of erupted in in a moment I
don't think that had occurred to me in
advance of in advance of that that
realization in that moment but when I
think on it now you're you're exactly
right in that it has something to do
with thee it has something to do with
partaking of the identity of the diello
ghosts and it has something to do with
harkening myself in the throes of that
identity overhearing myself as it were
and what I overheard could be termed a
philosopher so there's still a sense of
dissociation in that the identity
belongs to the process it belongs not to
me
it belongs to my partaking of the
relation and it is only true in the
context in the motioning gesture of that
relation so when I enter into the forum
with you all there's a sense in which I
feel I am possessed of the identity and
now the possession of that identity
lingers beyond the conversation because
what use would the conversation be if it
did not linger after the fact right if
we didn't introduct it and it didn't
live on within us but it is something I
hear and not speak if
makes any sense right it is it is beast
spoken but I don't find myself speaking
it I find myself overhearing it you know
it's funny and I bring something to mind
I was thinking about earlier which is
that guy when you talked about the
experience of sitting in your car with
your wife and listening to our dialogue
through your wife let you know it makes
me think of that like that that's sort
of a little instance of a phenomenon
that happens constantly which I find
really interesting which is I think an
example of what we're talking about you
know when you know you you sit down
you perhaps you sit down and you watch
something maybe it's like something on
TV or a film or something like that and
you have a certain impression of it it
has a certain impact on you and then you
sit down with in company with not just
any company but you sit down with like
close familiars intimates and that that
the second time you watch whatever it is
you're watching you're not you're you're
listening and watching through the ears
of the relationship espoused by the
company or in you're not you're not
listening as an individual you're
listening with the ear of the group and
so when people when individuals are
affiliated by this by this this is
distributed conversation in which they
partake and they're internalizing the
conversation and then participatory
knowing it I think what's also happening
is that they become they they start
knowing through the dynamic and so they
listen through it a hear through it and
their understanding is understood
through it right so now when I when I
when Tareq when I'm becoming
interrogative with any given subject
matter there's a sense now in which I'm
I'm my might I'm I'm I'm listening to it
through the ear of perhaps the four of
us or perhaps other combinations of
intimate dialogic partners right because
it becomes it becomes an it becomes like
an epistemic apparatus right like a
prosthesis that's now affixed around you
by which you know through you through
which you speak right and so that
there's a it's physical
thing of that relationship yeah yeah
yeah it's a city transparency shift it's
the perineum dwelling right that's right
that's cool that's right that's you and
I but as you and I discussed John what
happens is that it settles like the
transparency and opacity the
cross-fading of the transparency opacity
results into a translucency right and
yes very much very much right right so
the translucency yeah in that cognitive
serum is the phenomena is the symbolic
phenomenology phenomenology the symbol
is are translucent phenomenology because
we see it and see-through and we know
and nobody's so let's put a background
to the people because there's a sense
we're both seeing the people in the
dialogue but we're also seeing through
the people that's right exactly so
there's a there's a trend there's a
scene trans activity to Praetorian oh
yeah yeah we're seeing through them in
the way you're describing but we're also
seeing them and appreciating them and
hearing them so there's a friends and
lucency
and that's how they're becoming symbolic
to us iconic
the religious sense an icon right yes
yes yes there's like a phenomenological
continuity between us and and in the
beholden persons right and so then we're
yeah and that continuity that symbolic
continuity is then the entity that is
perceiving right that's why you and I
John have talked about the the
relationship being a meta analogic
entity right a symbol that's been
symbols because it's it's a it's a
knowing vessel in addition to being
inwardly and intra psychically known can
I realize this then so when you were
when you're over here and listen to the
word over when you're over here and
yourself as a philosopher are you
overhearing through that group that
group being that you're describing are
you like you basically overhearing
through the dynamic of a biologic
process and the people yes exactly which
also makes it confirming right
authenticated right which also means
that are possible right it also means
that it's more plausible because it has
convergent it has a convergence of noose
right also also it's going to be more
it's not only going to be more plausible
that the two things are going to
stereoscopically fused my trust in the
process in my trust in the people in the
process
are going to mutually afford and
reinforce each other right because those
right notice how you qualified they have
to be the familiar intimates for you yes
so yes Vytas you're looking through them
right yeah trust you had mates the
process that's right hmm that's really
cool that's right that's right and then
what happens to is that is that trust in
the relation also espouses trust in its
participants right because the they may
partake please that's right yeah it's a
skill tea into a tea by rice into a tea
of rest which is really really cool in
understanding what is just transpired I
find myself I find my I find my
understanding unbuttoned and what what
it took for me to understand what you
were saying was what was understanding
as it was happening and there was a
sense of nakedness at the end of it but
like a nakedness that felt almost like a
like you unbutton my gaze all the way
down and it stood out and went I like
this this is intense right it's like
this revealing sense of it which is so
which is so evocative of the Hermetic
arrows what you just described and it's
and it's aspirational quality guy merci
sorry what did you say Jordan I didn't
hear you what did you say just call out
for mercy yeah that's it there was uh
that was that was dope
that was amazing there's some really
amazing stuff going on there I think
that what I would okay okay so check
this out vulnerability so we're talking
about now how to play how to be
participatory in this collaborative
coming together into a group or a
relationality that has an embodied
capacity to be participatory in and of
itself and to participate in that and to
receive and to give and to receive and
to give so vulnerability now becomes the
entry point into receptivity and into
sensitivity in reception and then also
and there's the other side of that and
in the the the capacity and the sense of
carefulness in expression so that the
sensitivity in the receptivity of the
others are well met right you were know
you're not getting in they you're
actually giving something that is
opening up and allowing that receptivity
to find itself to become more capable of
becoming it's more nuanced and subtle
sensing capacity so that it can even
grow more deeply in richer in its
ability to give more to what is
happening and transpiring in the
conspiracy to inspire right so there's
something along the lines of that like
there's a deepening and enriching of
that that feeling of the thing that
begins with the invocation of
vulnerability to me it feels like
becoming very fluid you said you've been
into you become almost like poly
polymorphic here yourself has to
actually unfold and unfurl in the way
that you've used balland like vision
insight you become synesthetic and and
and oh portions of yourself like unfurl
into this new thing because you have to
flow into a shape that is not your shape
you have to be sensitive to the shape
that you're is this your firm your
particular shape that is conforming to
the possibility of what is available in
this particular container and as you
become more and more there it becomes
more and more real and more and more
alive and then that overhearing becomes
more clear that's that that's a perfect
I mean I think that was beautiful I mean
I think that's a very powerful and
enriching description of what Murdock
calls sensibility transcendence where
you are where what you're doing is
exactly everything you just described
Jordan that's sort of the willingness to
reshape yourself so that you fit
to the person so that they can afford
their reshaping themselves and that's
happening in this bike on that continual
bi-directional manner that's which iris
murders I believe is and John Wright are
talking about when they're talking about
sensibility transcendence and I think
it's an integral dimension of what's
going on and in the dialectic practice
totally totally I think that was I think
that was beautifully articulated you you
you you do that so well thank you if
you're here so I'm not gonna I'm not
gonna ask that question again well what
is that that he was doing so well I'm
wondering if if if it's okay if we could
pick up on a thread that guy introduced
and and he went on to do a lot of good a
lot of good retrospection we were doing
a lot of what's the grounding and how is
it affording the intelligibility but I
want to come back to something that guy
said that struck me prospectively which
also taps on another dimension of the
vulnerability and Trust which is the
confrontation with nihilism you
mentioned that guy you explicitly named
it as that and we and part of our
responsibility as Jordan so well
articulated it to the people who might
be listening right and and and to and to
speak so that they can find harkening
and what we're saying is to realize that
many people are coming to these
dialogues precisely because of the
meeting crisis or the confrontation with
nihilism and experience of disconnection
absurdity etc and I think if you guys
are willing and I'm not trying I'm
suggesting I'm requesting could we could
we come back around to that that theme
like what in what way do we see this go
and let's try and bring it out and
dialogue but of the way crystal aptly
described it create the over the
overseer through which weakens from
which we can see and hear ourselves at
the I guess it's the over here as well
but what is it about this practice that
can be responsive right I'm not looking
for it we're not looking for a
conclusive argument against nihilism
because I don't think that's that's
that's that's doable for reasons I've
articulated elsewhere but how is this a
response and I'm using my words very
carefully and I want to pick up on the
three meanings that Jordan assigned to
this word that make that a response that
people can appreciate our response to
nihilism that people can appreciate how
is what we're doing a response that
people can appreciate yeah that's what
I'd like to ask now I'd like to ask that
the logos that is that we have
engendered between us you know one of
the things that strikes strikes me is um
you know I think an underpinning or an
undercurrent of this conversation is and
one level were we're talking about this
dialogue and dialogue owes and the
development of this and we're asking
ourselves what is what is this thing
that's participating in what calls it
into participation like what moves
towards it what moves away from it all
but I think there's also a way that we
can we can we can look at the dialogue
as a way of being situated in life in
the world they think that's why when you
said in the in the last dialogue when
you said that that that you retorted
with the clicker or that question of God
Chris's is does this mean that what
you're saying that the world is
vulnerable and that's that that was the
cut that seemed to be like I'm like a
summarizing culminating opening point in
that dialogue work like we're all kind
of you know blown away and I'm wondering
about if that question actually points
to a response to nihilism writing
president because if we can experience
right in some way the world being an
animate responsiveness and of
vulnerability yes
then I don't have like then then I can
have the experience of living meaning
right honest that that that is the thing
that I
that people are really wanting and what
what is missing right in people's daily
lives right is this sense of that that
they don't when they look out at the
shopping mall and the different the
world doesn't have any sense to it right
that they can experience they don't feel
it and I'm wondering if that's really
good yeah it's kind of leaving with that
but I just I'm not gonna I just wanna
this is just to make sure I've
understood so part of what you seem to
be saying is people are drawn to this
this process the DIA logos the dialectic
that engenders the DIA logos because
they are they get they see an
exemplification of an aspect of being
let's say I'll try to use a word very
comprehensively here that espouses
vulnerability that espouses receptivity
and that allows for that kind of
connectedness right touching ness
contact intimacy with the world that
people are hungry for in the meeting
crisis did I understand you correctly
yes yes in a certain sense I my
understanding a part of the nihilism is
so intricately like we're you know this
the the scientific horizon has people
kind of pre reflectively just look at it
and sees it as not something that's
vulnerable or responsive us or feels us
but that it's inert matter that we can
act upon and it'll go on with us or
without us and that's a lot less worth
so I mean I mean nihilism is really
complicated right about it but that but
but III think that there could be a way
and I think its inherent in what draws
us to converse and notice it is that
that there's a way in which this can be
this could be seen as a like a symbol
right of a way that's
symbol to relate with the universe per
se right in a living way right in
everything so it's it's is it's an
exemplification and an instantiation of
a way of being and their and their and
their response to the meaning crisis is
always going to be a way of being as
opposed to a proposition a set of
propositions is that is that a fair yes
yeah okay well here we look Chris has to
say because he's been no no it's okay
it's no it's good it's good
so I guy you connecting these two things
together the vulnerability the idea of
the world's vulnerability and nihilism
is is like what an insight that is
because one formulation one for one
possible formulation of the problem of
nihilism is that the body of the world
is barren right that it is inaccessible
to us that it's closed that it is no
longer suggestible or impressionable and
that means that there is it is not
fertilized Abul and so I think one of
the one of the one of the projects any
response to the main crisis has to find
a way to refer to lies the world and
then and then even and all of your
language guy once again like there
there's this embodied vernacular of Eros
emerging and and so then the
vulnerability the and the
phenomenological suggestibility and the
process of symbolizing the world is
something approximating this dialogic
project like that what we're aiming to
do is what we're aiming to do is
mutually be fertilized with the world
because if the proud if one of the
problems of nihilism is that we are
disinterested in the world we're
disinterested because it doesn't seem to
avail potential within itself it's
opaque to us right going back to the
transparency opacity issue the world has
an opacity right it's commits just
perennially obfuscated right barred from
entry and so then I think one of the
projects this died of the symbolizing
nature of the dialogic project is that
we're trying to gain access to a
phenomenological texture in behind that
opaque edifice that is otherwise
none of our none of our are sort of more
naturalistic probative implements who
can gain us access to something that
requires a symbolic process like the dia
logos so going back to the the your
question John about you know what can
this offer to to if not if certainly
have not inoculated against nihilism
then at least a countervail the
pathology in nihilism is to become
interested in the world again we have to
trust in the potential of the world of
the world transforming as a consequence
of our practice so we were talking in
the beginning of this conversation we
were talking about we're talking about
the butterflies and how part of the
butterflies the butterflies have to do
with the fact that the world that we're
entering into is phenomenologically
altered from the world that we subsisted
in prior to entering into the
conversation so one way of regaining
interest in the world is a trust in the
potential that the world can in fact
transform to our touch and that the
dialogic process offers because it
exemplifies it offers such a trust right
the trust and the transformative process
becomes a trust in the potential for the
world to be phenomenological eerie
textured and that is the trust and that
is that amounts to perhaps a capacity to
become ly interested in it well that
interests to be within right right and
dwell it yeah yeah yeah and Welling and
so i but so it sounds like and you you
know I've sort of been sort of trying to
get this to work so there's another shot
at it it sounds like there's a deep
analog in the symbolic sense right
between dialogue that dialogue that we
can have between people and the an agog
a we can have with the world because in
the an agog a we can get that reciprocal
opening that engenders love right and
right we
a sense of the responsiveness of the
world because as I shape myself right
it's kind of like it's another analogy
is like the biological analogy of nice
construction the animal is shaping the
environment which is shaping the animal
which shaping the environment and
there's in the idea of niche
construction in biology and an acog a in
in Plato you get you get that you get
that coupled responsiveness right
the that and you get a sense of that you
have to be really careful about your
language here because it can be
misunderstood but there's a sense of
which the world at least the way the
world is disclosing itself to you is it
is it makes the world me in that
disclosure the world is kind of
self-transcending as well as you are
self-transcending there's a mutual
opening of you in the world and so
there's there's that there's that kind
of aliveness and responsiveness it so it
sounds like there's a deep affinity
analogy between the sensibility
transcendence between people and then
the a negau gate between people in the
world that's actually being afforded is
practice and so if people engage in and
this is what you see in the Platonic
tradition if they engage in right the
interpersonal practice right right the
sensibility transcendence they also they
also were practicing the an agog a
ontological e and the two who were seen
as completely inter penetrating and
inter fording each other right it's like
the two of the 2000s yeah that the
social though opposite us and the vow of
the ontological mystery of the world
converge and the symbol on right that's
what like that's white right excellent
Oh beautifully said oh wow that was
great that was really good that was
really good there's a there's a part
where one of the things that struck me
the last conversation we talked about
this well as well is a there's a horizon
that I think is you were responsive to
John which by the way I always
appreciate your horizons that you
respond to whatever never been
complimented that way ever before I'm
also glad that I have friends
thank you there's the compliment about
Jordan denies propositional sense the
the you got really had a response or a
relief or an exuberant in the idea of
that oh that the world could be now
without having to personify it yes yes
there's exactly yes but I've been
thinking about sense that I think is I
think is within that's an excitement I
want to kind of just unconcealed what's
important about that because something's
important about that yeah and you're
impregnating this conversation with some
wonderful conversations I've been having
with Paul van der clay and especially
with JP more so and Mary Cohen we just
did this we just released it I think
yesterday a three-way discussion between
us cuz I was talking about the contrast
between theism non-theism and and I what
you just said was something that I was
groping towards in that conversation
which is I was trying to say that I want
to get to a position where I can address
the world as a dow without addressing it
as without personifying it right and
then then and that that that this is
this is the gold that needs to be mined
out of non-theism that we can get to a
place where we're deeply if you'll allow
me to verb it because it should be verbs
where we're vowing the world but there
is no person here and that's I think how
non-theism could be understood to be
representing sacredness and so that is
something that I'm because what the
concern I have right it is right that
when we not that we should drop this
thread because I think that this thread
is wonderful its Golden Fleece threat
right but as we start talking about the
vow as Chris is appropriately doing by
the way
right and we start talking about the
responsibility of the world there's a
tendency to move to where it's kind of
an aunt of theological theism and then I
you know and then Heidegger and Vick and
Stein and all of the people that have
helped me so much come up in my mind and
say what are you doing don't go back
into andö theology that's how we got
into nihilism in the first place so
that's the horizon that's behind me and
that's what it's and I'm literally
participating in recent conversations
about what you just saw
stutely put your finger on how can we
though without without without there
being a metaphysical person that we are
addressing hmm yeah yeah how do we avoid
craving images and how do we avoid right
I take very deeply and I talked about
this in my recent episode on the meaning
crisis I take very deeply Heidegger's
critique of Anto theology as being a
fundamental grammar for nihilism right
and so I part of the Getty Jordan is to
not go back into the grammar that gets
us into nihilism if we try to disclose
the phenomenology of what's happening in
dialectic India logos and it leads us
back into Ando theology I I want to step
out of it because that to me is just
that we've we've lost the game in my
mind and then and you you raised
something earlier that reminded me of
something that hasn't been part of this
conversation but it connects to the
meaning crisis from the other direction
the direction that I spend most of my
time in sinistra construction yes yes
and one of the challenges for that one
of the the risks of niche construction
is that the organism is quite good at
niche construction yes I becomes hyper
fragile yeah it becomes it's able to
control the changing of its context so
that it itself can fit to its context to
a very high level but when reality
finally breaks that control and the
context changes the organism is now
hyper fragile and it's this is but
Jordan that's exactly heidegger's
critique of Anto theology exactly it was
like a mob yeah yeah it's comprehensive
niche construction that became
indispensable and then when reality
moved beyond it right if it revealed
itself for all of its monolithic
momentum it revealed itself as hyper
fragile and that's that's heidegger's
argument for the emergence of nihilism
so so we humans are our move are moving
now very quickly into a phase where our
capacity for niche construction must
achieve a enduring
escape from that trap yes yes are now
fully responsible for the world in which
we live
I dropped the ball if we get captured by
this construct that will shatter in this
way then we bring the whole of the world
with us at the biological lid level
right so our meaning crisis is both
sides of the word meaning it is both the
sense and feeling of meaning that we
have and it is in fact it be means the
actual words well it's both
simultaneously and both must be resolved
and both can be resolved which creates
the gift right that's the thing that
everybody's been talking about is in the
inquiry into this question now for
10,000 years is that when we are able to
achieve a level of skillfulness in
navigating this inquiry the inquiry that
we're entering into this question of
game bait we then also achieved the
level of skillfulness to be responsible
for niche construction in a way that is
enduring we take responsibility for the
world that takes responsibility for us
and we are no longer on the path of
potentially running into a running off
ground into extinction that has always
faced us it always pays to every
organism we're in a different game yes
this goes right to the heart of the
conversation Jordan you and I had about
the religion that's not a religion mmm
this is this is exactly the problem
we're trying to address with it with
that um thank you for doing that I think
that that the way you just drew
everything together I think that was
blowing I I think that what I would say
in response to that which I don't think
is it's just an implication is the the
issue I had was on Toronto theology is
it Those to the world's so much that the
vulnerability of the world is lost and
it becomes it becomes right this
freezing right just locking down and I
mean that that's the basis of
Heidegger's critique because once we get
the world once we get our ontology
frozen by Anto theology and as you said
and then though the world as if always
will reality goes beyond that then we'd
lose touch with the world nihilism
because our touch is frozed it has been
numbed by that framework so what the
question I have okay is like one of the
things that caught my
tension was I think in the in just the
way that I think John you put it yeah
while our niches become so context
fitted for the over we're fitting such
that the reality when reality shifts it
becomes highly brittle yeah in its over
fit in this what is what what is it
related to if it's not related to the
reality right there's a sense in which
there's a sense in which I'm wondering
if kind of that's inherently a little
bit what we're talking about is mmm like
if there's a reality that can overflow
it and it become brittle what exactly is
it related to in it's over Fitness that
isn't reality and how does it I just got
I was struck by that the presuppositions
of that that statement that's telling
well I mean in the original metaphor
that Jordan invoked of course the it's a
it's actually a particular environment
and the world has multiple environments
and so I think you could extend that
analogy the world has sort of multiple
aspects that that that our relevance
realization machinery can couple to we
ask sexualized the world but if we you
if we lose the translucency of our
aspectual 'ti right and and we we it
becomes a no pig veneer that is now
stuck to the world and hardens the world
and then ultimately when if the world
slips away behind it right we've lost
touch with the world now which is
touching this surface that we've made so
I think just like I'm trying to build on
joins analogy right just like you have
like here's a jungle environment but the
problem is you know then the african
rift opens up and it becomes savanna and
now you're screwed because you've over
fitted through a jungle and the the
world has moved on and introduced this
new kind of environment right and so if
you set up this kind of particular
metaphysics but Heidegger called on the
theology right you fitted you to a
particular way in which reality could be
our sexualized but reality is going to
move on it's going to move on and then
your
lose touch that's how that's how I'm
trying to understand it
did that help a guy the way the way I've
talked about it is the the thing is the
past yeah the thing that you're talking
about is the past
which is to say that the past embodies
itself in a it's that period that your
father warned you about right it's it's
that which has been endeavoring to make
that which is and that which shall be
nothing more than what it was does it
make sense so this is this is actually
I'm thinking about this translucency
right like let's say is like Oh
something get becomes fitted right and
then becomes over fitted it becomes
opaque to the reality so there's not a
translucency that gets it's in
relationship with it updates it makes it
flexible look what your hands are to it
this sounds like what happens in
intimacy right cuz it's like exactly
yeah
it also I'm it's kind of hearkening to I
think the the thing I've been thinking
about - a good way of looking and
highlighting what may be happening in
this in these dialogues that make them
shine forth in the way that they write
is is this distinction between idle talk
and authentic speech right it's kind of
this this way in where I think idle talk
is has that quality of I'm saying what
I'm saying so as to keep something in
existence that was right and it's it's
like the way that the interpretations of
the culture carry forth right through
all of our thoughts and like its
inertial its inertial yeah and it's eye
to idol in both senses - yeah I just
want to pick up on that motion that you
were doing guy because I think the
gesture was important and I was trying
to get this that not only do you lose
touch with the world when you become
numb you lose touch with yourself it's
it's a it's a bi-directional numbing
that's happening that's what nihilism is
that it's that the numbing of the world
is also it's interjected as a numbing to
oneself and that's when it particularly
fights us that's when it really really
bites us and that's why I think the
invocation of intimacy is exactly the
right thing to say there yeah
yeah in that in that yeah in that sense
of and this is why it's really important
I think because and this is where where
it starts I want to just bring in some
parallels to some other things that
we've been talked to walk to but I've
been you know intercooling right which
in many ways just kind of highlights and
puts constraints on this particular
thing that happens in relationship and
as has been pointed out that even though
it's explicitly a secular practice yes
and talking about it using all of these
terms is religious languages yeah I've
noted that too so much
ya know interested that brings back the
thing and I still I mean and we've done
some good stuff around it so but I still
find it pressing on me how did we know
the world without personify it we've
talked about why we don't want to
personify it but how do we vow it how do
we get the intimacy genuine I thou
intimacy without bringing back all of
the risks of the Anto theology that over
fitted us in a particular way to our
historicity it saw that as a cosmic
cosmic teleology so we over fitted to
our historicity in a particular way now
as Jordan has pointed out we're in a new
stage of history and in a fundamental
way and we no longer no longer fits we
got to how do we read out without
bringing all of that game a back without
bringing all that old code back that
really really brought people to the
precipice of nihilism mhm mhm yeah my
mindful of in my own life the the
experience of the recurrence of the
simplicity and the sort of very simple
practicality that seems to be the
grounding so you said it's a it's a way
of being it's not a it's not a story
it's not an ideology it's not a theology
and of those kinds of things there's a
way of being and in the context of a way
of being what was coming up for me was a
conversation I had was having yesterday
which has to do with a habit that I have
that my wife has and that I imagine
actually most people have which is a
rapid tendency to disassociate under
certain conditions mostly in
relationality and so particular events
show up in relationship with in this
case with the spouse and because of the
way that we have been been people in the
world our way of being in the world the
defense mechanism the reactor defense
mechanism to what's coming up is
disassociation which is numbness right
numbness in both directions yes yes and
that is a ground right that's a ground
of a way of being is that if you spend X
amount of your life in disassociation
you're going to have a very very hard
time having the feeling of connectedness
that is the necessity of a way of being
that is on the other side of a meaning
crisis so if any case is what I would
write and I talk to many people about
this for me most of the time the easiest
stop there was presence stop the step
ready at hand is to actually do the work
of actually in yourself building a
capacity to respond to anti-god inagaki
CLE what is happening in the world
dialogic what is happening in the
relationships that are in some sense the
most present and when you have learned
when you become conscious of that event
of how that happens so the first
movement is just simply to have built a
new habit do have once or twice had an
encounter where your way of responding
to an event that otherwise would have
moved you to numbness doesn't then the
next move is to then become conscious of
that you can become aware of that as a
kind of thing this then becomes the hand
right this is the you can now begin the
crawling up on your own up up up into a
deeper capacity to be in a meaningful
relationship with the diversity of
experiences that life is throwing at you
and because you have had it first person
in yourself in a and something that may
in fact be very important like your
relationship with your spouse or with
your child or something like that it's
grounded it's not esoteric it's not
theology it's not sort of hand-wavy it's
not fancy it's really very varied the
most possible wielder can be and that
brings you right back to Socrates
pursuit of virtue because that's exactly
where Socrates is presumably virtue in
the dialogues is exactly that training
those habits that you just mentioned
right Jordan that's exactly why the
dialogues always circle around a virtue
because ultimately it comes down to a
verb
Jewess way of being that that's what
exact with it that's what's being
trained in the dialogue as opposed to a
particular conclusion to an argument
that's why the dialogues will often end
in a propositional aporia but people
want to spend more time with Socrates
that's how a couple of the dialogues in
the interlocutors who you know know
agreement about courage or friendship
has it been arrived at
but the interlocutors say I want my
son's to come and spend more time with
you Socrates because the dialogue itself
is training the habit it's training the
virtue that you're talking about the
ability to to be that the virtue of
receptive responsiveness the virtues of
sensibility transcendence and an agog a
yes like and and and it's precisely
important about a virtue is it's a way
of being that inseminates the very most
prosaic aspects of our life you're
really honest when you're honest with
your partner and right there's a point
of conflict about some issue that's when
honesty really tells courage and courage
like I did there's one I think the
Aristotle who talks about that like the
virtue that that pre that all other
virtues form like our enactment over in
some sense is courage but also the thing
about this thing that you're talking
about and I think with with with
intimacy right there's I just want to
bring in work something out here because
there may be this we're talking about so
like in systems family Systems Theory
right they they have a really
interesting way of talking about
intimacy where they're where they say
that there is a an intimacy is is a I
don't know if they said it's a function
but it's in virtue of your ability like
how you become intimate is directly
proportionate to your ability to
tolerate anxiety mmm I and in and in
what they talk about and this is how
I've made sense of this is is in
intimacy right like you get to this you
get to this core existential like
paradoxical drives that we have as human
beings right on one level it's like I am
I
I wanna like merge with the environment
right
I want belonging but only forever and
guaranteed right on every sense of my
being at the same time I want to stand
out in my cosmic that's right an
intimacy usually has this element of
risk it's like when when all of a sudden
it's like okay I don't let your I don't
like your cooking right that's the truth
right but if I but if I say that I'm
afraid I'm gonna upset you and you're
gonna divorce me but if I don't say it
then I'm like not being honest about who
I really am and so there's this paradox
right in this tension and if you don't
have any ability to walk in that anxiety
anxiety and in once like say your truth
right and risk all of it
right um then that intimacy won't happen
and they say that there's one of three
ways that you move away from anxiety
right there's one that you just
addressed which is dissociation right
like I hope you're enjoying dinner
because I'm I'm on the floor I'm on the
ceiling like the other one is is to to
submit which is like oh yeah I like your
cooking and it and will do whatever you
want to do and just not even not even
address it I don't like it so I
disappear I submit and the other and the
other way that they talk about is
through dominating well I'll just take
control of the situation I won't ask you
what you're doing and I'll just move and
all of those ways their ways of moving
away from anxiety there are other other
ones is like or you stay and you grow
mmm that's the way of love that's
Tillich's point Tillich's point it's the
continual tonus the tension between
individuation and participation and the
courage to be is the ability to love
love is the virtue of intimacy right
it's the virtue love isn't a feeling it
isn't an emotion it's a virtue
I mean Aquinas was really good at saying
no no love is a virtue love is a virtue
it's a disciplining of your ability to
have the courage to be to find that an
agogic coupling between individuation
and participation so that you can fall
in love
with the situation because love is like
it's a voluntary necessity I bind myself
from my freedom to a situation that's
how I that's how it steers between both
domination and Submission because I'm
voluntarily binding myself to a
necessity that's the Christian virtue
love is the virtue of intimacy and the
courage to be a that's Tillich's main
argument in the courage to be that the
courage to be and love in this sense
love is a virtue are deeply
interdependent you can't have one
without the other
hmm I am I found myself
inquiring into the nature of this
concept of courage I was listening to
friends of mine we were having the
conversation I was just called to listen
to it and I ended up coining the term
infinitesimal courage to make sense of
the fact that if for example the GI
generations and my grandfather you have
you you have somebody who has the
courage to storm the beaches at Normandy
he has the courage to be you know in to
a hail of lead and having his friends
just blown apart or the courage to fly
bombers over the over the Himalayas
where 70% of the crews died right but
doesn't have the courage to be intimate
with his wife about her cooking yeah
right that's a big deal that's a bet
that's very important to be to recognize
the distinction and the fact that it's
the infinitesimal courage that we are
most called to the thing that is not
going to be valorized the thing that is
not going to get you a medal the thing
that in many ways is not even noticed as
a value bull and it is the very basis of
all real virtue and getting a hold of
that is very powerful that's very well
so that's very well said that's very
well said what is that what is what what
is it that were
like why do I know to hear that is
really important
like the infant at like the infant
tehsil like I I'm like oh yeah well what
it what is it like what is what is the
understanding that grants that and has
that light up is important right well
I'm gonna say relevance realization I
mean I'm gonna say you had an insight
that altered what you file you you
didn't get so much new data what happens
the difference between knowledge and
understanding and understanding is to
grasp the significance of what we know
right and and that's what I understand
and and and morally makes the argument
that plato's actually after
understanding rather than knowledge and
what happens in an insight right like
that is your relevance realization
machinery is altering this it's altering
what you find salient and relevant so a
new significance is now available to you
then wasn't available before but the
thing about things like virtue is like
and this is also made plain in the
dialogues and this is this is one of the
reasons why they fall into a pouria you
really can't know courage unless you
have some courage
you really can't know there's a me knows
paradox about you unless you have some
honesty there's nothing I can appeal to
in you to get you to become to aspire
towards honesty right mmm
so there's what I'm saying guys there
has to be something in you already
and then it's it's it now it's it's
significance has been disclosed to you
and that's why you responded to it in
the way you did with that kind of
primordial agreement that's what I would
suggest and that's the very thing I
think that it's also maybe highlighting
the very locus in place right that what
we're talking about is the vulnerability
of the world in the I though the world
is something to do with the nearness of
it right yeah there's a there's a way in
where the world on one level is really
out there it's the most out there about
there but but it's it's also the thing
that's like so near it it conceals
itself and its nearness it's like there
is an intimacy with the world it seems
to me in that we
can lose track of the world it's so
close to us it both determined us right
there's it there is an intimacy that I
perhaps we can recognize and unconcealed
right maybe our nihilism numbs us to
that relation that we can actually we
can get in touch with what we are
already pre - we are that which is the
intouch nosov it there's something
through something there yeah I want to
draw you out on this I want to reduce
from you more because you said this
before I've always found it provocative
I understand I think I understand I mean
it's I think I get a sense of what
Heidegger's talking about when he talks
about the nearness but you're doing a
thing that I don't see at least it's not
explicit in either you're drawing this
connection to the vulnerability and also
to the Dowling and I get a sense that
there's something there it's not clear
to me yet but so I want like maybe you
want the rest of us to engage and help
you with it I want to draw that out more
because there's something there there's
something about there's a hidden
intimacy and the nearness that bespeaks
the the potential to thou the world and
to disclose it is vulnerable I mean this
is a very clumsy sentence that try to
draw it all together it's there's a way
there's something about like there's a
I've noticed this for me and in our
conversations is that the real deep
relevance realizations have this quality
of it was already there right like and
it's one of the things that makes it so
potent and also the only its connection
to wonder right wonders I think it's a
big part of those photos Toto yo is
there attacked in that wormhole um since
making wormhole episode that we were
done this one guy had he described
wonder in this amazing way that actually
points to this he's like he's there's
great I've been thinking about ever
since like wonder is when you're in a
room that you've been in your whole life
and then you lean back on the wall and
you realize there was a door there
and wonder is that experience of
recognizing right that there's an open
door to a whole nother world and that it
was there the whole time and that
somehow it was concealed to you but it
was there and that experience of where
the ground opens up in that ground on
some sense was closer in tears closer to
than yourself another another example of
that is that is the movie The Sixth
Sense right yeah ed the whole time
no one knows that but no and then right
at the end out of the corner of his eye
he realizes and everyone else realizes
oh my god he's dead and then and then it
goes back to the very beginning of the
movie and all the scenes go one by one
and you realize oh my god and it was
obvious for full time so like also I get
so let me try and piece this because I
want to do this step by step because in
this book
ok so I get the nearness because it was
her sense it was always there because
what's changing it is not sort of the
antic entity what's changing is its
significance or relevance for you I get
not so and I get so it was always there
and then in the insight you also get the
responsiveness that this speaks a kind
of intimacy so that I'm trying to piece
this together phenomenologically I've
got that always their nests which gives
me nearness I got the responsiveness
which gives me a kind of intimacy a
mutual affording right and then that
maybe brings the vowing is that what
you're saying it's not how it's going
together maybe that's how it's revealed
it's kind of like this sense of of this
is what anything that I've noticed with
woods circling people and getting like
when people have this experience of like
feeling deeply seen like it's found a
sense of intimacy right is almost when
they have it you realize like oh my god
I've been like deprived there's this
experience of like I've been deprived of
this my whole life I didn't even know to
look for it usually has this way in
where somebody gets like oh my god you
so care about this like they they kind
of perceived this inherit
that the person has been grappling with
and that it that there's a being right
under there that's so deeply embedded
and cares for it that they're in fact
they are downstream from it and then
someone kind of gets it and brings it in
language and they're like oh my god no
one's ever seen me before and they
haven't seen themselves before but it's
fundamentally true like so that I think
maybe one of the things that what gets
numbed right in with the lack of the eye
though right what gets numb is has
something to do maybe with what tilaka
stopped talking about in the ultimate
concern like there's there are already
always our world is very much
constituted by our concern right no so
there's there's to put ontological
intimacy actually so there's the
platonic recollection or the Buddhist
sati there's a deep remembering right I
get that but sorry I didn't I'm not
trying to criminalize I get that I think
that's really important what I'm trying
to get at is like in the so in the
dialogue I can I can I can felt that
I've seen yes in the an agog a can I
come to feel that I'm seen because
that's how the world is dowing I get its
intimacy I get its nearness right I get
that it's it's it's right those two come
together but I'm trying I feel like
there's something more is needed for the
vowing right and it's something like in
the an agog a its responsiveness to me
because I don't want to attribute caring
because that's the wrong thing that's to
personify the world that's what I'm
trying to get up we might end up in our
pouria here I'm not sure but if it is
it's a really pregnant and good one
oh it's really good I think it's like
really good I I think it has something
to do with being had or being known by
the world yeah well yeah yeah yeah yeah
yeah but I and I so yes I'm gonna veer
into the personifying dangers here but
then maybe we can find a way out again
because I
think this has something to do with it I
think it's important that something
happens to us sometimes in a throes of
dialogue with our familiars such that we
realize ourselves known from without or
had from without and a way that suddenly
erupts in gratitude and I think
gratitude as a disposition unconcealed
the way ontologically in which we are
had and situated beyond ourselves egoic
lee i had this experience once of this
now again this is all personified but
let's see where perhaps we can strike
out from it I had this experience once
which was just a bizarre and profound
experience of watching a video of my my
my baptism as a kid and I'm an infant in
this video and the entire cast of my
family everyone is present in that video
you know much much much younger than
they were at the time I saw the video
which is just a bizarre vortex of an
experience right to see yourself present
at the center of a proceeding of which
you do not partake in any conscious or
egoic manner but that is that by which
you are constituted hmm it is that it is
the ultimate symbol of a gothic poesis
right yes this would one ritual is the
ultimate symbol of a gap poesis that is
of course its sacramental function but
there was something in that experience
and gratitude is the way in because
gratitude is the revelation of being
constituted by forces from without in
some sense there was something in that
experience of being so beholden and
being so known
now symbolically it's by family by
persons but if I were to use that merely
as a symbolic proxy there is a way in
which we are had and constituted and
empowered to gesture back to our earlier
part of our conversation had and
empowered by the world from without that
we can realize intermittently in moments
of intercourse discourse that manifests
as gratitude but that I think I think
also open up the the revelation that our
Constitution is grounded beyond us such
that it is infinitely and recursively
realizable in any given moment right
that Who I am right and this is again
hard Kubas goes back to the idea of the
divine double right or or I think
Tillich extended that to be right the
God beyond God which I think was his way
of trying to solve the beyond to a
theological problem that you're
describing right if it's always beyond
if it's always Beyond and the calcifying
effect of idolatry is is is is is
diminished at least if not obviated up
right so so there's something about so
anyway where am I going with all of this
there was something about the experience
of being so constituted and the
realization of being constituted being
had by the world
at any given moment in time that has
something to do with it and it's a very
humiliating and I mean in the original
sense it's humbling that somehow I think
for me a way in it's somehow a feeling
of it's a way in it's a way it's you
know that in what it's called thinking
that Heidegger tries to ground thinking
and thinking he tries to say that if we
can't ultimately get back to the
thanking we can't think deeply because
the thinking is ultimately grounded in
the thinking Mary Cohen said something
similar to me which she said well
because I've asked the question I'm
saying what is it in your phenomenology
that calls you towards a personification
of
the sacred and and she and because I
said you know I've had these mystical
experiences and wisdom and self
transcendence and she said and I haven't
had a chance to respond her about that
cuz in our three-way dialogue we didn't
get to it but she said to me she said
well I think one of the for the deep
phenomenological things we need to
address is gratitude and that gratitude
puts us into the being mode and puts us
into a relationship I have a practice
every day is in the Oakland atonic
practice where I think that I think the
physical aspects of being because as I
say I do not make them I emerge from
them to participate in them I think the
intelligible aspects because I do not
make them I emerge them from them right
I think the vital aspects that and so I
that I think all these aspects because I
they are ultimately presupposed by me
they are the grammar that makes the
trans gentle and so so I'm always I'm
always expressing gratitude towards them
because as I say in my little ritual I
emerge and I actually say to put it to
bring it all the way around I say I am
grateful like for the intelligible
because I did not make it I emerge from
it to participate and trust in it and so
that so the gratitude and the trusting
and all of that stuff come together yes
so I'm just I'm just wondering go ahead
go ahead just speaking of thinking I
just realized we've been going for about
hour and 45 minutes and I asked what I'm
officially late for a meeting - I just I
just wanted to say that like this is I
love the place that this this is
completing in its unfinished nests
because I I can just tell this is part
of this is that just like just like as
Bateson would say the difference between
a blockbuster movie and an artful movie
is a blockbuster movie like crescendo
you know like peak crescendo climax you
walk in one way you go through that you
walk out exactly the same an artful
movie is one in which it it arrives as
tensions that
never fully complete and that you walk
in one way and you walk out with these
existential there's not a lot to call
tensions that you you work out in the
enactment of your life and I literally
this is I could just tell this
distinction in this question that we're
drawing on I'm gonna be walking talking
to you guys in my head and linking
things I'm gonna be living out this I'm
gonna be you guys give me a sufficient
like problem that'll be self
constituting I'm sure well that's a
fantastic enactment of the Platonic
dialogues grain so this has been
wonderful thank you all and Jordan well
I have you I hope that we can start our
conversations up again soon let's do
that we can absolutely hate that I look
forward to that I miss I miss our
conversations I hope you enjoyed your
time off though I hope it was good
thank you yes I needed it any time off
yeah for sure
okay in with you guys wonderful love you
all thank you guys