welcome to our live board meeting where
we talk about omni wind solutions i you
together tech how we can create a tech
cooperative that supports all of our
projects and humanity and our individual
lives while working our individual
projects so we have some things on the
agenda today and i'm gonna try to stay
muted when I'm not talking chains other
people will need to be unmuted and
talking where is the agenda so I have a
team up one who is the one who found
that that seems like a cool option we
definitely wanted a calendar that I was
just briefly looking at it for literally
that's 30 seconds before we went live it
says for small teams I'm not sure I have
way too many things open this is usually
my issue okay I just wanted I just found
it because of what I was gonna do but
put all the board meetings and just a
sturdy round tables and anything else
that came up to the project group on the
calendar and also I thought it would be
a good idea because I said I forget when
things that happen in and they've put
the date and the links there and then
added to like the welcome document and
document it that's in the files area and
I had another idea
don't nobody want me to talk about that
now but it's it's by the said small
teams and it's free forever which you
kinda liked and it gives you two
calendars but also I think other people
could join up and then so they I can add
them to the calendar so they can add
whatever stuff that the port on because
I thought that would be a better way
just so it's there so people can
actually see in advance and then the
second calendar could be stuff that's
happening in game be like the the glass
bead game and rule Omega and stuff
that's actually
could two people and you can just go
enjoy I thought that if we put that on
the set maybe on the second calendar
than you solution raisins and whatever
else you want and then after two
calendars there so people have got a
choice and then maybe we could add you
know then as I said things that I come
across in game be they're going on a
regular basis and I can put them on the
calendars and then people can actually
see in whether they want and as I said
the links there and everything say so I
don't know what you think about that
and maybe also that second counter could
be for things like you know other
project events like Adriel you know just
for people that wanted to do the the
wiki gonna see the wiki election join
those meetings and then we were just
talking about another kind of regular
weekly meeting that we don't want posted
we don't want everyone posting all their
specific events on their specific
project and the main discussion feed but
that might be a good place that people
can connect to other projects and see
what's going on and a separate calendar
from the main one also I had to note
that idea of so like an experiment and
social cohesion is that what you call it
and there's this thing called them
they've logo and from did this talk ages
ago about developing triads not never
forgetting that you're Batman and it's
it's so I was thinking of maybe if
people posting about it in the group and
asking whether people wanted to take
part in this experiment where we're a
safer four weeks right the first
conversation so if if people want to do
it so they talk to three-peat so take
three people I would I would facilitate
the first one and then let them go and
do whatever and then after that have a
come back and see what you know what he
felt whether they managed whether he got
to know each other better
and then and take it from there and just
do groups of three as an experiment in
them social cohesion and getting to know
each other better and maybe if I can get
someone with a with a project that's on
the go someone with ideas and someone
who's looking for the project worked it
will depends on them time zones and
things like that I was thinking about
doing that and then that could go on the
second calendar you know see you having
chats reduce you know I mean and then
that I think that would be actually
quite quite Goods and think you'd be
quite fun as well about so I need to let
work on questions for the first one just
to break the ice
with everybody because I know people are
quite apprehensive about talking to
people that they don't know so maybe
maybe do a bit of that so I don't know
what you think about that as well I
think that's an interesting idea I think
that'd be something worth sharing in the
main game B page to get an idea of how
many people would be willing to
participate before you put much energy
into it and then we have another I guess
there's another game be kind of video
discussion group I don't remember but I
think that's where you're supposed to
record a video and post it in the
discussion so that's did that's
asynchronous as opposed to being at the
same one am i right on that you mean
game be conversations yeah yeah maybe
conversations has basically become Brent
Cooper's just posts his stuff his
conversations there I haven't seen any
other anyone else post anything there I
haven't posted any of my conversations
I've had with like Raymond and such
doesn't mean it won't be revitalized
there it doesn't even have the game be
Brian's name are like I don't think
Richie and I think it was Nick who
started it I have been yeah so it sounds
like there's anything like that we
talked a long time ago about creating a
system where people could just sign up
and it would kind of randomly put three
people together and stuff but we never
really built that but care if you have a
little bit of time and energy a person
can do that better than the system but
we just didn't have time so where they
were putting together a system together
a bit but yeah I think that'd be worth
kind of just writing up what you want to
do posting it the regular game B group
and and seeing would participate I'd
probably be willing to participate in
one of those you think you should if a
component in the project drew first
because as I said there's a lot there's
quite a few people who have spoken to it
might be select more warmly accepting of
me you know and the idea is you think
you're good enough you know at least
three people in the same time zone yeah
I just don't know how much participation
we have but sure yeah what I was
thinking even if they're not any times
the
time zone because you know as I said
they could facilitate the meeting
regardless because I don't have to go
back to work well probably won't have a
job to go back to until after September
anyway so him and I don't have to go and
do anything like that anyway so I'll
post in the game be group project
earlier first and then see what's what
and and if there's no takers
I might get brave enough and post it in
the main place and then get run out of
town you will not get run out of town
for asking people if they want to like
join up and have a group that was the
kind of thing that is always wanted in
game be even if it gets crickets people
are still like yeah what a great idea
I'm not coming but what a great idea
yeah my inner introvert certain not
participate which means it's a very good
idea
so yes join huh
I have to say I watched the TED talk
that you referred to about the Triads
I've liked his waking up Batman waking
up the idea people haven't seen it is
that there's a Batman cartoon where
Batman Bruce Wayne is kidnapped and he's
waiting for Batman to come and save him
and he doesn't realize that he's about
that and so then he remembers he's
Batman and the guys talked about how we
all can remember where Batman right I
which I find a little weird cuz Batman's
a billionaire like no we can't all be
Bruce Wayne there's a reason he can do
it without superpowers but at the same
time we all are about man and realizing
that but I didn't think he made the case
for the Triad like he he didn't really
like I don't like he wasn't like he
didn't give evidence as to why three he
was just like threes the number three's
a number accepting couples but you kind
of add third relationships in all of the
other relationships you haven't the
relationship is its number one I didn't
like I feel like Kevin Bray his micro
solidarity whoever does Microsoft or
Richard is makes it better like the the
twos and then the bigger like his I
don't know they just
tedtalk itself i what didn't come out of
it with like yeah I want to triad so I
feel like your explanation of it was
better than his so maybe oh okay like
link to the TED talk which wasn't as
strong of a yes I want to triad as I
think hey let's just play let's just try
well as I said there's a lot of evidence
well I don't know whether it's called
evidence so what have you both three is
a magic number and it's not just about
the song but it actually is you know I
mean cuz like everything you do is in
threes like have noticed Jordan or when
he he's posting his essays I'll give you
three points so you know I really and
even you know various things are just
notes in that it's in threes
you know I mean cuz a family game of
schreeten and this is from marketing and
now that you love them people remember
three things more than you'll remember
four or five so M although I ate all the
marketing stuff but I'm just like the
idea of three people coming together and
it's kind of like the power of three you
know it's kind of bizarre as well so
it's all kinds of motion with the
microphone Authority and power the three
triads
yeah stuff like that there's all kinds
of motion mushed up I like I like mashed
of things so it might be part of my
wounding but there's also a real shadow
side two triads like any little girls
hanging out it's like you have three
girls it's going to descend into chaos
because two of them and they exclude one
and you don't I mean like there's
something that happens and try it's in
every movie and every like it's like yes
Harry Potter and Hermione and and Ron
but like really it Ron and Harry or
Harry and Hermione and then Ron Hermione
get married but like it's a like to just
say it needs to be three so that it's
three like I think playing with three
and then seeing does it did it work out
right like did people show up
consistently or did you end up with one
person just showing up because or just
two people throwing up and was that
awkward but start with three just maybe
if it doesn't stick with three doesn't
mean the whole thing
is broken happy by two more three is the
lowest number which is not - and when
you have four you have a group which is
totally different dynamic but three is
something like when the two people it's
just a dialogue and it's easy to lose
perspective on whatever it is that we
know about this third it's a spectator
only or observer all just it's uncertain
mmm it grounds the whole thing and yeah
there's definitely something about three
yeah I've noticed that when I try to
sort of summarize and explain things the
number three shows up a lot but I think
it's also good not to be at all
ideological loaded if it's - its - if
it's five it's five and there's probably
an upper limit like if it's seventeen
maybe trying to simplify a bit but I
think yeah there's a difference between
saying like it just happens to show up a
lot and that might be something you
notice verses because you notice that
now you're always shooting for three and
if it's not three or wrong I'll give you
I'll give it going and see what happens
and that because as I said it it could
be just just a shitshow a so if just
like I think I think it'd be quite fun
as well you know I mean and yeah I'll
give it I'll give it a shot and see
what's wrong
awesome what was the other thing on our
agenda
oh the wiki I think it's also kind of
fallen by the wayside in fact the people
who were doing the wiki basically said
that they were going to delete it and
they there's something happening always
like down the pipeline for it never
right they just stood it back up and got
the security fixed so that's why it's
coming back up because it's now in a
stable state that could go forward so
they do have a projects page and so yeah
I just wanted to talk about did we want
to do anything with that I think in the
least we'd want to add a link to the
nack site and add a link to Kerry's if
whenever you're ready carry with your
Drupal site and then we could just say
you know these are experimental lists
and then you can also add yourself to
the list below which is on the wiki site
so that's kind of like minimum I would
suggest and I'm happy to do that work
it's not that much then the other thing
is we could take a look at it because
they'd have it broken out I don't like
systems where you force a sort on people
and they're breaking up the projects by
first by topic area which of course is
weird because projects often cover
multiple topic areas and then then you
list your project in the topic area so I
don't know if anyone here who has a
project like wiki election or meet with
reason score or Mar - she's I don't know
if you're gonna be talking about your
project soon wants to duplicate it in
all three places or what but yeah that's
just I just want to see what everyone's
kind of thought about III was wondering
them what I thought when I looked at it
I thought okay so you've got projects
are kinds about then in game Bay and
maybe people have got their own projects
and what I didn't want is to put stuff
up there
so I didn't know whether we could just
keep it as a game B project group and
then maybe list the projects that are
coming up within the group and what
everyone was doing and all
so the second thing was if you put a
project up there is someone gonna come
along and say no that's no game anyway
well what is game being they look well
it's not that you know I mean and I
didn't want people to put the stuff up
there and then to be told oh that's not
game B you know I mean so and and like
it wasn't clear of what and I think
that's what I was worried about like oK
we've all met in the game B space and
we're all waiting on our own stuff but
we're all collaborating together so
we're kind of all been assimilated into
the bog now you know I mean so and any
ideas that do to like pop up like the
stuff about the marriage counseling
thing with wreaths and Alex that and you
know I mean that that came and started
growing legs when things grew like soon
as I said if I put that up there and
then you might say oh no that's not very
game B you know I mean so I think that's
what I'm worried about there people are
gonna come along and and then where
would you put things as you settled with
the categories I was like well that's
kind of that and it's time to that and
is it that which might be we might be
able to talk to the wiki people and like
if we're taking on projects we're taking
on projects right that we are kind of
making which we do have a meeting about
it like what is a game B project cuz
you're right there's ones that we
consider a game B project that probably
wouldn't be wiki game B project right
it's when people come in and we're
looking for a project they probably
don't want to work on a marriage
counseling thing but there's like that's
under the arts umbrella right like we're
trying to and having almost more of a
spreadsheet or sort of table like you
know wiki election is dealing with
politics and sense-making like having it
more that there are these categories and
we're dealing with with all of them
right like solution raising what
category is that all of them because we
could do a solution raising all of them
but none of them at the same time since
we don't a solution raising in it we're
not you donate like it's they are hard
to categorize but with our various ones
being able to figure out what we already
have on the table and how would we
present that and how would we do a
criteria is a game B or not because
that's we have a
there are some projects I don't think
her game because they don't have
potential or they don't have but I don't
get to be the arbiter of that like what
having a very like to me and game be
it's like is it adjacent possible is it
big future utopia those aren't good or
bad it's just I want to know right i
want to know REMS he's common planet is
big picture utopia and he's got stuff
he's gonna be working for the pipeline
to get there right but like I don't even
know do we make our stuff fit into
there's in which case we got to figure
that out
or is it does that become ours and we've
got to figure out how to do the projects
I mean we can't decide that because we
don't have wiki right so I mean it's an
open wiki so anyone can sign up and make
changes and I and I think that that's
the intent of the project they don't
they haven't put approvals needed in the
system so I think their their idea is
you come you know it's a community built
thing all right I don't know I would
completely reformat these pages because
I really think that this user experience
is pretty horrific so I might reach out
to them on the site and say hey can I
try like redesigning this page and
explaining why I think I don't like
having to to click through to different
things and then just seeing a name of a
project and having no idea what it's
about until I click through it and then
having to back up three pages to find
the next so yes so we could discuss yeah
so yeah so I would say that if we want
to participate in this and we just go in
the game be wiki and say hey we had some
other ideas on how to improve this how
to put all content in and then we each
need to decide whether we want to
maintain our content and you know four
or five different places so you know and
Dewey does this meet our needs and then
we don't need the next site of course
the next sites a lot you know there's a
lot better a lot of ways we haven't seen
what Kerry's doing on the other side so
just just so we know what everything's
going on and you know do
we could we could like Jubilee like
you're saying we could go to them and
say hey you know we'd like to take this
page over deal want us to coordinate
with you before I make changes or just
make changes yell tell us we don't like
it it depends on how much they care
about it if they're going to do the
whole wiki I think I'd be happy to have
someone take over a section of the site
so they can focus on the overall thing
but I don't know for a fact that's what
they like so good we could just ask oh
yeah Facebook page post and if we don't
taking it over then we can figure out
what is the best user experience for
people coming in like well people want
to find a project they want to know
who's who to contact who do like it they
don't want to go through like you said
all of that I just looked at it got
terrific like that because because it's
not even you can't like it is if we had
stuff under all of those categories and
you clicked on agriculture and there was
20 different projects but there aren't
why did you click on transition B and
there's nothing and so knowing and yeah
there's many different ways to
categorize it that isn't quite working
and it makes sense we're in the projects
right where we're dealing with this
stuff with our own with our projects but
also with oh is this a game B project is
it how do we criteria that how do we
which categories are this that although
it's going to be not an easy thing it
will be a good thing for projects to go
through this and it'll yeah I think it
feeds back into it
both are individual projects and the
Omni when together tech and we kind of
need to pare that out for our own like
like for the neck side and for the and I
don't know if we've come sat down and
wrote out what our suggestions are like
I think one is you know the if the
person's gonna be represented they need
to be active in the game B community I
don't think we should be adding projects
that are or if we are it should be
closely designated like here are
projects that no one's in game be doing
it but it fits the game B things but
then who's gonna maintain that listing
right and so I think it needs to be
clear these are the ones because people
are participating this computer these
these are the ones we think are
interesting and you may want to look at
which is fine to have all those but
someone needs to agree to maintain
yeah if we want to add those we may also
want to reach out to the people involved
in that project to make sure that a we
know who to reach out to so we can put
on there but also say hey we're a part
of this kick community that might be
able to provide you with some people to
work with you if you want to get that
please you know join us here here's sort
of the level of participation that you
need to do even if it's just joining a
group and watching a page to be clear I
don't think we should include this but
if someone wants to I would say well
then you need to maintain it you need to
do all the right stuff
yeah I guess I'm kind of talking about
bridging that gap like I don't think
that we should either but if we hear
about our project that sounds cool maybe
do a bit of outreach quite often for
that um as I said I'm a bit wary of so
like putting projects on a list or I've
got no contact with and I don't know
whether or what information they've got
going on and I don't know what stage the
project is at because like some people
just and would you put people's ideas up
there as well would you you know if
someone's working on an idea that the
working towards and it's you know and to
do in bits and pieces would you have a
different stage of what though
what status the project was then like
idea qualen development that's you know
I mean so it's at the different
categories because that's what I was
going to ask you for what I'm designing
and what I'm putting together from the
information I've took the categories and
everything that's off the NOC site but I
was just wondering whether you wanted
whether it was an idea whether it was
you know in planning development um
already up and running you know I mean
because that's you know that's not know
clear and as I said if you've got people
who yet haven't spoke to you don't know
what stage that are you don't know what
info that they want made public you know
you don't know whether they're ready so
I think so they having some sort of
conversation with them to find out what
it is or even if they're actually still
doing it or they've given up or you know
I mean also the collaborating with
somebody else you know I mean so I think
that would be good to know yeah I mean
my thought is I do worry about them
of work for all this so a rule that I
kind of like or a guideline is that the
person whose wants to put the project in
the directory needs to put it in there
and they need to maintain it and it
shouldn't be incumbent on anyone else
and then I'd almost like to have it to
where you know if there's no updates in
like six months or a year it just falls
off into the old category and it's
further down not in the main list that's
what I'd like to have in a system I
don't know if anyone else wants
different stuff I think and this is I
think what you just said added to and
that because there's the people who
created game Bjorn consider very game B
and they've left and they'd have their
own going on right Eric Weinstein's
doing Unity 2020 Jordan Hall has CBM
those to be our game B projects but
they're not under the game B umbrella
and the people who are interested in one
would be interested in the other then
there's people in game be participating
in game B who have their own projects
that aren't game B but very game be like
the stoah and rebel wisdom and future
thinkers that have them like but they're
still very broad the some of them are
broadcast and some of them are right
they also have their own clubs and stuff
to participate in and how much money
they are and how what like I want to
know what that information is before I
get involved and who to contact to that
but if they are not updating it right if
David fuller isn't coming and updating
the rebel wisdom one and Mike and UV
aren't coming in and you know doing the
future thinkers that's us doing work to
get them more people it's not like it's
gonna be the opposite and people are
gonna find us through them and then you
know I mean go to other things at the
same time those are things that I think
maybe people are going to be interested
in but so I like the idea of only having
things that there are game B people in
who wanted to put them in which case we
might get rebel with them we might get
future thinkers because they might put
them in there right but yeah yeah yeah
and we have the you know and there's the
game B wiki that are lists like perfect
periphery similar things already in a
list somewhere and there's game being
news what is the one that
nick is doing anyway so yeah there's a
couple like information depots for game
be and can be ish but yeah but I think
we do it
I think projects like for people that
are and then having some way to sort and
filter and find what you couldn't
participate in would be helpful which
was what we've kind of built a knack and
stuff so I'm happy going to the site now
I would just go ahead I'm just gonna go
and make a change and put a link to our
necks it--and Kerry do you want a link
to your site yet or is it not there yet
I'm not quite there yeah as I said I've
just got a I said this week it's kind of
been like so los been wrong with this
week it just everything just kind of up
in the air for a bit a bit you know so
I'm a beast I'm starting again on Monday
and because as I said everything's gone
quite pear-shaped it away so I'm just
gonna give yourself a few days off from
meself for them see how it goes from
there and Monday more focused and less
crap and then I could just start the
conversation with them in the game be
working space to say hey we're gonna be
projects if y'all want us to like I
don't know the word manage this page and
group of pages and facilitate that and
we're happy to consider putting in an
umbrella I don't want to make a promise
that we're gonna do it because because
we may choose Kerry's page we made
choose a neck separate you may do all
the above but I think just putting the
links and then saying hey how much how
find out from them how possessive they
are of that page and if they're not then
we can brainstorm some more so I can do
all that the other risk of us doing
anything on that is that the wiki has
been cancelled so many times that it's
like and then rebooted and stuff that
it's like well if we put that work in it
and it gets rebooted again does that
work still there or does it just go by
the wayside all together where is that
doesn't like there's a possum
doing the knack or the Drupal one and
then linking to it from there right so
if they're up and running hey we have we
have of this all covered and doing it
yeah it may be taking that whole page
down and just putting a link to neck and
say hey if you want to know about the
projects here's how you get to I
wouldn't I would I don't think they
would like if we did that but yeah yeah
that's that's definitely possibility and
yeah that's a good point we need to make
sure we don't put a lot of effort into
something that may not be long term
that's the information overlap match
between the wiki and the wiki which is
by the way deserves a better graphics
and user interface it's not very are you
talking about you don't like that
specific one or just Wikimedia in
general because it's all good sports
Wikimedia it's not it's not like a
custom-built site they just through wiki
yeah yeah there are plugins that that
help but they have a very strict concept
so if you don't like the the UI it's
more like we just need to tell them to
go with a different tech okay
that's also possibility but I wonder if
there is a lot of information between
the wiki and that big Google document
about baby which is big and I didn't
read to them both so I just wanted to
ask if you have an idea how similar they
are if they contain the same information
or as it's like I don't recall
I remember that Google Doc there's also
the the dark there's they're still like
five or six Reis resources like this I'm
sure they all overlap to some extent but
I don't know how much and people are
reluctant to consolidate so so yeah what
was your thought on that if they overlap
a lot did we want to suggest finishing
or just consolation
which is I always suggest consolidation
but given how difficult it is even to be
fine maybe as a finger and you know that
it's it should not be even defined as
people say and I was thinking for the
past 20 minutes about why this is that
and what crossed my mind is it's like
that's similar to what how you cannot
explain for example riding a bicycle to
someone who cannot write and it seems
that there is something similar here
like like we can ride bicycles right and
we kind of have shared understanding of
what it is and how it feels and what it
does it's on the other hand difficult to
explain to someone who cannot do it and
what makes it more interesting is
bicycles are just a subcategory of all
things that can be that you can write on
so if the general population of game B
is based on Facebook right they write
bicycles and then someone comes in who
rice and monocycle or something even
like weirder than the discussion if it's
going to be or not it's got really
tricky I'm not sure if I make myself
clear but it's just it's weird that's so
difficult to explain and define
something that yeah something like this
and a lot of people don't think we
should define it harshly because as you
said because it's like riding a bike and
part of that's just your subconscious
brain learning
although I think there's a lot of things
she could know about riding bike that
would make the learning experience a lot
easier if people would tell you like the
faster you're going the easier it is
because the centripetal force and people
don't explain that to kids and then you
end up going slow and falling off a
little but yeah so people don't want to
define game B and so that's another
reason why these kind of things have
difficulty and they don't want a
canonical definition so they want you
know these these multiple different
views and stuff and they want to be some
extent hard I think Jubilees talked
about that effort is part of the value
but it breaks my Aussie d-brane yeah I
think when we had the previous meeting
on sort of what is a game B project you
sort of had some ideas but it might just
end up being only being defined by what
it's not and we you know might sort of
have the blanket statement on hey will
it almost anything in but we always
reserve the right as a group to say oh
no go away right like there might be
certain things out of the gate like hey
if your project is advocating any sort
of genocide no you don't you you can't
come in and that may sound silly but you
know some of the conversations that
we've had happen in the game B group you
may not have thought that you had to
have a rule around that but turns out
that you do so it may just be a list of
things that it isn't that might be an
easier way to appease the people who
don't want to define it or just be sort
of open and say hey this is more under
the together tech umbrella we're like
you know a group of people's idea about
one thing that game B could be so we
aren't defining game B but we're sort of
operating a game big group of projects
that you disagree with are you know what
we say it can be project is that then
come join us and have a conversation the
whole point is that it's not just me or
just Jubilee or just Bentley saying what
is or isn't it's right now you know it's
five of us and then hopefully it's ten
of us and hopefully it's a hundred of us
what is and what isn't and we aren't
saying as a part of game B but it's sort
of game be adjacent it's one you know
trial run at game B which I think is
hard to be a game B project so that
we're sort of being a part of that
community and gay audience but also
being open and saying hey if you
disagree with what we're saying that
that's fine you can start your own or
you can join us in try to you know add
in your opinion and see who agrees one
of the thing just not so much in game B
itself but one of the meta projects that
keeps coming up in the solution raising
is um the guilt fraps like that we need
to know what's going on in tech and how
and what you know what I can actually
use and what's in the making and when is
it going to be available and one for the
greater in fact mark just posted it
right something under greater like what
to buy is it game B ish right if I'm
buying deodorant what's the most game B
deodorants I can buy or something along
those lines one of the other things the
third thing which I'm getting is like a
dragon's den for game B projects right
we're not just because we've no funding
to give so it's literally billionaires
they were like yes but to actually like
have criteria of like is this possible
what the like MVP what is the thing that
we could do right now or is it something
that needs like a resource-based economy
you need to have basically the whole
planet on board like partly to put it in
those categories not to say it's good or
bad and then how did you that in a way
that's not broadcast only five people
get to decide whether your project is
good enough because and that was the
conversation that I'd had this last week
it was like okay maybe I don't see that
the thing in this project but does
anyone has anyone contacted you and been
like oh my god I want to get involved or
I've had a similar idea because there's
ideas that come up again and again in
game B right should somebody create a
social media platform that would be
awesome like it's like but it's good to
know because it is it's clearly an idea
that's needed but whatever we're doing
isn't quite working to get it out into
the world right because it's like well
yeah there's done
to people who think they have the
concept how do we bring them together
and work through what that looks like
there's people who have one-off projects
that are really amazing ideas and I
don't like I don't even know what that
would look like but something along the
lines of a Dragon's Den hey is this
financially where are you getting your
financing from there's a lot of them are
just like wait is this sustainable is
this actually which doesn't mean it
doesn't mean to be necessarily if
there's ideas I have that are you know
charity people are gonna give money to
it you hope in it but anyway having
criteria than saying yes you are
yeah even sustainability though as far
as something people will donate to just
kind of throw that out there it does
need some input it could just be
volunteering or donations yeah I was
thinking of it I was throwing out the
idea what if we had that except it was a
bunch of light software Debs that would
volunteer their time assuming it's a
tack solution right that would that
would do like we did have your you know
not quite ten thousand people but a
group a dozen or so of volunteers that
would marketing and or whatever the
thing we need and then they would be a
drag instead thing where we have two or
three people come in with their ideas we
give them feedback and say okay yeah
it's ready for this group to throw fire
on it with throw fuel on the fire with
their time as opposed to money that
might be interesting yeah that'd be cool
so instead of like I'm interested I'll
give you a gal in a million dark for 10%
stake its I'm interested I can spend you
know five hours a week for the next
three weeks to see where we can get it
if you do a good enough job matching it
that sounds cool but yeah I'd like that
idea obviously they're like finance and
finance legal and marketing I've been on
the horn fella in finance legal and
marketing people and seeing who's who's
kind of interested in that area in
whichever there's not that very many
em so cuz I know a lot of people have
signed up to that the life-coaching
think you know I mean for them the
finance and financial planning so I'm
hopefully other words we'll look to see
how that
Wednes because as i said i would like to
go maybe no like they set up these
mastermind groups so I think people and
maybe you know as you say like the
Dragons Den go and sit you know this is
what I'm doing because I what happened
to me it's like with mine and they've
got two people helping me and they've
given me all this stuff and I'm like ah
do I ask too and the like yeah
so the bombarda me but research now of
what i've got a look at and they keep
asking me where one of my income streams
and i think to develop different income
streams so you're not dependent on the
one so i think him ideas on how to
create different income streams from
what you're doing and having someone and
maybe going through that with them you
know i mean like i know it's very game a
and I've got to fill in a kind of
business game a plan for them to turn
into a source like a game being plan you
know I mean because the the the guy I'm
working with needs to be able to take
their language and turn into to what
what could be you know better and stuff
like that and then go and speak to them
but be able to speak to them because
it's been done in their language anyway
you know I mean but going with the idea
while this you know not that that and so
I'm finding that really stressful
because I get there was a woman from the
business gateway you were met the other
day
did you like yeah yes just like I've
tried that 17 years ago you know it and
she's trying to push me down that I was
like I don't want to play out in that
and they're like well you're gonna have
to because of this that means and she
said oh well we've got no money to give
you us well it didn't think he would and
even if you did he probably wouldn't
give me it anyway you know I mean so but
I suppose them there's webinars and
stuff so maybe what game a in terms of
business development and stuff out there
and then we can have a look at that and
then see what what we can maybe do
because I'm fed off of people say well
you've got to tick the boxes
I too want it to be any boxes to tick
you know I mean so am I'm sick of
ticking boxes because after time I never
fit into the boxes so yeah so him but I
need to know what's what what's accepted
what standards and that be able to turn
into right okay that's the standard
 we've got something better over
here you know a man stops oh yeah yeah
it's part of creating game B is like you
have to work within game a as well
because you just earned it which mine
because something like I've got a game a
project that I've kind of stopped
working on because I didn't find it that
interesting and it didn't match my skill
sets but I still think that there's a
possibility there but part of me like
wants to find a spot to sort of put it
into like the together tech type thing
to help fund projects like that so I
think that might be interesting if there
is a way to say like hey here's the
obvious game B projects and here's
projects that in their nature are kind
of game a but trying to be done in as
game B way as possible and where the end
result is any profits go back into these
projects to help fun right so like it's
got multiple income streams so it's
stable in a game a sense but for game D
purposes yeah and I think our Saturday
calls kind of I mean it was based off I
just forgot the word that you asked your
mind mastermind yeah based off the
mastermind concept and that's where I
mean we're not experts in finance and
legal but I could tell you unless you
have you know a hundred or a thousand
customers you shouldn't be considered
about legal you shouldn't be creating an
LLC or whatever it is like that you know
a lot of people do that stuff way too
early they get business cards and they
get do the legal stuff and it's like you
got to know whether your idea works
before you even bother with that yeah I
will say on that note the weird
exception is something like to
Kickstarter or because you could you you
you can go from zero customers to 10,000
customers and if you don't incorporate
first you have to claim that as personal
income and then yeah that's the only
reason why I incorporated wiki election
and now I kind of wish
I didn't but only because the
Kickstarter didn't take off if it did I
want him clad I did so what someone is
in in Canada in the US it's not a huge
tax difference okay I mean if I'm doing
a personal business I can still write
everything off without incorporating so
there's no there's not a huge difference
the only thing is if you have partners
and you want to make sure that you have
equity then you have to do all that yeah
but still it'd be better to write
something down on a napkin and legalize
it later unless you're investing money
if you're if you're just doing volunteer
if you're just doing sweat equity yeah
the legal stuff is just overkill and/or
distraction until you know the idea
works and then if you did a kickstart
and I got real popular although these
days it's hard to get a popular
Kickstarter without doing a couple
months of marketing before yeah which
yeah looking back I did my Kickstarter
too early but that was it was like I
wasn't doing anything so Mike all right
I'll start here that sounds like an
option and it did get you know the ball
rolling but to see in the game bSpace is
not like what is my personal vision of
what I think is the best project but
actually like what are the game B
projects not just projects but including
Stowell all of that and like if you are
trying to do the interpersonal work
where is the best where do we think the
best place to go is ie that's where we
send new people right like when people
want to do the personal work is it John
for baekje is it still eyes it you know
and possibly just I mean a price
comparison at a time can be comparison
and under the umbrella also if we had
the best option for game B that was
gonna actually create game B what is it
and is it like we have money to fund but
people who do have money to fund and
we're looking for something it's like we
as a group being all of game B was like
this is the one we think is the most has
the most potential like I really like um
for manufacturing Wow cube spawn I can
remember his name at the moment James um
that but that's it's so much money right
it's not the same as as funding the the
smaller projects like he doesn't need
that much money his project needs money
right whereas he's like I can live off
of nothing but his project costs a lot
there's projects that are the opposite
of that they cost so very little and
have have them intact I'd like to
actually be able to like all of Gabey
asks is the dragon dead right people put
up their project and we ask questions
and then say hey which one is the best
one which one are we sponsoring this one
right to say that if you if we had money
here's who we would forgive into without
and then also that also then the word
read says these are the people who also
should give your time to
write that we're endorsing its person
I'm looking for say to say that and
anyway that's a completely side project
you've done a solution raising on I'm
just trying to think about what you've
done
it seems to think that there was
something we did kind of like well I
guess we did what would manifest game B
or something there was one where we did
something like that but maybe it would
be interesting to have that discussion
as as a solution raising or idea cafe
what you know what project do we think
would accelerate this manifestation of
game being projects and honestly to me I
think it would be that thing were you
saying oh I'm coming in how do I get
educate how do I do that personal work
so I'd like to see an application that
guides people that helps them do
self-assessment test to figure out what
things they need to work on the most and
then point them to the free and the cost
resources and help them choose it out
and had that be community curated so I
could go on there and so anyone in the
community could go on there and make
either write an algorithm that says
here's the education resources I want or
put in resources and links and build
curriculum that I think would be the the
most effective tool and that's my second
one after reason score but I'm happy to
work if other people really say oh
that's it
then I'd be happy to you know
collaborate with some people on that I
think that's more anything does personal
development encompass that I could do a
solution raising on personal development
and that piece of it and especially in
game V I don't know they don't come to
that conclusion but
that is yeah yeah yeah yeah I think
definitely one about personal
development I think par that will be
come on is is there any tools that we
can do to grease that personal
development make it tore people fall
into the pit of success rather than
confusion I someone ironically did one
on like self-help industry but with
self-help industry people not Gabey
people and under the self-help umbrella
most of people are who in there also
want jobs in that same arena so it's
really hard for them to picture getting
rid of those jobs like I'm like how do
we have coaching without a coach I'm
sorry I want to put you out of a job but
it's for the betterment of humanity oh
yeah yeah I mean I would think that they
that they would best spin their well
people always need individual one-on-one
coaching but to make it less necessary
and the things you know they should have
resources they could go to learn on
their own and then have the coach help
them focus that right so the coaching
and I think really honestly this the
where education goes in general is a
teacher shouldn't be lecturing you
should be watching the best video about
that topic or over the five best videos
in the whole world and then the teacher
comes in and and answers questions and
helps you through that cognitive thing
or if it wasn't explained well well
here's a resource that's more visual
you're more of a visual learner that
sort of thing which that's all in my
idea the same tool whether it's
completely self-directed or something
used in schools and then something also
Tory can kind of track your learning and
just like in video games where they have
the lesson tree you know once you have
algebra they can go to trigonometry and
stuff like that you can check them off
and and you can show other people trees
and that'd be great because then if I
need someone that knows how to do social
media I could just do a search and
people that have gone through the social
media courses would pop up anyways so
that's the idea I've been rumbling
around the background it's very similar
or similar people been talking about the
same thing didn't the education one the
first solution raising my maturity there
was a podcast recently I think on level
wisdom including ju-yeol and
he said something I need to listen to it
again but it was something about the
hammer of Thor mean that one tool that
only that no one can basically lift up
but there is one person who can and that
the idea was that everyone has its own
like hammer and the only thing that only
they can do and discovering that
potential and that not destiny maybe but
yeah discovering that who who I am
it sounded like something like that
discovering my own orbit and yeah being
able to find that that hammer that
belongs to me and only I am able to lift
it up and use it that's that sounds very
like lucky what you said ah it's nothing
application or a tool that helps people
to find the place yeah yeah I wind it
the idea there only being one or only
one person can pick it up but I think
there's like hammers lying everywhere
and there's a lot foam that no one's
picking up and some people can pick up
pick up that hammer better and more
easily than other people so it's it is
an efficiency thing but I think a lot of
times when people say by one way like
this is the one love of my life this is
it's like no there's there's a lot of
them some are easier let's find the most
efficient for you and in it and it can
change and you know in another year you
may grow and there may be some other way
that you can really help the society but
yeah I think a tool that says how can we
take this one person and a m'm at
society the most efficient way and just
make the world better for everyone and
then if we did that for a large number
of people or made a resources for
everyone to where they can be their most
efficient and happiest that would be
amazing be together attack right there
look at that I mean
my five questions of like Who am I for
my people what is my purpose what do I
need and then what am I willing to let
go of I don't it does not feel my
umbrella but like something like that
where it's like you wanna know who you
are
follow this path you want to know who
your people are use these tools you want
to know and where and then creating the
tool that does all of those things your
hammer yeah
we're circling around that idea together
if you wants to know who are call me at
4:00 a.m. in the morning well you'll
probably tell us where to go if it's
4:00 a.m. is anyone a good person at 4
o'clock your I tell you I was up at 4
a.m. driving someone to a hospital for
surgery but that's a different story
agenda which was just I mean this might
be a better thing to do eight for two
weeks
once we may be played with the calendar
piece is we talked about doing every
other week of our roundtable at 2 p.m.
or possibly having wanted to p.m. even
doing one monthly at 2 p.m. so the
Aussies and New Zealanders can you know
come in and do it when it's not except
she said this at 9 a.m. this one is a
little more do a hole for them even
though it's ridiculously early like 9
a.m. is a ridiculous time so um just
wanted to reap ring it up if anyone
would be open to doing the 2 p.m. one I
know I'm not as on 2 p.m. as I can be in
the morning but yeah I mean that would
hopefully be on the weekend but yeah
yeah Oh God I'm happy moving one or two
that way I'd like to double-check make
sure someone will show up so we can just
ask also in the project space right like
if we handed it to be like an 11 12 1 to
5 hours later the normal who would show
up for that on a regular basis who would
calendar told does that have some sort
of a sign up it's got him yeah you
cannot see as I said you can just look
at it or you can actually sign up and
then ads but it's also a poor work the
water set off I've got all the different
time zones on it because it didn't want
to just
so like just for the pond so I think
whatever you sign up it will show you in
your country what time that is
so yeah it's okay in projects yeah yeah
will do um yeah so that's what I was
meaning so like the viscosity
roundtables always same time and the
board meetings every other with the idea
cuffs and the links are always the same
links for every single one of them but
no new link for every single one of them
right
oh it's a new link so so would you want
me to just pour this is what we're doing
this is what time and because if someone
what looks a like if you wanted to send
the calendar to Kylie dice and she just
looks at the calendar and how would we
tell her which way you know you said the
different links every time if dude up a
same link is it only chance of getting
the same link for them or just so I can
use my zoom but then we'd be using my
zoom we wouldn't be live and that's kind
of the point of the round tables and
these theoretically people are watching
and know that we exist and come be part
of it but I still feel I'm gonna put it
on my to do this I do have a paid zoom
account and it does allow sharing
streaming to Facebook and YouTube I
think I haven't done it yet but it's
it's on the option the problem with
having a consistent link posted on the
internet is that you will get
thirteen-year-olds right okay ugly
things on there so there's that I don't
know a good solution on that except you
could they have the waiting room and I
could only let in people that yeah cuz I
was just wondering so that you know if
people who aren't on Facebook maybe you
know I mean they might want to come in
join or whatever of this they have no
time for whatever and if you send in the
milling to the calendar they're wanting
to know when the links going off and the
link goes up a few days in the Facebook
group you know I mean so I'm just trying
to
I'm having trouble finding the link in
Facebook every yeah yeah doesn't show up
so I don't know if do you believe you're
putting the link somewhere and then Kari
can put it in the calendar or if someone
wouldn't mind maintaining the events I
know for Jubilee it's a pain to create
an event instead of a post but then you
could always just hit the events thing
and but then we're still maintaining a
few calendars right when we create
stream yard
it creates the posting and so then yeah
you have to like also then create an
event and every of every one would have
a double I would have the event
broadcast and so it's just for that or
we actually go live to Facebook right
it's even more weird than with like the
solution it's easier for people to find
events yeah it should be nice yeah I
wonder if you could create a link to a
Facebook search before I might play
around and see if I can figure out a
link that'll always pull up the latest
one mm-hmm we could post that link
everywhere and then it would take them
it would search Facebook for that I know
the Facebook search sucks I'll play
round see if I can figure out a way to
do that yes the other option we talked
about before Brett and I didn't actually
research it is something like a bitly
which bitly does not have this but where
we have the same URL but we change the
backend right so every week we're
putting our new stream yard but they're
following the same length every week we
are doing the backend changing it out
and I don't know if that exists Italy
doesn't have it at least I sound like
that would have the same problem as just
having the static link where if somebody
you know if a 13 year old or something
else
mm-hmm with nefarious purposes wanted to
because stream yard right so stream yard
for the to a new project round tables
you might want to switch over to zoom
anyway if we get bigger so we can break
off into smaller groups but because we
can see them right so we don't add them
to the broadcast zoom is it like that
it's a waiting room with a name you
can't see them and talk to them before
they you can see the picture down below
and like I don't know that person
like I can tell they don't have pants on
or pants like these days who is it
missing pants I mean like come on the
rules do not stand up we don't have to
wear pants right you're not right we
don't yeah we don't care whether you
wear pants or not we just don't want to
know all right is it 9:00 a.m. Pacific
Standard Time in normal time but come
bring your project bring your ideas and
otherwise anyone else have anything to
wrap-up for the board meeting before we
Jubilee and Kari have you guys been
getting the messages for all the
comments being left on the YouTube
videos I'm not sure if that's only me or
if you guys are also getting those we
have ads together check to see them but
it was only mail oh no no I know we
don't get emails no oh yes okay
yeah because one person isn't watching
with all the videos and adding a bunch
of and like the real comments like their
timestamp and 26 videos on the channel
it's it's some guy in Germany yeah email
me and get together tech support me
because she's gonna be emails but that's
a whole other other issue yeah I don't
know how to cuz he seems to be like he
wants to get involved in like a tech
cooperative but I don't know how to do
that you know like how do we coordinate
this I don't know I don't know and that
might help if we get the calendar tool
online we might be able to put the links
there and then just say go there and you
can you can see that stuff which that's
something that like if the natural took
off that's something that was built in
its people who were RSVP to the event
could see the URL people who weren't
couldn't so you could see what time it
was but only once you'd signed up for it
you could actually see the the link but
that's harder to set up and manage with
neck so I mean if this calendar tool is
easier to use for that that might be a
better way to do to to approach a
calendar tool looks like they charge
they have their scaled pricing but it's
not per person so it is like 20 bucks a
month but overall and some
something maybe like a second to your
one but they offer free for three months
if we're wanting to use that right now
we can use the free one until we figure
out what a lot of you for it but if it
is the thing that encompasses everything
we need to get people to our stuff then
20 bucks a month seems like an okay
totally alright goodbye YouTube and
Facebook see you tomorrow morning