we're about to begin if you can hear me
give me
thumbs up alright welcome to another
meeting of the intellectual Explorers
Club I am Peter the organizer of the
group and to give some context to those
who might not be familiar I started this
club in Toronto about two years ago
solely as an in-person meet up then I
created a podcast with the same name and
more recently I was inspired to take the
in-person meetings online and I am
currently dubbing these experiments
since making wormholes and I'm inviting
past podcast guests on to facilitate
them so for example last week we had
Nancy Strickler from Kickstarter Fame
today we have Jordan Hall and in the
pipeline we have the likes of John Verve
a key Andrew Taggart and guys and sock
confirmed so I'm pretty much allowing
the facilitator to do whatever he or she
wants last week for example the antsy
did more of a workshop with like a
PowerPoint and group exercises but today
we're going to lean more on sourcing
that collective intelligence of the
group so in a moment I'll hand it over
to to Jordan he'll speak more on that
but first I'll speak a little bit about
it myself let's see so I think Jordan
has needless to say he has a great mind
and is incredibly intelligent and
because of this I think it's
understandable to look up to him as an
epistemic authority on game B and as he
mentioned to me previously he mostly
shows up at least on the Internet in
sort of a broadcasting mode so I imagine
you know if we hold on too tightly to
this frame of Jordan being the epistemic
Authority of game B it might turn this
session to some kind of Q&A dynamics but
I want to make it clear that this
particular sense-making session is not
about that so that being said I'll hand
it over to the man who needs no
introduction
Jordan Hall
I finally gotten to the point that I've
always been going after which is I don't
have to worry about people asking me how
to introduce myself it's nice so I think
the may be a way to start this is to
just have a very simple round everybody
just introduces themselves and we're I
think although I would definitely urge a
high degree of agency in terms of
choosing what seems to be the right
answer but I think that a good approach
would be to actually focus on how it is
that you chose to be in this particular
context to be on this call today what
aspect of you is what's actually showing
up here and then if there's any
particular question or curiosity or
inquiry in or about the domain of game B
that is alive then bring that into the
center as well and then hopefully we can
actually do is we can try to find a way
to have a coherent conversation which is
to say that it will each be listening
very closely Twitter in fact actually
wants to be said in the group which
requires a real effective application of
rule Omega which means notice when you
were I suppose saying the language of
ego might be strongly or when your ego
is speaking or when there's a strong
sense of performative or controlling
speaking coming out of you
notice if you can listen to what other
people are saying in such a way that you
can hear the thing that is trying to be
spoken not instead of what's being said
but the deeper basis of what's
endeavoring to be expressed and then if
it is yours and it may very well not be
there's a lot of people on this call to
further that then try to find the best
way in yourself to further that so in
some sense
ideally we will find ourselves noticing
that there is a single tone a single a
single thing that is being expressed
here and if not perhaps we'll learn a
little bit so I'm not sure
does everybody have the same geometry I
have or is it just if I just should I
call everybody's name a one way to do it
Jordan is to just choose someone when
the person goes and that person chooses
someone else to go like play tag and so
if everyone just zooms out so they can
see like everyone on their screen that
would be great
so I will choose one six four seven
eight six nine nine one eight two which
is a assume character from Blade Runner
just on my bottom right corner hi this
is Daniel I apologize if there's ambient
noise but I just called in because I'm
five minutes away from a computer and
I'm lacking a little bit of contact and
so I don't know if I'm the that's the
first person to go but I can try if
you'd like we can take you off the hook
and punt it to my second-favorite all
right that's probably the bad call nice
alright so we were already beginning and
so we'll now go with the entity named
Jordan who is not me sorry I haven't
been able to figure out how to change my
name mid call to make that easier so
you're saying what is the thing that's
bringing me to this call right now the
most so my interest in game B right now
is I feel like in the way that you've
described it I'm sitting in a stage
where I'm really trying to develop my
individual sovereignty right now more
than anything else and I am interested
in I don't know I mean I guess I'm
interested in that and I have like a
number of pieces of curiosity around
what to do when you're sort of sitting
at that stage where you don't feel like
you're really ready to become a big
driver and the more broad sense I think
that's it was there something else you
wanted me to add or if there was a
particular question about the nature or
essence of game B that felt meaningfully
alive and then and then take the next
person in the chain okay on the way near
the tail end you have to remember
everybody who's already gone it's
actually me buddy
okay so I am
I guess my curiosity is around that and
it's likes okay so if you feel like
you're not in that part of strong enough
individual sovereignity to start
entering into the higher stages what do
you do and then what is what is like a
broader functioning game be system how
does a broader functioning game be
system address people who are in that
stage and see them and like to what
degree do you involve yourself in the
higher levels that's sort of what I'm
thinking and I guess I'll just pick Amy
W
sorry that got a little cross wit so I'm
Amy L I feel like I fell down a rabbit
hole and came here honestly I just one
thing led to another led to another of
watching YouTube videos I'm an art
critic in New York City and an educator
and this just became something I became
really fascinated with it became
something that completely dovetailed
with how I've been thinking about myself
in connectionless societies I moved a
theory and philosophy person which kind
of I was always satisfied just being an
art critic and using that there but in
the recent years I've felt I really
called to this wider kind of systems
thinking this just wasn't thinking
wasn't anything I was interested in
before now I'm really fascinated by it
so yeah everything I just devoured when
I started listening to Jordan halls work
Dino walked a burger I just it just
everything resonated so clearly with me
that I just wanted to go deeper and
deeper so I've just fallen deeper into
this rabbit hole and because I am an art
person in this TEDx person I guess I'm
wondering what the aesthetics and art of
game B will be and I will get next to go
I will pick right hi I'm a researcher in
meta modernism so that dovetails with
this and I'm also a critic of the
intellectual dark web which has some
background and and kind of legacy
artifacts with this topic and I'm a fan
of Peter Lindbergh and his work and his
his activity and mm-hmm some of the
neuro hacker guys like like Zach Zach
Stein and Daniel smock do burger
and to some extent mr. Coll here the
Honourable
yes I hope to to learn and also
contribute something I'll pick a fill
because he's next to me what drew me to
game be a couple of things one was
really making sure that he may survive
as long as possible and that
civilization doesn't collapse and second
one was around the Danish muckenberger
says around emergence and summation I
think I'm not onto a book I read the
really early on called non zero but not
to yourself my question that I've been
thinking about a couple days now is how
do you create a little religion without
religion specifically how do we create
something with unity but without the
coercion or being told how to think or
what to do and I am going to pick Isaiah
hello its Isaiah's actually with us but
it's okay so yeah I kind of got into
this space by following the Twitter
hashtag down to the very end and it
really resonated with a lot of the
previous stuff I'd studied and it really
resonates with my current interest in
testimony who lives in Canada I'm
starting I'm learning a lot more about
the cultures and philosophy of the
indigenous people we're here and it it
seems to me almost like they were they
had developed like a proto game B and so
I think there's there might be a
something we can we can learn from that
to help develop the actual game B yeah
so that's I will pass it to Jake
Thank You Isaac so I'm I'm Jake I'm a
I'm a filmmaker I also do media for an
academic Institute focused on psychology
and technology stuff and in terms of
what brings me to this conversation I
had for a long time a kind of diffuse
set of interests in politics and and
narrative and epistemology and
meditation an existential risk and all
these things were to sort of disparate
communities that I was involved in that
really didn't have any dialogue with one
another and I certainly didn't know how
to unify them in my own mind but I had a
strong intuition that there was some
kind of relevance of each of these areas
inquiry to the others
and when I started stumbling upon this
kind of a larger conversation around
since making it did at least give me a
framework not just for unifying my own
interest but for sort of seeing why each
of those had seemed so kind of vital and
important to me so yeah that that's kind
of how I got involved in this I got
interested in this and then the question
that's kind of most alive for me with
respect to game B is you know unlike a
lot of other kind of political
conversations it place it seems to place
equal emphasis on kind of this
individual sovereignty component and
self development and that and also this
kind of larger systemic or incentive
design approach and one of the things
I'm most interested and learning about
is kind of how those two relate to one
another what's the proper domain for
each so that's what I'm thinking about
and I will pass to Zachary
hey there quite a lot of people from
Toronto or Ontario so it seems it's good
um I suppose I'm always up for a good
conversation and I came to game B kind
of chasing that perpetual pursuit of
self-development which includes
understanding what we would call game a
which is how I kind of came on to
everything that led me to game B a
couple years ago um I've wanted to get
into the intellectual Explorers Club but
up until think last week I haven't been
able to get down there in person and
what interests me about game B is that
through the rapid acceleration in
exchanges I guess mediated through the
internet and all this new technology is
that it seems like we have we're poised
for a big breakthrough in in something
new so I'm curious to see how how things
are developing and what better way than
to get out and speak with everybody
interested to see how things will will
turn out and I suppose I'll pass it over
to Antoine
um what brought me looks so a few years
ago I became interested in what Jordan
has termed sovereignty just increasing
uh it's your own agency and that led me
to find a neuro hacker and or find neuro
hackers website and then Jordans some
Jordans work and and what brought me to
this individual discussion is I've found
that following the interest that I've
developed in the last few years all the
way to the actual closest I can get to
there's a go interactions seems to be
really productive seems to increase my
sovereignty I would say so I'm not sure
that I have a meaningful question on
game be for everyone or not I would say
it to jewbilee
all right I don't really know exactly
people here me my picture didn't pop up
on the screen that usually means that
yeah thanks to its missile heard about I
am here to participate in game be with
other people this is what I've been
doing
full-time for the last three years is
figuring out how to create an omni win
what I was calling a world that works
for everybody and although I feel like
I've created it in my own head that's
not where it needs to exist it needs to
exist in the real world and in order to
do that we have to create it together
and that's what I am here for is to hear
other people's ideas and participate in
that conversation and the question I
have that is burning for me is in
respect to game B what is a litmus test
or a chaplain list something of like
this is what is game B this is what
something would be like under game B
versus not under game B so when anyone
regardless of Steve's brings something
to the table how do we know whether in
its essence it is game B or by default
game a and let me see who has been
called on I don't see Chad on my list so
I'm gonna call Chad Chad I'm not too far
from Toronto I'm in Ann Arbor Michigan
what brings me here is it's hard to say
actually I'm a recovering or an ex
academic that I am the background Earth
System science or if governance field
called science technology studies and
for some reason I never say four done
two postdocs and still was never able to
find my niche in the meantime at then I
mean over the years following different
threads that are convergent and some of
them hadn't been mentioned already like
like nonzero Robert Wright's book grins
we were on another word of these calls
and I guess here from perspectiva
appalling perspective independently
alternative currency is hollow chain and
I never for long as I never saw these
put together and now more and more they
are being put together so there was some
sort of stream underlying my inquiry but
I know about that is ruling itself so if
you're like part of this is me following
the stream because I have long since the
hug really being able to truly given up
the attempt to fully steer where I'm
going so it's process discovery and it's
exciting too so for me the question is
well where again how to how to live it
and how to how to be critical of it
without falling prey to the the tendency
of critique to push things away without
reflecting back on itself in a
constructive way which is one of the
things that compelled me to leave
academia know so excited to talk to you
guys here I guess a couple people are
still remaining about Mike have you gone
everyone I'm Mike I decided to show up
today as I speak with Peter at least a
couple times a month
and other other settings and I've been
tracking sort of lines of thinking that
Jordan has been elucidating for some
time and I found this I find myself
having a lot of experience listening to
the the conversations and a lot of
experience
thinking about this stuff have an
experiment to be amidst mostly strangers
and to see what arises where whether is
it in some degree of shared
understanding always I found myself they
are curious to see what was here for me
and the question that feels alive in me
right now is how can I learn to more
deeply listen and how can I use this
venue that we have here too so I am
interesting ly having I'm not seeing
names show up associated with everyone
on the screen but I believe I recognized
Tim from Facebook and you haven't gone
so there you go hi I'm Tim I'm here
after a few years multiple years of
following what seemed meaningful and
particularly those things that were
meaningful in such a way that I could
participate in and I've had interesting
conversations with Peter and Jordan
before and I'm taking some sort of steps
towards bringing people together in
person to do something that shares
enough in common with this that I
realize a real interesting need to learn
as much as possible from doing it as
much as possible with people who are
able to do it really well so that I can
better do it and more broadly to
act appropriately in relationship to all
of that as for a question I'm interested
in the degree to which one has to be
successful at game a in order to play
game B and I think the last person is
Jorge perhaps again here you all right
hello all right so I arrived a little
late for the conversation about tried to
settle in to where I was feminine so can
you remind me of the questions local the
questions again the two questions were
very simple one was what aspect of
yourself brought you here and what is it
the broad chose to make you be the
showing up here the second is to the
degree to which there is a question that
has any real aliveness for you contacted
game being what is that sure so a couple
months ago I decided to lead my career
because of some differences in direction
for the organization I was really
satisfied with my work one thing and I
was happy everything day that I was
there but I was upset with the monastery
Valley that I was receiving that I
didn't think everything compensated
enough that there were some decisions to
hire people that I would be leading and
part of my team never coming in from
different angles and it just wasn't
making and or hey you're I think you're
me anymore yeah there we go
I'm hearing myself an article on Twitter
and
I talked about summer swans and
education for the future and just new
ways of doing things through that I
started to come across and so in my mind
[Music]
this coming along organicist is more
like three of us haven't gone
Daniel Melissa and myself so I'll go
what brought me here is the Daymond sort
of all my activities really that's
outside of how I sourced my livelihood I
would say it's day one inspired and for
those of you are not familiar with that
term it's more of a certain quality of
intuition that says go here and the
question I have is this is just came to
me when I was speaking with Jordan and
Phil before this call is what's the role
of sacrifice and playing game be and
I'll choose my stoic partner in crime
Daniel hey my name is
I think there are many things that
brought me here today but the most
proximal cause is that I've noticed as I
learn more about existential risk I
start to feel this low level hum of
anxiety just operating in the background
at all times and as I become more aware
of that sensation I realized that it's
not particularly useful on its own but
it doesn't seem it doesn't seem like
it's appropriate to completely dismiss
it either so I wanted to find some way
to act on that feeling that seemed
potentially productive and and this
seemed to be a step in the right
direction because I don't really know
what to do with that feeling but doing
nothing doesn't seem like a good option
my question I actually Tim kind of stole
my question more broadly I want to know
a little bit more about how I can start
practicing game B in a very practical
mundane like day-to-day sense such that
it's actually rippling out positively
across time for issues of existential
risk but one of the main qualifiers is
to what extent do does one need to be
successful at game a in order to play
game beasts successfully and I guess I
will choose Melissa I was probably the
last one hi everyone can you hear me
yeah okay I apologize for being late
I was didn't know where to find the zoom
link so I'm disappointed that I didn't
get to hear all of your answers to these
questions but what partically brings
what part of me brings me to this
conversation is all of me because I've
been dying to have this conversation I
keep sending videos and podcasts
everybody and all my all my people and I
can't seem to get anyone to engage with
me in this way so this is a real gift
and I appreciate all of you for that
and the questions I have are
what do we do what do we all do together
and and
where did we're to begin I mean it's
already begun but
but next steps how to connect for actual
projects deepen the practices of being
sovereign and I'd want to get myself
around more people and having these
conversations in order to actually start
taking taking some action so I'm curious
about my next steps is how to do that
Peter do you have anything left or is it
uh all my court
yeah it's all you great
so I'm Jordan and I I'm here because the
the thing that has begun the process of
happening at least to some extent with
my participation over the past seven
years seems to be having more energy and
there's something about that to use
Peters language that my that it seems to
be deeply resonate with my de menthe
so the inquiry that brings you all here
is an inquiry that brings me here as
well so a few things that were coming up
for me that I noticed as I was listening
was some part of me definitely wanted to
just begin the process of answering each
of these questions and of course I
noticed a couple of things one was
that's really not going to be reasonable
in the context of a group of this size
the number of questions that we have the
next thing was that it's probably not
even reasonable in general he's probably
not the right approach to take to try to
address the things were the questions
they're actually being asked so then I
had a an interesting memory of being in
a conversation somewhat like this and
noticed that I was asked to take a
perspective to kind of observe what was
happening and notice was happening in
mine inside myself and heard a sense all
the different things that were coming up
in me and all the different ways they
were coming up notice what observations
happen to be impressing themselves upon
the in terms of the group who was
happening there and then more broadly
try to sense or notice if there was
something that somehow seemed to kind of
like be waving at me from the far
distances from the periphery or from the
horizons and
that context one of the things that was
quite interesting to me is that I
noticed that even as the conversation
seemed to have a life of its own looking
back each person's questioned actually
seemed to have a piece of it brought
forward wishes to said that if each
person reflected on their own inquiry
they would actually notice that
something in the conversation was
actually meaningfully extending their
own inquiry even if it wasn't explicitly
done so and also that people's depth of
inquiry their questions got richer and
deeper so perhaps that's the thing that
is alive for me today is how might that
work and so I would just repeat the
question that was at the title what does
it mean for us to play a game B what is
this notion of meaningfulness and how
does that notion of meaningfulness guide
us moment to moment in the context like
this one so as things come up if you
feel like something is really calling
for you to bring it in please do so
notice what's happening in your cell
phone and others and let's see what
happens
you
forgive me are we are we is this the
point where we're allowed to chime in
I'm sorry I can't hear you is it muted
yeah please do yes you're quite excited
so the the the thing that came up for me
when you were when you're speaking was
that when I was giving my initial answer
I was describing a kind of collection of
interest that I had that seemed to find
expression in some kind of larger
communal project the interest that it
seemed disparate and it kind of unique
to me and expression in a larger project
and I'm wondering if that general
phenomenon of an individual's kind of
strange concatenation of interests
finding expression in collective
projects might be part of what it means
to to play game B or what might be
something that game B enables to a
greater degree
you
I will speak to that and just say that I
hope so because it really doesn't make
any this trip after it really doesn't
make any sense for my life otherwise
because I don't have any kind of I don't
know the but like I said in my kind of
opening statement the path that brought
me here is very it has nothing to do
with my life and be more communicative
in my in the general sense of what that
means professionally but personally it
makes sense to me because I engaged in
so much self work and because that kind
of for me generates once you kind of do
that for a while and kind of becomes
obvious that what you're doing yourself
needs to kind of you need I don't know I
don't know how to sound sort of it needs
to be beyond just yourself I guess and
that didn't seem initially like that was
ever going to be something that would
make me interested in the theories and
ideas of people from a completely
different sector in the world and that
sort of thing but I mean I
to believe that something I would think
that that would be kind of what you're
saying Drake rings true to me in the
sense that like reducing like quite
different people on the surface but
there's something that kind of tethers
us all together and that would seem like
what I would think of is a game here she
type quality
that for me hearing people speak and
it's resonating with my question about
how to do this together is that there's
a social aspect so by calling a game B
we're already identifying social Assoc
ality to it there are three ways of
dealing with existential risk or despair
so one thing here is we're noting it
social
we're also noting it's a game and that
it's not the first in a series of games
but there is at least one prior to it so
bring those things together I wonder if
that might also speak to the question of
this what does it take or does one need
to succeed and game a in order to play
game B so part of it might be the game
of transmuting game and to gain these
sure that you can't like I think to the
extent that you can succeed a gaming you
it seems like you can't play Gabby then
game is built on a sort of disinterest
in yes what seems to me by definition
the qualities the game be is trying to
trying to foster
you
I noticed the question popping up in me
which would be something like what does
it mean to succeed in game a and also
noticing that perhaps his objective
position between the question what does
it mean to succeed in gaming what does
it mean to play game day
um I love that question Jordan because
it's turned something at me because I'm
not successful at game a game a success
equals money and power and whether
that's true or that's just my story I
will do further inquiry on later but
that what Antoine was saying that
success in game B is almost antithetical
to maybe I'm pretty weren't resolved to
success in game a I know what puts me in
a place to know how to play game B is
exactly what game a does not reflect on
it's my disability it's my poverty it's
the stuff that puts the at a
disadvantage in game a it gave me all of
the capacity and the space to create
what I believe is a solution for game B
which I'm still sitting with and dealing
with how to do it in a group how to
communicate it how to do any of that but
that even in this game B space there's a
lot of somewhat needing to already be
successful right you need to have an
education you need to be articulate mean
to have certain things that other people
i luckily do have access to that but
don't necessarily have access that other
people have access to um and so that's
just what was coming up for me and like
i said i will sit with that further what
a success mean for game a
it seems like
we are comprised of many components in
the psyche and if that's the case can
some of us be ready as in some parts of
us be ready to play a game a well some
other parts are ready to play game B
what does that leave us with
you
you
I agree with the challenges of like you
need to come in there's something
there's hide ourselves
you
um hopefully this is coherent I feel
called to say that and I had a
discussion with a friend who was trying
to also become a candy player and I he
told me that he had to release being a
game a player and a lot of things that
he was learning in game be to be applied
to do really well in gaming and I guess
as a pull on that a little bit it's for
me it feels like just in general we're
all maybe trying to increase our impact
or our value that we're creating for the
world it just happens that in game a
people are sucking that in in terms of
for power or for money versus for game
be it's more about letting it be not
needing to be captured but it's to be
actually given to the whole so in that
sense like I think each and one of us
are in a kind of game a environment
right now
and while playing game B we can people
can see us as kind of more beacons of
light where like there's something
interesting about each and one of us
because we're here and as we develop our
own sovereignty and getting the right
relationships we're able to actually I
guess generate more I'd say like value
for those around us even though we may
not be particularly capturing it and
sort of be elevated even in the game a
space I really
a couple things came to me the term
emotional vampire and then this this
feminist motto personal is political and
if to repurpose that the relational is
political and like I teach interpersonal
skills that's what I do for livelihood
and I've been like researching all these
kinds of different conversational
modalities and if you've kind of put it
on a spectrum like I hit and then the I
vow to use blueprint terms
it's like pickup artists and stuff like
that is like that's diet that's the
quintessential I it and then these new
kind of technologies that are popping up
like circling or we spaces they're like
I Dow I doubt tech and I wonder how much
if you practice those how much is that's
going to bleed over in your everyday
life and the story that comes to mind I
tell this frequently in some of the
courses I teach is when I got married
this time last year in Ireland and you
know I got a look I gotta look good in
Ireland my wife so I didn't think I was
gonna be nervous at all and then the day
of I was like super nervous and then I
was like aw man what's going on and then
the priest came and he just looked at me
and he's like well bother preacher no
bother
no worries and then immediately like
boom
I just dropped because I could tell
instantly he was like a man of God he
was like overflowing with presents and
he sort of liberated me from my my
anxiety at that moment or whatever
whatever I was going through so to
Phil's point
I wonder if who show up in this way how
much we could not only liberate
ourselves but liberate others
I'm sensing some some connect during
what Tim shared about a sense of you
know that the simultaneous playing both
game a game B and it's not it's not just
a discrete shift where I'm suddenly a
game B player Solis there's this sort of
slow transformation at least uh pieces
of me to begin to lean into and that
connects with me I believe it was what
Chad shared about how do we transmute
like game a 2 2 game B it has something
to do with that it feels like in the the
niche the the place that we are feels so
the world as we conceived of it and all
the rules and everything that is is so
deeply controlled or conditioned by
culture and we have some say in creating
new artifacts of culture at least
experimenting with new ways of being and
so when I connect that with what Tim's
sharing my senses how can i I try these
things on and essentially the more that
we can mean into this game B space the
more playing field we create for others
so that they perhaps becomes more
accessible and and so and so that's sort
of what I'm connecting a couple of
things came up for me when you're
sharing that like one of them
surprisingly is the the term make
mindfulness which for those of you
haven't heard before it's kind of a
critique on how I guess like modern
Western society has adopted meditation
practices and the way I understand it or
the piece of it that has been useful for
me is the realization that when people
learn about the utility of meditation
they think in terms of utility and they
schedule like 30 minutes a day you know
if they're good to meditate maybe in the
mornings before they go to work or
something like that and that's that's
just kind of the way we tend to fit
you know we we have slots and then we
add something to that slot and that that
is a there's a whole set of assumptions
that make life like that and maybe it
comes from having a nine-to-five or
having kind of a discrete boundary
between weekdays and weekends and the
related idea is this feeling that I've
had where I can still remember what it
was like to not actually know that a
weekend was a different thing from a
weekday in that sense of expansiveness
that I felt as a child where it was just
life and there were no discrete
boundaries between things so to connect
that with the rest of the discussion it
makes me my first thought when hearing
what everybody was saying was maybe one
way to play game B while we're still in
game a is to negotiate these small slots
that you know it's like some sort of
liminal sacred space that come in and
you play a game be in that space and you
get to practice it and you get to build
your game B muscles so to speak and then
maybe at some point it'll start bleeding
into the rest of your life but then the
counterpoint came up which was this Mick
mindfulness thing which is maybe that
that's fundamentally the wrong model and
maybe to think of it as something to
just fit in to the existing way that we
do things is is is just flawed
completely and what we really need is to
to kind of completely re-evaluate how we
even think about our time we think about
time itself Danya that reminds me of a
very wise woman who I spend some time
with who just asked the question what
would happen if we treated every moment
as if it mattered
you
you
so something's come up for me as this
discussions going on especially with
relation to the Mik mindfulness comment
as well as what Peter was talking about
with the priest I know I'll see I hope
hopefully I can I can articulate this
well but it reminds me of something that
a friend of mine very recently said to
me when I was sort of talking about my
worries about trying to get like my own
life sorted out and everything and he
said well you know look why don't you if
you're if you feel like you're spinning
your wheels why don't you just go and
help people because if you're if you're
stuck with you know you're not able to
figure out how to fix certain situations
and you're in your life and you've got a
bunch of time then just spend it on
other people and it kind of messed me up
in the head because I it never occurred
to me why that wasn't just so obvious to
me to begin with and then I thought more
about it and in relation with Peter's
comment about his like the very the
godly man who is the priest I think
people really really vastly
underestimate the sort of spiritual and
material power and charisma associated
with people who are truly selflessly
motivated in what they do and there's a
bit of a game a error which is that
people overestimate their abilities to
sort of calculate how everything will
turn out for them out into the future
and underestimate how the world will
sort of form itself around helping you
to succeed as you put more and more
positive effort out into the world and
succeed at doing that
there's a kind of thread that I feel
like I'm noticing in a few of the of the
last comments starting with when when
Peter mentioned this phrase of the the
personal is political and I have I have
this kind of like aversive initial
reaction to that phrase but in the way
that it turned out that that Peter was
describing it as that the relational is
political
it wasn't the the version of it that I
have the aversion to which is to say
it's not that the relational has to be
turned into a kind of power dynamic but
precisely the opposite that it no longer
needs to carry on there to take on that
kind of zero-sum power quality but
rather can can be something else and it
there's there's a similar thing that I
noticed in the MiG mindfulness comment
and in the comment that that Jordan
hoped that both Jordans made which is
that one faulty aspect of game be our
sort of game a is that it doesn't have
any language for a non utility utility
maximizing way of being which is to say
things that we might want to practice
for their own sake rather than things
that we might want to get and
relationships get kind of subsumed in
that acquisitive Frank mind and and as
to do kind of economic activities and
even something that's by definition a
practice like mindfulness gets subsumed
in this kind of a quiz ative frame of
mind so that's what came up for me
I've noticed a connection between some
thoughts here I it seems that so one
thing that I would say is a game a
quality is
it seems like someone's playing it
they're not but they're not really
playing a game they're pretending to
play a game they are I don't know I
think that's the best second best I
could put it and so I think that there's
there's some game v is rooted in a sort
of pursuit for authenticity and I think
that's its authenticity both in yourself
and what's actually happening between
people and and I would say that for
Tim's comment with maybe part of you
isn't if what do you do with part of you
is still interested in playing game a
another part of you that in playing
game B maybe you could find all that
desire into simulating ways that can
help you play a game ways that can help
you eventually become more authentic
which I think also mean we're unified as
a person and Julie's comment how I think
that you can somewhat inherit the the
benefits of a different game without
necessarily playing it yourself you can
you can funnel these benefits into
different possibly more authentic or
productive ways of existing
I think one facet of the I don't know
that interstitial point between you gay
and gay and gave me might just be in
having the ability to when you're in
those authentic moments identify them
that you can kind of identify and gain a
situation versus again be situation and
maybe think how this game a situation
could have turned into my game a
situation how it could have been I don't
want to say optimized with that things
very game a but how social interactions
but take on the flavor game a which I
would say like he maybe like somebody
being a bulldozer and another person
thing that doormat or something of that
nature could you know what's the way
that that interaction could on in a more
and here iris nonzero-sum way because I
do think that for me
this feels like something that happens
between to a wider wave
one phrase I heard recently that that
that reminded me of is just noticing
when meaning is being crowded out of a
situation and that that's a good initial
criterion for saying you know
something's gone wrong here
and this question of
I think is pretty critical to another
word meaningfulness has come up and
there I think there is important I mean
there's a distinction there another a
technical like philosophical
distinctions but when I hear it there is
something the difference to me is
meaning is something that is more well
defined it's more goal oriented where
meaningfulness is fluid and it's maybe
somebody can help with the teasing
lasalle but there's a connection there
with presence and authenticity that
makes it okay I pay attention to some
things differently than if we're focused
on meaning and Amy I think you said you
work on aesthetics I think there's a
hint there towards this TEDx to in the
difference between something that's rife
with or bereft of meaning versus
meaningfulness and have the aesthetic
question really is directing us to think
or live towards meaningfulness
this same question came up at
yesterday's meeting in Toronto and the
meeting crisis were filled
Jordan vo Jordan were were there and
it's like the idea of meaning and what's
the meaning of life is sort of almost a
disembodied propositional question that
has like a yes or no answer to it where
meaningfulness is like you're full of
meaning you know it's like a it's like
it grabs you as a felt sense state of
being can I jump Ilana a few threads
here
so the question what does it mean to
play a game B I think we can ask it at
every level like within ourselves what
does it mean to be non rival risks
within ourselves as in the different
parts that want to play different games
and how do we make those parts non-rival
risks and there's also a threat about
you know there are
finite games within infinite games some
just note that and kind of set that
aside for a second but how do we play
game be in our intimate relationships
with our families how do we play game D
work how do we play game B in broader
social situations how do we extend it
out and be non rival wrist and we're
still swimming in game a but I think we
can
find ways to make choices that bring
that way of being into all of these
different considerations
you
the results and I think in the way that
I've been thinking about it is that it's
is integration
that
there's a way that where humanity sits
right now is like we've we have like the
the process of development being a
process of differentiation and
integration that we have differentiated
ourselves from our environment and now
we
are in the process hopefully of
reintegrating it as a new identity and
identifying not with our environment but
maybe like with the cosmos or with
something bigger with awareness who
knows but so there's some thoughts and I
think there's something telling there
also the meaning and meaningfulness and
pluralistic society so if if the health
of the collective hinges on the question
of meaning well that's an unlikely
proposition that everyone's going to
agree to by contrast if we organize our
week
I cannot optimize this like towards a
plurality of meaningfulness that seems
more possible and that could be both
gonna rivalries or us non-violence isn't
constructive way so what would
collective pluralistic meaningfulness
look like
held to say that those last two comments
remind me a lot of one of the most
overused loaded terms in English
language which is love specifically that
concept Melissa
articulated about being anti rivalries
across multiple levels and within
yourself being one of those levels that
kind of reminds me of self love or self
parenting where you know there's part of
you that wants you know path a and
there's part of you that wants path B
and maybe B is the better path and your
higher self so to speak knows that and
so you you can kind of force that upon
yourself in a non loving manner and then
you'll see how far that gets to or you
can approach the whole situation with
maybe Compassion's a better word and
that allows for that integration process
to happen more naturally and I think
then that also leads into relationships
and I think this goes all the way back
to Peters question initially which is
what is the role of sacrifice and
playing game B and I'll leave with this
one comment I think my my definition of
love I is not fully fleshed out but I
know that it involves an element of
sacrifice and maybe to make that more
tangible when you're having say conflict
with a loved one the best chance you
have achieving resolution across time is
to have buffer for one another buffer
for your partner you know being an
asshole from time to time so that they
have buffer for you to do that as well
and then doing that within yourself and
then doing that across society
when they've done notion of up go ahead
excuse me I think the notion of
buffering is really interesting I'd be
interested in
how we could take that on with respect
to
this is a hard thing to say something to
do with the nature of time
because if game B is a city on a hill
maybe I don't think it quite is I think
in fact it is a process ever unfolding
but if we take it as a city on a hill
just for a moment there's some path
between here and there so there's some
sort of transition and that's what I
mean with this parts of us here and
there we're embedded in the world and
from one context you may be able to be
more in the mode of game be more more
able to be loving and in others we might
walk out and all of a sudden maybe some
baseline fundamental bit of security
isn't there eNOS if you don't have
something in you that is well-developed
enough to protect yourself from a
specific game a threat perhaps then what
in your structure is compromised
that might be necessary in order to be a
vehicle to continue moving towards the
city on the hill that is going to be so
so this notion of buffering and time and
something else that I think is really
important is is a practice being able in
authenticity as part of it this
meaningfulness is part of it is what
kind of way can we drop in its the
cultivation of a practice that enables
you to drop it into something that is
somehow beneath between and above all of
that it's transcendent to all of that
but it's nevertheless participatory
which is the reese entering thing which
enables somehow this orientation despite
the putt despite the fact that there is
the city on the hill that you have to be
moving towards but not but not yet there
and that seems like a broader point
regarding life but the notion of
buffering and time it's is interesting
as a sense of forgiveness there with
respect to how how much you are or are
not able to continue moving they are
really feeling into some some notion of
buffering and the period of time we're
considering this process to be unfolding
and I'll just leave it with the question
what if
a successful game be even that's not the
right way to say the question but but
what if we were talking about something
that's 200 years into the future what
are we really playing then right if if
if I get if a game B that is more fully
present in the lives of some critical
number of people such that it is the
game that is being played more if that's
centuries into the future what really
are we doing now little called to say
something I'm going to try to
incorporate Tim's question to that I've
noticed the the the use of
quasi-religious language in this
conversation and I don't think that's a
bad thing I kind of want to also address
Phil's original question about how do
you create a religion it's not like
religion and so for me when I come to to
these spaces to the the I thou spaces I
feel like I'm bringing a sacred a very
sacred idea with me and so for me I'll
to put it I guess in a straightforward
way it's to try to find the balance
between science and religion and I want
to uh and I want to engage with people
while honoring that idea with me and so
maybe how to play game B is to borrow a
term from from Jesus is to to go make
disciples of other people and so to try
to create spaces where where other
people can have like a sacred idea and
try to have conversations similar to
what we're doing here it's why I'll ask
the question if if maybe anyone else in
the group feels like they bring like a
sacred idea with them to these types of
spaces
from for me it's the idea of stewardship
and I think along with some of Tim's
point as to what we are doing out and
looking into the future it's there's a
there's a gentleman I think his name is
Nathan on Twitter who commented about
this event and mentioned that we're not
necessarily playing candy or so we're
constructing the framework for it for
building a better future and so we're
having the discussions now are trying to
come together to fill up these ideas
because we can't really just do it on
our own and we need to hear from one
another to prepare ourselves then beyond
ourselves
have something didn't say about the
sacred idea
it strikes me that sovereignty as you
all described it
is awakening like the ultimate of
sovereignty is awakening and it is
building the capacity that I think it
was tim is speaking of not of having the
capacity to not be pulled off center and
the
ultimate of that is I mean this is this
is my own personal philosophy but as of
not identifying solely with the self and
and the degree to which we are this body
or we are this mind or we are our goals
or we are that that's the degree to
which we have so much to protect and so
so much to keep safe you know
I think Daniel Stockton burger talks
about that we don't meaningfully exist
without all this other stuff
and so to take that I that identity that
sense of self and kind of dispersed it
to the rest of the world and however far
you want to go is
way too
they feel safer and be
be able to stay on center and have what
you intend to happen and what you mean
to be be
to build off that the thread of kind of
loosening attachment to ego and what
role that kind of plays in game be I
feel like there's there's a thread and a
few of the different topics we've been
discussing of so but both love and
meaning have this have this component of
being relational and they're not they're
not solely in the self nor they like
kind of solely in the world their
processes and and a lot of real
relationship or the kind of conversation
that we're having now entails opening
yourself up to being affected by
whomever you're relating with so if I
was if I'm relating to this group or
anyone just as isolated self I'm not
really opening myself up to being
transformed by that that process of
relating and and I think meaning has
that component as well where meaning is
not a thing that you're gonna find kind
of as a as Peter said is like a
proposition that's out out in the world
nor is it something that you can have as
a kind of isolated ego self it's it
emerges in the process of interaction
with others with the world and I think I
think that shift from kind of isolated
selves and a world without without
subjectivity to some conception of this
ongoing process that is really the
relationship between people and between
people in the world there's something
there for for game B
feel compelled to just drop in the the
concept of sacrifice again into
everything that you just described Jake
yeah you're mentioning sacrifice in the
context of love made me think you know
this is the sacrifice that love entails
is opening yourself to the other so I
think of that oh do you want to go
George
hey just very shortly I just I hear
sacrifice but I I feel altruism it's not
to say that you are necessarily harming
yourself sometimes it is not to your
benefit but like altruism might be a
better fit for that idea
I kind of feel an affinity for sacrifice
because it it involves a certain amount
of like letting go of yourself so you
can think of it as as harm but not it's
not necessarily harm people use the term
self transcendence and you could even
think of that as you're renegotiating
what the self is by making these micro
sacrifices across time whether it's
through an interaction with someone
that's characterized by love or towards
something that you describe as
meaningful and I think encountering
something that is meaningful
perhaps necessitates a little bit of
that self transformation but the
transform you got to sacrifice one
aspect of yourself in favor of what's to
come
okay so especially because you guys have
been talking about sacrifice I've been
thinking about this level of sort of
sacred ideas that have a relation to
this and I'm reminded of the apart from
the Sermon on the Mount which is one of
like Jesus's famous speeches where he's
instructing people essentially to stop
worrying about their internal material
needs basically because if you according
to him align yourself with God which I
think in the context of this
conversation is very much like aligning
yourself with important higher ideals
and then being less concerned about your
own internal day-to-day sort of issues
that he says that like God will clothe
and feed you if you actually seriously
dedicate yourself to what you think is
like the most valuable and it makes me
think again that of a lot of people who
I know are very successful at game a at
game a who are aligning themselves
strongly with higher ideals and don't
see their mission as being ultimately to
sort of like ascend the hierarchy so
somebody like Elon Musk is a really good
example but there's tons tons more
examples so I guess something I'm
wondering is again back on this this
idea where I really do think that people
are under estimating even there's the
question that near the beginning where
people are asking well do you need to be
good at game a in order to succeed at
game B and
I'm wondering are we not maybe we should
ask to what degree is game be actually a
like an extremely excellent sort of
strategy for game a and that if you're
willing to sort of make that leap of
faith and sacrifice in that way what
what kind of a future does that yield
something that comes to me there is one
of continued sacrifice
I'm reminded of the trickery that can
sometimes happen in words which I
suspect is probably quite intentional as
I'm thinking about the feeling that I
have when I hear the word sacrifice and
then I reflect on its etymology which
simply means to make sacred and that
sacrifice is the act of turning a
particular activity into something
that's participating in this sacred and
then I was noticing that I had an image
in my mind and I sort of spent a little
time hunting it down and realized that
it was a documentary I'd watched
sometime ago about a family that for
three generations had been carving a
particular piece of the cathedral in
Barcelona and about how there was a
feeling of careful care like for three
generations each individual had given me
essentially their total dove there to
tell it to their life to this particular
practice and then I remember the
conversation that I had with Jubilee
about the platform the the vision the
thing that she's holding and I was just
wondering it would be like if a group of
people had attached themselves to that
particular project with that level of
sacrifice
I mean that would be amazing
there's one who has that level of
sacrifice at the moment and it's funny
the word sacrifice doesn't appeal to me
except in the way that you just defined
it Jordan because I think of my
evangelical Christian upbringing it
brings about well just a negative
connotation and what I've been in in
this moment I mean I came up with this
idea three years ago and I've had to do
the interpersonal work after that to get
to become the person that could possibly
bring it into the world and a big piece
of it is not sacrificing is my natural
self is empathetic and wants to give my
whole self up to the group and I've had
to learn to do the opposite which has
been so instrumental finding that in
finding my own joy what is easy for me
and simple for me because in a group
that same piece it's easy and simple for
me it's hard for somebody else and vice
versa and I don't remember who was
speaking but someone was talking about
utility and I just reminded me of
watching the in community these parents
playing sports with their kids and there
was like dad's playing whose kids
weren't playing that was like oh they're
enjoying that process and there was a
piece of me that was I hate playing
sports hate it with a passion but I
would do it for my kid and yet I like it
I like shook my world because I was like
oh there's things that I hate that they
actually really enjoy and in community
how that works because my kid if she
wants to play sports can play sports
with them and vice versa where part of
it is letting go of the sacrifice
because somebody else that is not a
sacrifice for and instead finding your
purpose and your utility and your flow
because when you find it there isn't a
sacrifice there at least not how the
negative connotation the positive
connotation of dedicating your life to
something and finding what speaks to you
and what brings you joy I think is
playing and be and enough people doing
that in some kind of a organized way
I have in my head but any kind of
organized way of like doing what is in
your best interest but having it be Omni
when where and that is where game a
falls apart is that a lot of what is
utility and what is I get it and other
people don't and in game B I think it's
I get it so I can give it to everybody
else you get it so you can give it to
everybody else
and the more we play in that and the
more we give ourselves those little
slotted times to play in that the easier
it becomes because I've experienced it
like I experienced living mostly in game
beep I just had to come at it from a
more selfish point because it was if
that's making any sense and I will stop
talking now because I could talk about
this forever
mmm Gordon when I
on the apology of sacrifice to make
sacred I need to be thought back to when
you shared what if every moment mattered
and that and that also connected me to
what you shared Peter the pastor who
communicated to you as if he was holding
that that sacredness and in that
interaction that he had with you Peter
feels somewhat like what you were just
describing Jubilee Ian he is in touch
with something that he was able to give
to to Peter in a certain kinda way and
I'm sensing connecting to this this
sense of a sacred idea when I when I
tossed that around in my mind the sense
of there are many paths of change that
are fueled by a deep hatred or distaste
swear things as they exist and are
reasons to have distaste for the things
is the way that they are that I think
that there is a need for coming up
against the sanctity of life and finding
finding yourself in the position where
independent of what's going on and do
you recognize the privilege of being
alive and from that place we're actually
on solid ground from which to move and I
have to bring up when I was there
intended to speak some time ago
sharing the peace around the time scale
I had this image of like seeds falling
in through cracks on a sidewalk and then
imagining that fast forward through time
tree is growing out of that space and
then asking myself the question what
what are seeds like that I can plant in
myself
Oh grow and that way I'm having good
answers but it felt beautiful to
consider what keeps coming up for me is
art and there's this philipp reis term
called death works which i really like
it's like works of art that are meant to
undermine the sacred of society right so
you can think of like stuff like piss
art or piss Christ or you know Katy
Perry or porn things that remove the
sacred which remove community or
communion so if there's a no how matter
if there's an opposite of death works
like life works and what comes first is
the community come first and then the
life works emerge from it or is it the
other way around or is it kind of like a
co-creating process and if that's the
case what is the work of art that we
want to co-create together is the
question that's coming up
it is beautiful Peter that's so
interesting I am I wrote a very similar
sentence yesterday to someone I know
here who I just consider a thoroughbred
wizard and and I don't know but but my
sense is involves it involves more than
just the modality of speech although
listening will always be present so my
aspiration is to open somehow this
shared collaboration in a space where
musicians artists draws you know the to
resonate on on that kind of scale and
what can be created there so I suppose
what other a question from that might be
what other modalities of coming together
might best afford this co-creation of
art
you
you
in a way this feels like a piece of art
what we're doing right now
one thing coming up for me because both
both art and and time have been
mentioned it was a filmmaking is
something that I do and and the kind of
deepest experiences I've had in
filmmaking or in watching films kind of
orient me in terms of what I feel like
I'm looking for in in this general space
because they are those experiences of
kind of total presence and total
engagement and I think a lot of that has
to do with how it how a film can orient
you in time where you're in the film is
a foregone conclusion it's gonna end
however it's gonna end but your
experience of it is moment by moment by
moment by moment very much very much in
the present and and it occurred to me I
heard a conversation between
Krishnamurti and and David Bohm
called the ending of time and
Krishnamurti keeps making this point
over and over again that the conception
of time that we have in in the physical
world of this there's now and then
there's the future and then there's the
past and and there can be
transformations that happen over time
that doesn't work for a psychological
time to create that distinction in one's
in one's own mind is the this kind of
seed from which all these different
pathologies spring and so you know
there's something about these
conversations that that give us an
orientation toward time that that
doesn't create that kind of fracturing
and I think think art has that kind of
potential as well
that has me thinking of making art and
the experience of making art painting is
where I started and it was actually the
experience of feeling like this didn't
come from me it came through me that
brought me to to meditation like this is
this is I didn't make that that didn't
come from me where in me did that come
from but that to be a vessel or a
conduit through which life can flow in
which art can flow is the goal to be a
good vessel or a good conduit through
which life can flow and think of I'll
come back to it I'll leave it there for
now
just wanted to say as it brought forward
to me that that that is not how I feel
about art because I'm not an artist but
it is how I feel about this thing that
I'm creating that it's coming through me
for some reason it's me that it's coming
through because of my life experience
and in experiencing that it is not mine
it is ours because it was brought on
from all of my teachers and every
experience I've had through everyone
else and I think that is game B that is
why we're able to have omni win is like
anything that's created was created with
the whole and therefore you can't own it
in the same way that it's owned in game
a if I took all the risk and I did it's
like even if I did take all the risk
even if I did all the work you still
didn't take all the risk and you still
didn't do all the work and so owning
that and being in that of like this
thing and then being a servant of it
being like okay letting ego take the
back the back seat and being like okay
what can I do to move this forward what
is in the best within my capacity to be
a better person today to do something
for the whole to do something for this
vision that I have to do something what
is the best thing that I can do to move
it forward which isn't not necessarily
what society looks at from gamei and
says that is the next step make a
business plan do X to Y instead of like
no what's my next step what's the next
thing to do because that's part of the
spiritual practice
can you hear me
okay so we're reaching the point where
it's time to start closing and it seems
like we might be nice is for everybody
just to have a chance to reflect on how
they've changed as a consequence of this
conversation and maybe just share if
there's anything that is the question
that they're leaving with perhaps is
being moved through the course of the
conversation I can say for myself that
in just the last little bit the question
that landed on me quite heavily actually
if this inquiry into the notion of a
seed falling to the cracks of the
sidewalk and the difference between
death works and life works what would it
mean to play game be became in my mind
this notion of what would it mean to be
able to create life what would it mean
to to be able to create a seed a truly
viable seed that would actually grow
even in the context of the sidewalk and
reflecting on the degree to which almost
all of our efforts as humanity hitherto
have in fact been death works what would
it mean for us to practice life works so
I will take that with me if anyone else
has anything they say please now it's
the time when you buy bubble
on that point the question I'm leaving
with is you know the Daymond when I rest
into it is he's really creating art he's
not trying to win a finite game so you
know I don't know if I have a question
it's just there's just a statement or
insight but I'm leaving with if we're
choosing I'll go with film
there's interesting because I think the
first thing that Jake said where we
ended off that was expression and
expressing what is true to yourself all
the collection of interest that you have
and showing that maybe as art and I
think I'm trying to think through like
what is usually uniquely mine not to
share as well I think Jake also as a
second thing for me to think about being
versus having and moving away from every
single thing that I'm doing has to be
because of some reason to get something
else and how can I switch them mindset
so that I'm not hoping to get something
in the future based on things in the
present I am going to pass with Jordan
I'm going to play volleyball and give a
set shot down to that Jorge sure so the
one thing that I'm leaving with well I
have the idea of slots and things into
slots trying to capitalize on my own
free time and trying to reduce the
amount of things that I give slots to in
order to to play this game be where I
feel like the initial thought in in
existing within game a is if we are
living inside and you have to find a
spot for B but I think I can take that
idea in sir
on myself the idea of game B and let
little spots of game a float around in
that space but just give that a small
chance rate and engulf myself in the
other time the question that I am
leaving with is the notion of buffer and
I think that's the thing that's throwing
me around more is what is this buffer I
saw it as trying to remove ideas from
game a that might be messing with your
you know reaching the top of the hill
where the city of MB is I think that's
what it is but that that's where of my
question understand we pass it off to
the other Jordan
thank you right so I guess there's two
things I'm sitting with right now one is
and I think they're in some sense
possibly they're actually the same thing
but one of them is I feel much more like
I feel like I'm identifying much more
with pursuits of a silica selfless
selfless nature than I was when I came
into this conversation which is really
good and the second thing is that in the
vein of what some people have been
talking about sort of like Damon
inspired things I'm feeling much more a
little bit ready to engage in things
creatively with that sort of creative
mindset and and sort of drawing on
intuition which well we'll see how how
far we get with that and if I have a
question right now one of them is how do
I keep that going and and which I'll
have to think about for myself and then
the other would be I'm a little
concerned I would like to avoid
completely having like a loss of self
because I don't like complete non egoism
I'm not into that so and I will pass it
off to Jubilee
right as per usual I'm not going to know
all of the ways that this conversation
has changed me and so long after the
conversation that is the power of a
conversation at least a good one um but
the buffer is definitely something that
is in sticking with me this idea of
creating space in society and how we do
that in our own lives by hopefully
playing game be 90% of the time and game
aid 10% or whatever our life allows but
also on an individual sense of how many
game B players does it take to buffer a
game a player like how many of us is
already tippity allow game a player and
like walk them through how to like play
a more cooperative game once we've even
figured it out but like buffer I'm
sitting with the buffer and I will pass
it off to Isaiah's
I feel this was a wonderful beautiful
conversation I mean I feel like sort of
like an afterglow I'm gonna probably
have a hard time going to sleep and I
get any a specific question that comes
to mind is how can how can I and then
it's a personal question so how can I
find people how can I find and help
these help other people who might be
trapped in a game a mindset shift it
slightly and welcome down to game B and
how do I I feel like that also engenders
respond responsibility on me so how do I
what is the nature of that
responsibility for me and I will pass it
to Mike
[Music]
I'll find myself feeling I just sort of
struck with the beauty of some of these
exchanges and I know in my end there
then sort of sequences that have
unfolded where you know a few people
would say a few things and that sort of
there's a catalyst for something and
then I would say something and then that
could serve as catalysts for other
people and I'm sure that's happened
brothers in this space so it's just
quite beautiful that we're able to do
that coming together you know most of us
I imagine not having known each other so
that reflection feels present to me and
I have this the sense of this question
that that's worth exploring
it feels abstract but the what's the
difference and between like pushing away
from something versus digging it in
myself if I'm up against something that
is that I see is worth changing and then
I can scale that out pushing off of
where I am versus digging in more deeply
and what is the place of deeper embrace
take me do I begin to see things that
I'm not able to see as I'm pushing away
from that monday-saturday
yeah birth in motion so yeah I will pass
it along to chat great yeah there was so
much there it's hard for me to pick one
thing but one thing did come up this is
another the convergent streams I think
that's bringing me here one of the last
things that was reached researching was
was a climate heart actually so the
environmental arts and seeing it come up
here again is very interesting so it's
making me rethink
what I was doing in that project and
what the project had to say and also how
I was orienting myself in it and what it
might tell me about the artistic process
that's going on right here right now
how about info
I was really affected by one of Jubilees
comments on love be because I find it
it's also leading to my question I find
out I sometimes look at people with a
right interactive people with kind of an
awareness that I may not be able to do
anything for them
that uh maybe they're they're just
beyond what whatever I'm capable of but
he he he
yeah but no now I'm thinking about it
what can I have how can I go about
getting or helping people get what I can
give them that's now something that's
now instead of that's in my head now
instead of abandoning someone sending
them in a a more proper direction or
something so Jake be mine
[Music]
yeah thanks that I think the thread
that's that's most alive in me right now
it's just this question around ego and
what the role of ego is and all of this
and it occurred to me just kind of like
feeling my own sensations in this
conversation and afterward that there's
a sense that from the kind of game a
perspective the prospect of of sacrifice
we're like giving up something of
yourself is very aversive and it's from
the standpoint of kind of being a self
trying to get things that idea seems
like a threat but from the standpoint of
being engaged in a process in a
conversation like this one where my
ideas are only or not even mine they're
just part of the process that is this
kind of ongoing conversation it's not
that my self is fully kind of effaced
and and destroyed it's that the question
doesn't even come up of you know what's
the threat to me or what's the and what
are the implications for me and just
just having the experience of that kind
of Orient's me and points me toward okay
maybe this is what interactions would be
like in a different kind of system and
in a kind of game be world is is the
question of you know what am I going to
get out of this it's not that it's not
that you got nothing or you give up
something it's that it doesn't it
doesn't have to come up that's that's
what I'm leaving with and I will pass it
to a me like in a torch lit cave and are
we having something like that right now
just being in front of our screens but
so together so that was just something
is kind of
trying to make sense of what's happening
right now I guess and I'm leaving the
idea that I guess I'm taking away this
idea that mmm I I shared with Jubilee
who wanted to you know find the litmus
test for what the differences between
game Amb is and she also said that she
is unsuccessful at game AI can really
relate to that and I got a bit
distracted during the call so I didn't
participate as much as I wanted to but I
feel some solidarity with the group in
that some progress has been made and you
know I feel that that net positive I do
want to leave the group with a point
it's something that didn't come up at
all in this conversation which is
politics because the presidential
debates are actually tonight it's
already started and in my view in my
humble opinion there is one game B
candidate up there just one so I'm not
going to tell you that is you can ask me
if you want to know or form your own
opinion but uh there's you know the
personal quest and all this that we've
been talking about but there's also the
sociological political context and how
our decisions work for other people too
so I think we need to give equal
attention to that Thanks and a bit too
who hasn't gone
have you gone go ahead
hey thanks no that was great I think it
really expanded on some of the
discussions from last week at U of T
kind of cornerstone discussions about
what is game B and one of the well some
of the themes that kind of thread it out
there kind of show that game B really is
humans are involved for game B already
and I think that we're kind of cultured
for game a and I think looking you know
looking across the entire spectrum it's
important to look at that we saw words
like love the theme of community that
you really have to to care moment to
moment and live life with what matters
like these are essential things for what
is game B I think anther
anthropologically when you when you look
back at human beings and our
predecessors you know a tribe would have
gone through cycles of abundance and
scarcity which are still themes that we
live with today depending on how
successful you are at game a at
different points in your life and I
think that you know we're already really
primed very much so for for game B but
maybe in the illusion of permanence of
game a we kind of lose track and are
almost exploited by what game a is to
lose focus on our community so I think
that's you know cornerstone stuff but
looking to the bigger picture question I
suppose that I have I'm always in
pursuit of answering and perhaps a you
know in the nature of game B would
always be in the pursuit of refining the
solution to it is that the biggest
obstacle to gain B itself is gay
May and game a is you know employed well
rather successfully over the last I
don't know 70 years or century or
perhaps five centuries by
english-speaking Westerners Europeans
but now it's played by everyone yeah
across you know game a is the great
battle of civilization so I'm really
interested in seeing how technology is
employed actively and passively to kind
of progeny and reawaken the meaning
behind game be and maybe see what
technologies emerged to to accelerate
game be and out-compete game a at what
it is and kind of solve a lot of the
predicaments that that exponential game
a has has has left us with to answer for
so this talk was great I wasn't keeping
track of who was going there is there
anyone who hasn't spoken yet perhaps
Daniel Zack or liked how you laid that
all out in fact I found it very hopeful
so I just wanted to comment on that I
apologize for the CD lighting it's just
my digital sunset I think what I'm
taking away from this is that at some
point in this conversation I felt almost
like a raisin heart rate and I I
realized it had to do with this feeling
which I don't even know if I'm qualified
to say that anything in my life up to
this point that has been that could be
described as spiritual has been pointing
roughly in similar directions like
there's been themes towards my
experiences you know growing up as a
committed Christian and then losing that
and then my experiences through
meditation practices and through you
know those really meaningful
conversations with people till five in
the morning or my experiences of
psychedelics and the
types of interactions it's like it's all
pointing towards something and it's
almost similar to its the idea that your
your psyche always has a task for you
and our relationship with that task is
almost like a function of our level of
courage our level of virtue and maybe
that's the source of the raised heart
rate like I feel and maybe this is my
question that something is being
requested of me that there's some sort
of maybe the question could be
formulated as what is it that I ought to
sacrifice or what is it that I am not
willing to let go of in service of game
B or
you know some other formulation of
whatever is in that direction and it's
it's very exciting but it's also it so
it's a little bit fear inducing and
actually just one thing to make it like
a little more concrete and personal and
less abstract I think part of my fear
here is that by being a game B player in
a game a world I I think part of me is
afraid that I will be taken advantage of
and I'm not entirely sure how to manage
that other than what Jordan said one of
the Jordans this concept of a leap of
faith and so maybe that is something for
me too to run with and I will I guess
Melissa hi well I for one am totally
unsatisfied I think we're just
scratching the surface and I think it
speaks to the benefit and essential
nature of building a shared context and
continuing to have conversations with
people that have a shared understanding
of the words that we're saying and
so here's two more of these for one
thing
I just wanted to say one thing about
what Zachary said it was very helpful
but I think that the
idea that game a is the enemy of game B
and it's the single the most the thing
that most prevents it or whatever it was
that you said that may be the case but
it also may be that it's the caterpillar
and game a is game B is the butterfly
that it is only because of that that
game B as possible and I don't know if
that matters but it helps that kind of
perspective helps me not to go around
hating everything
and so where I'm left what question I'm
left with is the question that I always
seem to be asking which is what is what
does life want from me and what is what
is game be calling me forth to be and do
and
[Music]
yeah I'm gonna keep asking now
so thanks is everyone had a chance to
speak I think I think I may be the last
one all right Tim take a sound
well like
on taking us home we couldn't find it
unless we knew what it was
so
what keeps coming things keep coming
back to me something actually Jordan you
said to me when I asked you if I asked
you what your priorities were or what
you were looking to achieve or something
like that and you said to to develop or
maintain or pursue a relationship with
continuity and
this is a very powerful notion that
relationship the difference between
continuity and symmetry and for those
who might be interested by that I
recommend listening to daniel
trachtenberg go talk to Forrest Landry
on the Naraka podcast but
what's so important about it is that
there is a I am i leaving with a
question I think I think though I think
what is that which enables me to
continue to keep going at all is in some
sense that not in some is a deep knowing
that at I am and we are it we are that
which is continuous we have in our
capacity to be in continuity we are we
are it and so the notions of life works
and death works these are inherently
related and thus notion of seeding is
inherently related you know we are that
which dies and lives and so it's just a
trust
he's a and at that level the religious
language of faith faith in that which
cannot be
circulated is just a trust in in the
quality and the capacity for life itself
so I'm going to leave here and just keep
on going it's been lovely to share this
time with you all
you
well I think um thanks to Peter for
[Music]
ultimately being the one who caused this
to happen thanks to everyone for
choosing to show up so fully I really
appreciate it Thank You Jordan
[Music]
thanks everyone that was great thank you
yeah
nice to meet you all
thank you
you