[Music]
we're going to talk a bit about so the
difference between American and UK media
that sort of balance between alternative
media and mainstream media I thought I
just sort of introduced myself a little
bit and then asked you to introduce
yourself in case there's people on that
channel who aren't familiar with you
so my background I I worked for channel
4 news for many years in the UK and then
the BBC and then made documentaries for
several years so I've worked in a
newsroom in the mainstream media swith
what you probably call the the liberal
mainstream media and also for the last
year and a half or so I've been I've
been sort of delving more deeply into
YouTube after setting up rebel wisdom
the the YouTube channel so I kind of had
a bit of a steep learning curve in terms
of seeing the difference between the two
but it's been a really interesting
journey and sort of producing
documentaries and films on on YouTube
and can you tell me a bit about your
background and what you've maybe a
little bit of what you've learned doing
it over the last however many years
sure so now I host the David Pakman show
which is a multi-platform independent
progressive show based in the u.s.
multi-platform meaning that the program
is on radio stations it's on television
stations it's on satellite TV on a
channel called free speech TV and then
independently we also have an online
presence with a YouTube channel and an
audio podcast and in terms of how it's
changed I mean of course on an on the
technical side it's changed and I hope
for the better as you know my production
team has expanded and gotten more more
tech-savvy and technology has continued
to improve and become more accessible
but I think from from a sort of
perspective point of view at the
beginning I would tend to do much more
of the on the one hand on the other hand
sort of presentations and I realized
that that was both not particularly
interesting to me that I really wanted
to be giving my opinion my point of view
and it also wasn't super interesting to
the audience because
it was you know either way there are
going to be people who disagree and I
might as well just do the best job I
kind of advocating for what I sort of
think is best or the best policy so I
think over time the program has
certainly become more more opinionated
than it started as I'd love to return to
that a bit later on because there is
this sense that this this kind of view
from nowhere affectation that the
mainstream media has has been shown up
quite a lot by the growth of alternative
media as being as being an affectation
like there is no view from nowhere and I
think that's becoming really much more
clear one of the reasons that I was
really keen to talk to you David was I I
did I wasn't
I confess I wasn't that aware of your
show until I sort of diving into my
preparation for my interview with Dave
Rubin and I I I saw that I think one of
the things in the online media space at
the moment is it's very easy to get
caught in reality tunnels it's very easy
to end up giving your audience what you
want and I could see that at times you
take an unpopular the unpopular
perspectives with your audience and that
you seemed willing to engage with people
from all over the political spectrum but
from a from what I could see from a very
good faith perspective and being willing
to to say things that might make you
unpopular is that is that have that
could you tell me about some of those
occasions that have that have happened
on your channel and why has that
happened do you think well I mean I
think certainly everything I say is
unpopular with someone I think maybe
what you're getting at is sometimes
there have been stories where there was
more of a backlash from what I guess I
would perceive to be maybe my core
progressive audience you know -
generally well to the left of someone
like Hillary Clinton or Joe Biden but
still probably to the right of actual
socialists and communists so to speak so
some somewhere in there and in the sort
of world of social democracy and you
know my principle has been and going
back to the first thing we talked about
in kind of explaining to you the
philosophy of my show and how I've
gotten away from this idea of
on the one hand on the other hand the
view from nowhere and just really doing
every story the way I see it I recognize
that you're never going to see eye to
eye on every issue with any particular
person I mean with people that I
consider to be my strongest political
allies there there still can be areas of
disagreement and they're almost always
are so the approach that I've taken to
just do every story the way I see it
regardless of the consequences is based
in I just want to be genuine right and
if I start moderating and by moderating
I don't mean moving to the middle but I
mean being a moderator of my own speech
on the basis of what I think the
audience reaction will be it's it's
actually potentially a slippery slope I
don't want to get into and I'm always
cautious of slippery slopes when I don't
think they apply but that actually could
be a slippery slope I don't want to get
into you so for example there was a
recent story in the United States about
a congresswoman named Alan Omar where
she made some comments related to the
Israel lobby and there were a number of
perspectives on what she said ranging
from it was downright evidence of her
personal anti-semitism all the way to
the other side of it was a perfect
analysis that was in no way tinged with
anti-semitism and I took what I knew
would be a position that some of my
audience would disagree with or or take
issue with but I decided to take it
anyway
you know if I looked at my youtube
analytics I probably had a net loss of
subscribers as a result of doing that
story and that's okay and I think that
my perception is that most of the
audience that is supporting me
financially is supporting me not because
they expect that they're going to agree
with me on every issue but because they
can trust that I'm going to be genuine
with them about every issue and not
calculate my perspective on the basis of
what I think will be appealing to the
people that are watching me if that
makes sense we're in a media environment
that really doesn't reward nuance it
seems absolutely and on all of these
issues very often
the most controversial issues where
maybe my audience and I have clashed my
core audience as I as I would call them
our issues where if you ignore the
nuance that I am at least attempting to
present and sort of make a caricature of
my position you really are completely
missing the point that I'm making so
another example would be Venezuela
Venezuela has been one that I'm
particularly interested in as an
immigrant from Argentina to the United
States and someone who sort of grew up
in a house where Latin American South
American politics were a topic of
significant discussion I have made every
attempt to sort of make very clear
whenever Venezuela comes up and the
Maduro Chavez regimes come up to make
very clear that I'm against American
intervention in Venezuela I'm against
you know military involvement by the
United States and Venezuela that
historically American involvement in
that region of the world has been
disastrous for for the region for the
people of the region but that as a non
authoritarian leftist I am NOT a
supporter of Chava
I was not a supporter of Chavez I am NOT
a supporter of Maduro and unfortunately
the reaction from many of those in my
core audience is David how dare you
support the United States putting a
puppet president in Venezuela which of
course is not an argument that I'm
making so and that's not even
particularly nuanced right I mean from
my point of view it's I don't like the
regime and I don't think it should be
the United States that gets involved in
replacing it it to me it's it's barely
nuanced but unfortunately in an
environment that doesn't seem to take
super kindly to the on the one hand on
the other hand sort of thing I've
definitely suffered as a result of
taking those positions I'm really
interested in in reflecting on a few
recent piece or a few recent media
encounters that showed up sort of some
of the culture clash between alternative
and mainstream and also UK in u.s. maybe
starting with the sort of very high
profile
clash between Andrew Neil on the BBC and
Ben Shapiro why don't you just say that
you're on the left it's so hard for you
why can't you just be honest it's a
serious question
mr. Shapiro if you only knew how
ridiculous that statement is you
wouldn't have said it so let's move on
absolutely yeah I mean so is there a
particular I mean do you want to get my
general sense of it so to speak yeah why
don't why don't you why don't you sketch
out what you made of it from there I
mean how familiar with the iewk because
it seemed that Ben Shapiro in particular
wasn't very familiar with UK
journalistic styles which is very
combative very sort of devils advocate
questioning and he seemed to completely
misunderstand and quite amusingly for a
british purse british watcher because
Andrew Neil is famously right-wing he
accused Andrew Neal of being clearly a
left-wing interviewer yeah I thought
that there were you know that my
analysis I I maybe am more familiar with
that style than at least ben shapiro
appeared to be during that particular
interview although my familiarity with
with Andrew Neil was was limited
although I was generally aware of him as
a as a conservative individual
personally so I wasn't so surprised by
the interviewing style my surprise was
really maybe as you're hinting at the
way that ben shapiro handled it who
within the context of the united states
and often in particular during these
events that he does at colleges and
universities where he's being questioned
primarily by by college students
effectively there's this idea that he's
never rattled and that his mind operates
so quickly and that you can't trick him
in any way and that he's always one step
ahead and ready with the sort of most
powerful brutal refutations as many
YouTube clip titles like to point out so
I was most surprised by the way that he
was so thrown off by the way the
interview was going um and then it got
very quickly to where you know two
principles that ben shapiro espouses
almost to a level of satire in the
United States are this idea of facts
don't care about your feelings and also
being very much against so-called
identity politics as
to find in a sort of very particular way
and where it kind of broke down was that
been violated both of those ideas right
his incorrect perception of the identity
of the interviewer caused him to sort of
cut it short on the basis that this
progressive left-wing whatever term you
want to apply to the interviewer was not
interviewing him in good faith or was
employing some kind of gotcha questions
or however you you want to analyze it
one of his principles in the context of
how he's known in the u.s. is that
identity is not relevant in situations
like this that it's all about what are
the facts and in a sense his feelings
sort of got the best of him his feelings
overrode the facts which were the the
questions posed to him by the
interviewer and the reality that the
interviewer was actually a conservative
personally not not on the left so that
was the what was so interesting to me
that someone who is known in the US as
being sort of unshakably principled in
identity doesn't matter it's all about
the facts it's all about reality
abandoned that as he was very rattled by
the way that the interview was carried
out yeah I mean this is a good time to
to mention Dave Rubin so I went
interview Dave Rubin a bit over a month
ago now and put the interview out
probably two weeks ago something like
that and I I first found out about the
intellectual diet web through Dave
Reubens
show and so I was sort of very I guess I
was i admired a lot of the conversations
that I'd seen on the show and I haven't
paid a huge close attention to the other
interviews that he'd done and then in
the research for the interview that I
did with Dave I dug up quite a bit of
stuff that made that that gave me a few
concerns and I knew that going in for my
own sort of self-respect as a journalist
I had to ask some more probing questions
Michael the criticisms that I see any of
you that I think have some some validity
is sometimes you draw this you talk
about a new center evolving but
draw that new center around some people
that that I would consider on the right
let Stefan Stefan modern you for example
well I've never said that stefan
molyneux Xin the new center
I really have you ever heard me say that
I thought you had no I checked again
after the interview one of the reasons I
got in touch as well is that this has
started happening more and more at Dave
Reubens events that there are people who
are asking him why won't you talk to
contra points why won't you talk to Carl
kolinsky why won't you talk to Sam cedar
why won't you talk to David Pakman and I
know recently as well that he he said on
stage that you'd lied about him or he
gave a reason why he wasn't going to be
interviewed by you or to interview me I
guess it was yeah he said
Pacman's lied about me I think it was a
bunch of times or many times or
something like that I still you know if
that's the case then I really want to
know what what those lies or you know I
would argue that they wouldn't really be
lies they might be Mis statements which
I very well might have made about Dave
Rubin I just don't know what they are I
haven't heard so far I mean listen my
perspective is so I'm not a journalist
per se dave rubin is not a journalist we
are doing programs that are commentary
interview analysis call it sort of what
you want so you know my primary
criticism of the way that dave rubin has
carried out interviews are sort of
there's two criticisms one is I think
that left-wing voices outside of the
so-called intellectual dark web have
been mostly excluded now I know that
recently there were assertions made that
Dave is interviewed I don't know if he
said it was socialists and communists or
lefties and communists or something like
that that may be true I don't I don't
know who those folks are and I'd be
interested in knowing about that but I
think generally speaking if what you
don't have to give equal voice to all
sides of the political spectrum that's
totally fine not to but I think that if
you are sort of asserting that there is
a sort of open-door policy to all sorts
of ideas then I think it would be best
to more equally
represent ideas from a variety of sort
of placements on the political spectrum
so that's been one of my criticisms and
you know we I tentatively at one point
was going to be appearing on on Dave's
new program and then it didn't happen
and it's not completely clear to me
exactly why and I think at this point I
don't have the open invitation that at
one point I did so I would be glad to be
one of those people and I would be glad
for others to be those folks you know my
particular interest in this is that I
used to be relatively friendly with Dave
and we used to text and have phone calls
with some sporadic regularity I guess it
would be the term I would apply to it
and since I interviewed him on my
program for an hour we've had almost no
communication and there's been what I
perceived to be sort of like a cutting
of what was at one point a very cordial
and friendly relationship and I don't
know why that is I don't know he's never
expressed that he wasn't happy with how
the interview with me went where I did
go into policy in the way that I liked
to healthcare taxation etc so that's
sort of my personal interest in it as
far as the one other thing I'll say is
as far as the interview style yes I've
been critical of giving a platform and
that's the term I use and I don't use it
preservative Lee when you have a
platform and you invite someone to it
you are sharing that platform with the
other person I take special care because
of how I manage my show where if I am
platforming someone whose ideas I
perceive to be extreme dangerous
discriminatory problematic I make sure
that I'm responsibly platforming them
which includes both being prepared to
take on what I perceive to be bad
arguments and not being afraid to make
clear that I disagree with some of those
arguments or positions I would like to
see Dave do that and as I've told him
personally he can kind of manage those
interviews however he wants but it's not
how I would feel good about handling
some of those interviews now the reason
maybe he doesn't feel comfortable being
that adversarial that would be
perfectly fine the reason may be that he
agrees with those things that maybe I
see as problematic positions or some
other reason I don't know what the
reason is but it's not how I would sort
of run my program if there are critiques
out there of Dave Rubin or whoever which
are limited to this is a person who is
doing something wrong because of the
political orientation of their guests
period that is guilt by association and
it's it's also just not really a serious
critique I think that my critique of the
instances or the episodes of the Dave
Rubin program that I have made focus on
number one do I believe that there is
irresponsible platforming taking place
with regard to if there are known bad or
incorrect ideas or ideas that are
discriminatory ideas that are xenophobic
or whatever is the interviewer well
enough prepared to push back against
those and whether or not I mean you can
be prepared and still choose not to push
back I don't think that that is
responsible platforming I don't think
that that serves any serious
journalistic or cultural purpose most
people who sort of exist in the west and
have access to the Internet and to media
know that xenophobia exists that white
supremacy exists that anti-semitic
conspiracies exists so on and so forth
and I don't understand the value of
merely giving someone a platform to
espouse those ideas so what I'm for is
responsible platforming I have
interviewed all sorts of right-wing
people people with really disgusting
views but the only way that I feel good
about it about doing it is if it's made
abundantly clear that is I disagree with
these horrible ideas and I'm prepared to
push back against them so to the extent
that Dave Rubin has done interviews for
example with folks like Brigitte Gabriel
where she actually touts anti-semitic
conspiracy theories and Dave doesn't
push back against it that's what my
critique is of it's not of the fact that
he interviewed someone who's a right
winger
I completely agree that's not really a
good
it's not a productive one and it's not
going to I mean listen we the left
should engage with the right the right
if it wants to should engage with the
left but it needs to be done in a
responsible way and that's my approach
to it since the interview that I did
with Dave Rubin there have been quite a
few pieces on various left-leaning
channels about him not just off because
of my interview although Sam cedar did
pick it up and run something on my
interview and I get a sense of almost
like a feeding frenzy around him at the
moment and is that something that you're
picking up I'm picking it up as well I
think it's gotten momentum and I think
that there has been sort of because of
the you know that there's no better way
to get something discussed on a bunch of
YouTube channels than to mention the
names of the hosts of those YouTube
channels to some of these people that
have shown up at Dave's events and said
hey what about David Pakman or Sam cedar
of contra points that's a great way to
get that story onto those shows for
better or worse but I do think you know
listen what's going on with Dave Rubin
is not uniquely bad I think it's a
combination of sort of a a an audience
capture sort of dynamic combined with a
predisposition from any of these
internet enclaves to really adhere to
the type of content that sort of is
de-facto produced on Dave's channel and
I think that there is a bit of a feeding
frenzy going on and I'm sort of trying
to be careful not to devolve into the ad
homonyms to restate that I think he and
I could have a really great conversation
which I maintain my openness to
participate in and sort of leave it at
that I also want to sort of take it out
a little bit to say so he's obviously
been being challenged quite a bit and
there's there's quite a lot of critiques
of Dave out there already and it this
seems to be a feature of the polarized
landscape as well I know like Sam cedar
for example and I think Michael Brooks
on Sam cedar show there's quite a lot
and Anna Anna
ana kasparian as well
there's quite a lot of critiques of Dave
that in a way I can see that the
audience of those shows wants people to
beat up on Dave Rubin so that becomes so
the tone of those critiques seems to
become more and more combative and then
the chances for any kind of dialogue are
the chances of Dave sort of being able
to say well yeah I'll let out I'll
welcome these people onto my show then
seems to to deteriorate massively
because of the tone of those critiques
do you see what I mean like that
polarization seems to make good faith
dialog even more difficult absolutely I
mean on the one hand why are some of
these voices not being interviewed by
Dave Rubin but on the other hand I
completely see why he would not be
inclined to bring voices on that are
sort of levying harsher and harsher
criticisms against him in terms of their
tone as it goes sort of like above and
beyond the fact so that's why I've you
know I have a track record that is not
something to brag about it's just a
reality of being able to have civil
conversation with almost anybody now
sometimes when I say that people will
write to me and say David it's no big
accomplishment to be able to calmly talk
to Nazis right and it's not I'm not
citing it as an accomplishment in that
sense I mention it in order to be able
to say although I have these differences
with Dave Rubin or with whoever with ben
shapiro or name anybody if we decide hey
we're going to sit down and really
figure out where do we agree where do we
disagree what are the lines of this sort
of this debate assuming that it doesn't
evolve into personal attacks against me
I'm gonna have no problem carrying that
out in a civil way we're really the
focus is going to be substance rather
than attacks or tone or whatever so I've
tried to make it clear that these are my
disagreements with Dave Rubin in terms
of what he's putting out on online but I
would sort of relish the opportunity to
respectfully figure out where is he
coming from on these things you know the
last conversation I had with him as I
mentioned was this hour interview I did
with him at this point it might be two
years ago or more so I completely on
understand why as people become more
sort of virulent in their critiques why
he would be disinclined to allow them to
participate on his program that being
said I also am unsure why someone for
example who is openly homophobic or
anti-semitic which relates to two you
know identities that that Dave Rubin is
part of why they would be I see that I
see platforming that without serious
challenges just as problematic as sort
of keeping out broad swaths of the
political spectrum yeah there is
something quite ironic I I find in in
what's going on at the moment and I'm
bringing in sort of Ben Shapiro here as
well in in his criticisms of Andrew Neil
and that there is almost a mirror image
of what they accuse the left or social
justice warriors of doing of tone
policing of no platforming of pre
deciding that a conversation is not
going to be constructive and that feels
very ironic like that there is something
very that there is there is something
that's very similar about those two
perspectives yeah and I'd love to have
the opportunity to really explore that
in in in some detail for sure I mean
being against identity politics but then
making identity arguments or being
against sort of limiting the scope of
voices or the ideas that are heard but
then not sort of actively pursuing more
diversity of voices in in those ways and
you know I do think that in without
inviting me on anyone's program I think
that there would be a very interesting
conversation to have with whether it's
Dave or whether it's Ben Shapiro or
whoever about what I perceived to be a
contradiction as far as that goes and
I've made some video clips on my channel
about those those apparent
contradictions and I think it would be a
great conversation to have and it would
not be a bad faith conversation I mean I
genuinely am interested in if someone
says identity politics is bad how do
they justify making identity arguments
you know I feel as though my view on
identity politics is relatively nuanced
which is using identity as a sort of
cudgel
to suppress voices and to say only those
who check a certain box should be
listened to or primarily should be the
ones listened to I'm against that
but it would also be ignorant to ignore
the reality that one's identity relates
to their experience in the world and
thus there may be some special value or
particular value in considering that
when we are exploring what we should be
doing as humans on this planet in terms
of figuring out the problems that face
us are you familiar with Jonathan
heights work very much so yes and I've
interviewed him in read recently read
the there is it the righteous mind the
coddling of the American mind is the
most recent one the righteous mind is
about how good people are divided by
politics that's the one I read yeah yeah
I mean I think his work is absolutely
crucial to to understanding if if
political belief is largely based on
temperament then we have to keep talking
to each other and the separation into
armed camps which is what seems to be
happening through the kind of WL
sense-making wmd of social media seems
to be one of the most existential
threats that we're we're facing
absolutely and privately I've been
talking to a lot of people about what
are some techniques that have actually
been able to sort of open the door to
these cross party lines conversations
and there you know are some specific
techniques that I've come across which I
think are useful which I'm glad to talk
about but maybe are not really the scope
of our conversation today but I do
believe that there are lots of ways that
these conversations can happen and I
think it's undeniable that social media
is not facilitating any of that I'd
certainly be interested if you were able
to run through them fairly quickly yeah
I mean just a couple of ideas and some
of these I employ them on my program
when I have adversarial callers I mean
one thing is a great basis for a
conversation between people who disagree
is asking the other person to sort of
read back to you or to explain to you
what do they perceive your position to
be and maybe more importantly why do
they think you've arrived at that
position so for it
ample health care debates can be
extraordinarily divisive just to take an
issue like that I am on the left and I
believe that some sort of single-payer
nationalized or otherwise universal
system is the way forward although I'm
relatively agnostic about the specifics
rather than just like diving into a very
heated conversation about that with
someone who thinks the market system is
best if I asked them listen you know my
position why do you think I have my
position how do what what what led me to
arrive at my position if they are good
faith participants which will be very
quickly exposed by a question like that
merely by reading back to me why they
think I believe what I believe they are
going to be significantly predisposed to
listen to my ideas because they are
probably going to attribute good faith
reasons to how I arrived at my
conclusion they might say well listen
you probably think it's the most
efficient way to get the best care to
the most number of people if someone
just says that that is instantly
changing the tone and the tenor of the
conversation away in a way that I think
is very positive I tend to follow that
up with given your position on this
issue
what evidence if I was able to present
it to you would would change your mind
and this is something I first heard from
Peter Boghossian the de feasibility test
although I've seen it from others as
well just those two questions to set up
a conversation about most political
issues will significantly include the
chances of it being productive and maybe
of actually making some progress on
these issues it's interesting so we as I
said we featured the intellectual dart
web quite a lot and there's some talk
about what it is and whether there could
be a kind of IDW protocol for good-faith
conversation that that and that I think
could be part of it I think steel
Manning is something that Eric Weinstein
talks about which is kind of what you're
talking about in your what you were just
saying is can you restate back to me my
own argument in a way that I'll agree
with I I think that there's definitely
significant overlap in the ideas yeah
from my perspective sort of I'm thinking
about what is the the other side of the
culture war dynamic that we're looking
at
I think it is something like
appreciating that everyone has values
that are important and Jonathan heights
work I think is really perfect for this
to show that there are five moral
tastebuds liberals are more sensitive to
two of them conservatives are more
sensitive to the others and that also
that there's a sense that any ID on any
any set of values when taken to an
extreme can become an ideology and then
you're in some sense you're divorced
from an evolutionary conversation at
that point in that you can't really
engage with anyone else because you've
fixated your values into an ideology I
think that's right in the last year and
a half or two years one of the most
valuable experiences I had when it comes
to this is I actually went to rural
northern Indiana in the Midwest of the
United States which is real Trump
country it's Church country and it's gun
country I mean it's basically a place
where you drive down these country roads
and the only things you pass are gun
ranges and churches and in spending some
time there and in talking to people I
understand why they voted for Trump
I understand how abortion becomes this
voting issue for large swaths of the
country I understand how guns sort of
take on the cultural significance that
they do for many people in the United
States it didn't change my views but it
definitely changed my perspective on oh
yeah I actually understand how if this
is the environment you grow up around
you end up with the political views that
seem totally antithetical to my sort of
northeastern United States cosmopolitan
views and it was an extraordinarily
enlightening experience particularly in
making me think about what are the best
and wait I still think that they're
wrong on policy but how can I better
engage with them on those issues great
David thank you very much for for making
the time
my pleasure I was so great to speak to
you
[Music]
you