[Music]
[Music]
I'd like to start with a Verico who's
done brilliant work of separating
intelligence rationality alright yeah
yeah I've been following that as well
yeah yeah that has to be understood as
three different levels you could say
like the drive system with it then I
would wait up as well we took the
original two distinctions for
psychoanalysis from say Jacques Lacan
said there's driving there's desire and
their conflict with one another we said
that there's four there's a king sting
ring is Drive there's desire and this
transcendence and they're all drives so
they're all something inside of you that
wants something right instinct is
animalistic instinct it was to share
with animals animals operate according
to instance OD human beings we do it
from the day were born little Gabriel
crawled to his mother's tit soon as
possible yeah in Hey
the other one is drive which is eerily
weird because it exists between desire
and instinct is a mechanistic okay
something inside of you that wants some
point so when you sit with a therapist
or an analyst and you analyze your drive
system you will discover the drive a
certain different from instinct watch a
little in Europe whereas drive has the
party buddy some pops up from out of
nowhere it demands of you that it what
it wants in a mechanistic fashion it's
almost like you're a machine and that's
exactly what happens we were exploited
in mode or the negative archetype it's
almost like an archetype controlling you
or something it's not a negativity if
you're gonna survive a little fucking
each part of the drive system you need
to fucking drink when you're thirsty
the other one is desire desire is
exclusively human so that wasn't a star
system that is human is part of desire
that means desire is tied to language we
cannot have decide unless have language
first you don't see higher operating in
the newborn child for example but as
soon as we have language and we started
use words so we say things like you
there and me here and was not a language
we will also create desire
iris is a real knockout because desire
wants only one thing and that's the main
aim itself so desire has by nature it's
like oh I won't that woman I really want
that woman and then will you get what
you wanted your sire has already moved
on to something else yeah
do you see also hero desire also because
of language operates any rearm where he
will turn you into an exploitative
machine
well well Jared says the desire is by
nature a memetic right it's the medic in
the sense you learn the words from
somebody else yes but it's tied to
language its linguistic and it's
therefore deeply human now the problem
is that if you take religion out of
psychoanalysis you and what pretty much
there now if you take religion bad
people cycle mothers listen you just
make the radical move John so dickfist
and I did in digital libido which is to
say that wait a second would strive
towards something higher and more noble
not for ourselves to be superior to our
neighbors but rather because you want to
achieve something in our lies mm-hmm
that is called transcendence and
transcendence should be described as a
drive it shouldn't be strive as the
thing in itself that we strive for it
should be destroyed simply as to drive
the complements instinct Drive and
desire instinct pure driving desire so
do you the fourth one is transcendence
now if you make that pattern you see
that drive is a meta instinct and you
see that entire is a meta drive and you
see some of the transcendence is
essentially a meta desire you could even
go to shock Lacan who claimed he was not
religious and it was of course the end
of psychoanalysis as we know it
you can basically tell shock you don't
really discuss anywhere you work what
you do with a successful patient or the
successful model it's on if you
succeeded with young person or your
advice in psychoanalysis
what do you do with the guy succeeded
that's just the end right it's over
right at that point no it's not over
exactly it's not a mistake that's what
religion starts perhaps exactly that's
why the only way to get out of say
Slovaks current predicament
it's to recognize that he's religious
and his religion is called communism and
I actually shared with him it's another
religion but it's a good religion so you
you you got to understand trance as a
fourth Drive no you can then go back and
take Sean for various excellent work and
realize that intelligence that we need
to understand how quickly because
obviously we're making machines in one
of them it's only the basis on which you
can then based rationality as Amanda
intelligence once you got arrived at
rationality I've to understand the
limits to rationality John for Varkey
and study Chris and I both call these
trance rationalism we've invented the
term separate from one another
so that is that is can I can I see if I
understand wisdom is not merely
rationality and intelligence is that
correct no it's you take rationality if
you are you recently be rational and
rational it's not only logical it's way
more than that don't provide excellent
work explaining this so give me no mark
it once again lissajous different
episodes I think this is like episode 40
or 41 and you get to the idea that
rationality is way more than logic so
rationalism
you know so if you don't a rationality
only have intelligence you get a very
stupid machine you're very me and the
world is unfortunately full of people
are very high IQs but incredibly stupid
right right and they're dangerous right
it's only the basis on which you can
then build the rationality rationality
thrives really arise where it should be
when becomes rational understand and
maybe that social rationality is the
basis on which you can build the
transcendence wait a second no on which
won't build wisdom wisdom sorry it's
like it sort of builds each time right
okay okay we should have a whiteboard
here but try to keep the cute sample we
talk about transcendence is possible
about a drive okay
so the drive system is instinct dry pure
drive itself the mechanistic right
desire which is human and transcendence
which is divine so you have those four
drives now keep them separate that's
part of soda taste now go to young for
VAR
steep studies and incredible great
started some cognitive science when the
differentiation between intelligence
which is performative it's the beginning
of the basis on that you can build
possibly rationality it's not guaranteed
and rationality arrives at a point to be
called trance rationalism an
understanding or rationality can
actually do and because you arrive at
that it's happening along the time axis
this is a wasteful path you can only
earn with age you can only earn the time
and the wisdom you start understand what
is the wise thing to do yeah oh and we
need more wisdom which Verve a key calls
relevance realization I think that's his
term right he says it over over it again
that's still with irrational it because
that's where you arrive at an experience
of which you can build mmm-hmm you know
relevance realization in itself is not
enough you have to go to the meta level
which we called trance rationalism you
have to go to the meta level to
understand what are you gonna do with
these relevance realizations that you
had they said more like a brain function
or a mind functions just like okay this
is relevant because it's relevant I'm
gonna put tons of energy into memorizing
it and use it as a future tool mm-hmm
okay that means that intelligence just
becomes dangerous and causes havoc
unless it is directed mm-hmm it has to
have some kind of a direction we're back
in pit the phallic that I'm lacking in
John for Veronica's work but he's a
cognitive scientist and he's a Buddhist
why would he interest in the phallic
unless somebody explicitly tells him
that well foul against what's lacking
here what is their direction and wisdom
and only then exist when wisdom teaches
you that the phallic and the metrical
have purchased both of our food system
parallel they're not different
substances the different attributes of
the same substance and the name of that
substance is the tribe the way you and I
are not separate entities we are unified
through the tribe as the fundamental
entity of humanity and as members of the
tribe we become archetypes you become
different types of men women and
anything in between a conservative
and our lives are totally meaningless
unless we do precisely that
that is why my search for religion today
and for religion they unify Stefanik in
the metrical is all the way back to the
very origin of religion where hardly
anybody else seems neat history and the
word for that is no my knowledge II know
mythology is the original religion the
reason why we need the religion in the
first place and what we create its
religion itself it's sort of the
blueprint of yeah so to reformulate and
reconstruct or construct a religion that
works for us today our word provided
Sufism we need to go back and say okay
what is phallic it was a magical and we
didn't necessarily do that division of
the senses and book doesn't we need to
write the third book now in a trilogy to
explore that idea totally and I think it
has to do with great different missions
where all phallic it could tokenism
cosmopolitanism and working on that we
now for now called experimentalism as it
is really to arrive in what the
Zoroaster is called a permanent state of
ever refreshing innovation and thats
thing is called how about taught in so
Astroworld iran is thought of it three
thousand seven hundred years ago it
seems that passed by everybody else
because everybody else was obsessed with
perfection but it's not perfection it's
an ever refreshing state of constant
innovation and the question that is
tested human beings is that can you be
part of that can you as a human being
part of that because I cannot guarantee
as a human you have a role in the future
world because the exodus we need to make
into this sort of augmented equatorial
cosmopolitan world the Exodus we need to
make it only be opened to those who take
on this attitude we're gonna be part of
an everlasting ever refreshing
experiment mmm-hmm
that is the future humanity so this is
the exodus we're moving towards we don't
have a name for yet we call the Tennyson
with the new Babylon because of course
it's not the New Jerusalem and its
cosmopolitan it's not so new Babylon
could be good name for it but
let's just think with that for now as a
theme and we're trying to build that
into the next book set up in iron and
have a full map I did mm-hm
and you call it experimental ISM huh
yeah for now yeah for now know anybody
who listens to this conversation has
gotten this far can certainly
participate in you know laborat in all
the different terms and we probably will
all jump when we see the name of a place
or what state that we're looking for but
a state of constant informants in a
state of humanity in the future and this
can be of course a man who can meet the
Machine MMH and to us today this must be
perceived as being messianic that it's
precisely you and I talk about the
medieval Messiah or about the messianic
well with the Messianic come from when
we go into state of man-machine
collaboration in everything we do mm-hm
where were to come from yeah well to
begin with the Machine will demand of us
that we collaborate as human beings the
Machine will demand communism from us
that is actually believe it okay you
have to unpack that because I don't
really understand that the Machine will
demand communism from us what what the
hell do you mean by that well that we
have to stop exploiting each other okay
because I mean it says because it's
unsustainable or it is unsustainable
exactly it sounds terrible it's just
cruel and it's meaningless and it just
reveals like the Joker movie Jaws it
reveals that the state we arrived at is
absurd
yeah it's absurd okay the first thing
that atheism is done
for secularism has done is that it's
turned it into permanent procedure did
you say permanent Joker children
children children yeah you cannot grow
up without religion you have nothing to
grow up to
yeah I agree with that yeah so what is
it that the Polian and Hitler and Stalin
having come and I'm bringing Napoleon in
it with the bad guys for a change but
you know certainly Napoleon was the mild
version of it Hitler and Stalin were
much worse versus of it what do we call
these guys are they men the little boys
yeah yeah powerful tools there little
boys and there there there people who
didn't you know flourish in some kind of
a way they became demented and perverted
what happened what happened in here also
my 1945 yeah we dropped a bomb exactly
a bomb that would destroy us all unless
he was contained how do you contain the
atomic bomb you're starting your
religion that contains the bomb we will
not be able to contain the atomic bomb
and that's a way worse threat tossed and
climate we will not contain the atomic
bomb but lesser formulas and religion
that we all accept mm-hmm where the bomb
is being contained me if the bump
needs to be in the hand grownups it must
have come into the Handy children
otherwise we see Lord of the Flies mix
with apocalypse that is the real threat
yeah yeah the real threat is children
taking over the world with powerful
tools powerful not the struggle weapons
Oh what did we do with the bomb both of
the Soviet Union in the United States we
contained the bomb by creating an
elaborate system when no kid on his own
could golf and press the button hmm
that's a minimum of security against
ourselves being these children who are
grumpy and suddenly blow up everything
so the search for wisdom starts already
there we have we have a nucleus of a
search for wisdom that's applicable to
our age that starts with hiroshima
august 1945 the problem was that that
created the trauma
we're so terrified of the phallic energy
being in the wrong hands like being a
boy like Hitler a boy like Stalin
insecure power over the world so because
it was Hitler and Stalin and Mao who
created the atomic bomb you know Hitler
could have had the bomb he could East
have had it America's managed to create
only possible we're working on it
installing credible a 12-mile crater
bomb mmm it's precisely these rasoi and
little boys you created atomic bomb
and that bombed recipes now spreading
and all the tapes of some cynical little
Pakistani boy I'll give it to some boy
out there from some other territory that
once it does / did blow things up we all
know that if Islamic state had had
access to the atomic bomb the world
where I gunned down in flames it was
this close so if we look real threat
it's not even quite a bet this costly
look into the real threat which is the
third world war run by atomic bombs
mm-hmm that war can only be described as
something that can come out of a secular
world where children are allowed to run
the show and press the bottle of the
bomb yeah we need influence systems with
systems of wisdom that prevents that
from happening
that's the triumph of the Joker if I
come back to the movie in a way you know
there's this part where you got this
bloody smile at the end and he's kind of
gleeful it's like you know it's the Glee
of the terrorist who's actually that's
what he wants right he on some level he
doesn't know better and why because he's
a child who cannot go out because he's
not provided with a religion where he
can grow up religion is the space within
which we grow up from children to
grownups mm-hmm okay
we entered the world of path for so long
that's a good definition of a religion I
like that we leave the world we leave
the world of myth us where children are
being brought up and walk into the world
the first logos and later pathos we walk
into the world of science and sexuality
that's essentially what I call the
grown-up world and religion introduces
us to those words so we can comprehend
them understand them and use them in the
right way we were there other ways the
two things who will fail on our violence
and sexuality hey where are we failing
today violence and sexuality you know
clearly jewelry arms of logos and pathos
and they're not for children those
drones are not for children real
religion is not for children that's what
we tell children fairytales mythical
vehicles instead of providing them with
proper religion with the children so
they ready to be introduced into proper
religion and the name for that
introduction is the initiation ritual
mmm okay so if you go back with your
1945 what has been the cost we've paid
at least keep nuclear bombs locked up
within some
the wisdom what is the pricing paid for
that the price you paid for that is that
we blamed father's for for it for the
problem yeah so the atomic bomb was this
big dick or something that we're not it
was a big dick sorry it was it hey watch
out watch out both Hitler Stalin in my
work where boy yours uh-huh
they watched they watch the sexual
ritual they did not participate in it
you will never find a porn movie any of
the three of them fuck otherwise you
probably would have found that by now so
my voids that makes them boys I'm
looking for the big one who and then
imitate what the big men do and then
throw the big men out of the picture by
being rude boys right the Lord of the
Flies all the way through so what we did
was that we did not differentiate 1945
between authentic and fake follows
that's what come into this no I finally
do engage it to libido we've finally
reread the history with a work of nickel
and from you know the the British
philosopher losing time we used nickel
on as a starting point or we said that
no no we have to go back and revisit
1945 and also understand the costs
involved without saying that all phallus
is wrong yeah because all phallus is not
without fathers were lost
we have no direction to our religion we
have no vision and we can count a cop
who might have any strategy there's no
phallic wisdom in the world today
well we're desperate lacking is fallible
don't get guys like Joker blue buzzer he
got Joker at home with his mother
watching TV becoming you know psychotic
or something exactly and and and or
Hitler figure or or or terrorist figure
or you know yeah exactly so we need a
good solid phallic wisdom here so how do
you prepare how do you make what happen
with that what phallic religion is all
about my response to that is to go back
to the purest form of phallic models and
that exist which is a raster listen you
can also go back to Taoism for example
you can take the the young separate from
the yin and we're young you can create
the phallic in Chinese culture which
Thien Tinh unfortunate or ignored he
should have taken it on right if
if I could add tantric Buddhism and I
think David Chapman would agree with me
exactly that's what we agree with
Chapman that's what we love time to
Buddhism oh my onna Buddhism to be given
Buddhism in response to store asterism
includes the phallic element because it
is monist
you cannot have a monastic religion that
ignores either the phallic or the
magical the way Western religion did so
so asterism as a large place for matric
on the mat before this begs or accidents
was preached equality between the
genders and equality and importance
between Patrick a matter key for three
thousand seven hundred years that's why
the world is full of strong Iranian and
Kurdish women so that's the evidence of
that culture so it's not a neglect
Dometic he said direct motion that we're
live you know woman and child will
always success the problem is that we
haven't really understood the value of
the fully grown up religion of the
phallic religion which is the religion
of men this is the religion that contain
pain violence it contains engineering
and architecture mm-hmm every damn
building in the world every damn road in
the world is built by men not by women
or children okay so the phallic religion
we have to go back and understand the
distance between authentic and fake
phallus well we arrived at that is that
the fake father says his field day like
Hitler Stalin have a field day when you
first secularized the society
hmm whenever somebody says a this was
better than religion I'm like hey Hitler
Stalin Mao really yeah okay I mean a
system is the worst innovation we ever
did do you know usually from that
question they always say oh yeah I'm
with their religions too or something
but that's what it's very silly the only
difference between Joker and Hitler is a
joker so damn selfish that he only
thinks of himself and turned to solving
his own private Hitler whereas Hitler
wasn't least enough with that he wanted
to conquer the world according to jokowi
and there you see what Nazism is No so
the fake file is undeniably war and the
fake file it unifies people through
election hmm find something to hate your
chair for you go right which is of
course a religious behavior Renee she
racked by scapegoating by objectifying
something we unify the tribe so it's bad
religion but in this religion you're as
my Nazism is a gnostic religion that was
Stalinism it's a gnostic religion of a
Maoism is a gnostic religion exactly
like Christianity was before them in
Islam so these are Gnostic religions
their ligands are pretend the master key
in the Patrick air separate from one
another and you must choose one of them
in reality you need both otherwise you
cannot be grown up so question how do
you how do you have a religion with
without this scapegoat I think that's
where your bird that's what you've been
talking about but without that's the
Messiah the say yes so she aunt in irani
philosophy because originally Iranian
concept so if you have a father
collision and the reason why the
original phallic Manas religion is or
Astron ism is that it's the first
attempt at creating a philosophy of my
decision so say you're not walking
around any longer you're no longer
nomads that means no madala G is no
longer you need something more than no
mythology the first attempt this was
clearly saw roster sets out to do when
he created for us is to create a new
teaching that is based on our mythology
takes no my knowledge II into
perspective because I'm awkward
according with already clinically we
need to pay
results from the pneumatic instincts and
move ourselves into transcendence which
is a world of a permanent we're still
after 5,000 years trying to come terms
with the fact we creating permanent
settlements the obesity pandemic
slamming society they obviously result
of it mmm people are not moving around
they're not they need to move more than
I was sitting on their couch watching TV
they're not they're not as you say on
the move or and they need to move in
their heads to write anything no matter
ology should be applied on the body it
should be applied on the head so you
need to move and you need to move more
if you're a man than if you're a woman
somehow women get away with more when
they get older than men do but
physiologically and mentally a man has
to move yeah so so what's a raster did
he study basically says since we're not
gonna move our bodies the way we used to
we're gonna create a village of women
and children which is the inner circle
we're gonna let the men travel around
that and eventually cells down to by
creating farming and cattle racing
thereby creating abundance we've never
seen before in history that would be the
resource on which we can build
civilization and the great thing with
farming the way was constructed by the
Soraa so it was a reconstructed in
employed employed ative way it started
with irrigation the first major
engineering product project in the world
so irrigation is how it starts and
because you irrigate the earth and you
then you differentiate you so it's like
it's like a surgeon you know once your
blood flow to run efficiently through
your bodies you don't die it's the same
thing with irrigation you cannot move
farming unless you irrigate first this
will be controlled water and by learning
to control and take water we learn we
can domesticate materials we
domesticated ourselves we want from
children to grown up that's almost a
chenonceau challenge that's what we do
in the tribe mostly how they should be
bear each will let out but he should be
controlled and contained because we can
contain our sole store especially we can
contain young men young men also
realized they can contain materials they
can also domesticate plants animals and
suddenly good farming either town racing
and and you got civilization
then you can build on that every new
technology you develop that you pass on
to the next generation will create a
value of intendant's you improve on the
world now if you improve on the current
world and it's really about your
children but they will grow up and take
over and they will come your heritage so
they can create a better world of the
one you had starting with that whole
progress that not just process that
wouldn't settle progress progress tied
to practice has a name it has a
direction and the name of that paradise
that direction is the word communism hmm
care about two classes rights we need to
retake the word communism because we
have had some kind a word to reply to
the machines for the machines ask us so
what would you really really want which
would really set the tribe free to
explore fully what the tribe can
actually do yeah I suspect it will take
some time before this word is is you
know dissociated from all of its
negative connotations or well that's the
problem with everything you do within
philosophies that you use the word but
then you use it provocatively as I do
right salvation yeah you're using it
provocatively
and not in a dynamic way not automatic
because you should never be in dogmatic
wasn't even took my David Marx Karl Marx
clearly said that you need to reach a
certain stage in philosophy and in
history before you can even contemplate
the possibility and communism yeah Marx
would definitely had said no to learning
in 1918 to the Russian Revolution we
were remotely communist mmm-hmm he was a
little boys fantasy again a little boys
fantasy well again Lenin Lenin used Marx
philosophy but he ran ahead of a he run
ahead of the game if you don't
understand Jaime you're not wise with
some it's all about timing
yeah he's Marx philosophy and a very
unwise way and and that's that's kind of
Marxist philosophy seems to people use
Marxist philosophy in an unwise way it
seems to be like a large problem right
and Lenny would agree with us that he
died as a tragedy why because on his
deathbed he realized that Stalin would
replace him and he warned everybody
about Stalin but he hadn't warned
himself about himself he's owned
Stalinism yeah well then he was in a
hurry he was sort of half still and
wasn't he he had that dud you know I
mean he was in a hurry yeah he one of
the Communist society so badly wanted to
happen in Russia but Russia wasn't ready
for it there was no way was ready for
them certainly not China in 1949 either
that's why these sort of the Communists
and was seen China today is a parody of
communism mmm-hmm it's little scream ISM
everywhere is a parody of communism
isn't it communism hasn't existed yeah
but we allow Christians to say that
Jesus has not returned yet obviously
hasn't but why do we claim the communist
mess arrived anywhere when it hasn't it
clearly has not read Karl Marx communism
has not happened and it's still the
world for the full completion but know
it what the critique would be that he's
promoting violent revolution I mean
that's not how it happens either is it
or the critique is very simple if you
don't have a name for where you're going
where the fuck are you going
an American capitalist individual has no
idea where he's heading he is Joker he's
a self-obsessed little brat was no idea
where he's going I'm tired of American
capitalist and American individualism
okay that's one except those they ride
nowhere the other extreme as I was
reading about the Bolsheviks and and and
and the Red Terror and they really
wanted they really really going
somewhere they wanted to destroy
everybody who was a Kulak and you know
everybody everybody and their children
who was associated with the class they
wanted to destroy this class and
obviously I mean I told you what's that
call it that is called it's called fake
fellas okay it's fake yeah why would you
need to kill about it what do you do
when you do a proper Exodus you leave a
territory and walk into new one and
you tell the guys to leave on you can
explain her you can your main Egyptians
you don't have to be Hebrews but we're
leaving that's why the Exodus were
formulating in our next book is so very
much an exodus it's about this this is a
possible future for mankind
hmm are you up to it okay I'm all for
that right I love that that's great um
but I don't feel that in Marx Marx
doesn't use that kind of language he
doesn't go that deep he he doesn't talk
about the Exodus he talks about the
class right only so yeah sure but I'm
not saying Marx is the finished version
of anything I think we need to revisit
Marx we need to reconquer the word
communism I'm not a socialist I'm a
communist communism is simply I'm a
communist simply because that is the
proper response to what optimism and
individualism have become we become dead
ends
so you creating material abundance by
exploiting a planet wealth you created
the bomb that can blow us up at any
moment
yeah all of this is the result of the
system we've had on this secularization
of the planet it was the eighth system
of a fucking week Obama nobody else they
should be going for it so now we've got
that problem we need to solve it so one
thing is to turn all the resources we
have into something peaceful that's one
for nuclear power
I think nuclear power actually is the
only thing that can save the planet the
next 100 years are on it that's why I'm
Anika topi I'm not an environmentalist I
think the very Mentalist are sloppy and
stupid and childish do not take the
entire picture into account and we do
not have technological solutions to the
current problems and technologies the
only way we can solve problems we don't
have any other way of solving problems
as humans oh and the technology then be
put inside the container of religion
because if we can do that we can create
purple for young men and that purpose
would be I'm a young man I want to
become an engineer where I'm a young man
I'm going to become a priest you know
I'm a young man and I want to collect
data so that engineers and priests can
do something come on that's a wonderful
with the data
that's nitocris e that is the new upper
class we popped about it in our first
book which was though when it khakhra
see is where we're heading but we're not
heading to the talks about killing the
rest of humanity we're not gonna create
eugenics factors we wanted to create
concentration points we basically I sent
plenty of paper on this planet we leave
the rest of you guys behind and we walk
on to this new world hmm now who's
joining us yeah but if you're 23 years
old you think this sounds fancy because
your little boy and you want to be with
winners well you're not a winner because
you need to get your fucking it takes an
effort before the exodus could start
yeah takes wisdom very much so and the
respect for wisdom has to be wisdom that
is monastic in its approach to the world
modest but it has them both fairly
kinematical well we're going to dialogue
with American the other guys to see what
they think of it because we must not
talking about America all the time they
talk about the container but they're not
talking about the content and the
content you put inside the container
comes from afar like the urge to change
the world for the better the urge for
transcendence is a phallic energy mm-hmm
and urge for imminence maybe as a
matriarchal quality Ambani answer matric
call you have a call it man magic oh
excuse me yeah yeah because he met
charcoal you refer to the leadership of
women but magical just means generally
refers to the inner circuit which is
dominated by woman part of society the
women dominates and does so well it's
magical the phallic is the world is not
it's not exclusively for men but he's
dominated by the masculine energy or
course the Taoist would say it's
dominated by by the yang instead of the
yet mm-hmm so for me this is the return
to the east east is a return to Madison
hmm and it's also a way of understanding
these religions were developed along
trade routes that's why they so great
today to study today and from
if they were developed along the trade
routes that means they were tolerant of
other ideas they include also thought
really they were a structure called
schools of thought along the way
scissors along the trade routes we built
their only whorehouse in the bathhouse
as we also build school so thought
because of he schools these schools of
thought or what I call the Silk Road
tried these are the religions of the
east these are the mr. systems and the
wisdoms of the East we can learn a lot
from him and the reason why they were
all monist was because they all
influenced one another mm-hmm it's a
rich rich diverse this brings us back to
the cause of my pole what you would call
the cosmic yeah yeah because if you've
developed trading or if you're a priest
to build a rittle place you come in from
two different ends I'm beginning more
and more to think that ritual places did
not originate before trading started and
trading was a byproduct of rituals I
rather think they Co develops I think I
think the I think the priests leaving
your co-develop things and I think
priests engineer trader you got the
three different ones here they proudly
co-develop so if you look at say
Kyrgyzstan is the origin of civilization
or something like that which the problem
is you probably see that all language is
a communication tool use written
language the communication tool they use
to both store information and accumulate
information and use that information to
build more complex structures mm-hmm
that develops into written religion that
develops into architecture of
engineering and that develops
infiltrating and craving a certain
something what requires a weakened
language because you cannot have trade
without Diaries and spitting is very
phallic also isn't it it's it's
masculine activity isn't it's like
business or something today yeah yeah we
trade with one another to come back to
our women with some kind of an increased
abundance to impress them even more
mm-hmm yeah so yeah trade trade would be
very important also in this in the
global world right yeah and all of it
has to operate within the realm of
religion hmm all of it all of it all of
it yeah
there is the there is the room for the
the Western childish fantasy of what
secular world this would this was
Nietzsche's point with the death of God
we've killed God and we don't even
understand what we've done and that was
before we had the nuclear bomb before we
started discussing climate yeah he
imagined he was it was fantastic he was
he knew what would happen and he didn't
say we universal killed God he said we
have killed God in in the sense that he
was a German Protestant he said that we
in the West of God didn't go all the way
back to the fifth century like we do now
and say that we killed God by killing
the phallic God and only having a
magical God and that was the problem of
Christianity all along emerges theory is
a necessary theory you have to have if
everything is processed fundamentally so
if you say that everything is processed
fundamentally and any object or any
phenomena you find out there are buying
products or processes you need an
emergence three because obviously the
entire universe could not have been
pre-programmed into the Big Bang the Big
Bounce but when the universe starts on
fourteen billion years ago everything
that happened after that was not pretty
problem it just happens
right the world is not even in
deterministic is actually trans
deterministic that's how little
determinism there is in the universe
have it plants the community universe it
started from a place of absolutely no
space it didn't have any classical time
so space-time started out of it and out
of space-time as the original emergence
comes what physics later you know for a
few hundred thousand years later out of
physics starts another emergence called
chemistry and then on a specific planet
that we live on a couple of million
years ago out of chemistry came biology
the first life-forms
suddenly exist they just suddenly exist
okay
they obviously exist meaning that
emerges on something we have to question
itself we have to study what an
emergence is are there similarities
between the origin of biology the origin
of chemistry the origin of physics the
origin of space-time
do these
share something something similar with
them well to begin with I would say that
I propose that there has to be time
dimension and added tongue dimension
called global time or hyper time and
that hyper time is basically the time
that existed before the Big Bounce so if
the universe sort of imploded collapsed
and then a new universe came out of it
the new universe had a new specific time
that we called space-time and space
included in it
that's Einsteinian spacetime but that
would have been a time before that too
because otherwise required even think of
it you just call that hyper horn but
then you have to time Domitius why let's
go to then we can set along the hyper
time axis we can discuss history along
the hyper time axis then we can sort of
neutralized emergencies it's not that
physics is more important than chemistry
or chemists needs more in portable
biology even if one is conditional on
the other one the fact that a certain
emergence has to exist first before
another mergers can exist doesn't
necessarily mean that there is a
priority between them oh there's not
necessarily better than younger mm-hmm
if you realize that you can create an
idea of each emergence being a vector so
whenever the very first life form
existed and new emerges was there life
biology out of that you create a vector
that means biological life in whatever
form it has taken anywhere in the
universe starts from that emergence and
emergence vector or biology is the
result then you can just study biology
separately from the physics or chemistry
or work philosophy would you like you
can study biology on its own you can
make comparative studies you can for
example study exiting biology and you
can study complexity physics and lets it
implement separate from one another and
then compare them so you can learn from
one another you can also see where
they're different okay so that means
there are no laws of nature in the sense
of laws of nature exists before anything
else exists mm-hmm there are no such
laws there are only relationships power
relationships and and a possible
influences and in these forces that
exist in the universe our date-date
suddenly develop we
urghhh it means what we have to deal
with our habits of nature and if you
have a certain state of some kind of
tensed pretty permanent over time so you
have a similar temperature of a time
like you haven't planet Earth then
certainly it's can occur on that planet
that probably will not occur anywhere
else that that that that is a
consequence of that happening but he
wasn't it wasn't bound up or anything
like that before it happened it still
makes it very difficult but then you
realize it's 30 different emergencies in
a comparative fashion but you cannot
draw the conclusion when one emerge
doesn't that apply to the other one the
emergence of biology might operate very
differently from emergence physics the
only thing you can be sure of is that
it's radically different from the
emergency chimera mmm so it's like it's
like so you study study these things not
to conflate them or or exactly Scimitar
turn them into platonic ideals or
whatever the way you do that is that you
say an emergence is not a phase
transition mm-hmm because a phase
transition is like that that applies to
a constant say that well you know
there's water and water comes as guess
and it comes as liquid then he comes his
eyes yeah depending on depending on the
circumstances water we react differently
the same water molecule will act
differently but it will also react in
both directions so it's symmetric hmm
the thing about mergers though is that
they tend to be a symmetric happened
only once
suddenly they change the rules for
everything and within the vector they're
creating things behave in a very
different manner from anything you've
been a you observed before so there's a
lot of thinkers out the terrace Deacon
is what I'm studying at the moment who
doing emerges theory and taking it very
seriously the fact that emergence exists
doesn't mean we understand it but if you
can understand what emerges is we can
work with it now the problem is
emergence has become a buzzword for
people who hate phallus for people the
people who don't like the fact that
somebody might one day walk into the
room would be much wiser more
knowledgeable than you are and therefore
explain how the world operates and also
have a vision of where we should go next
you know somebody could be messianic
when you would proudly sit and babble
all day long with other people you would
claim but if you only talk to each other
only well you've got a conversation
properly there's something emerge out of
that well that's not how you arrived at
wisdom wisdom is not arrived at by
students talking to the students all the
time without teachers were important
mm-hmm waste of a rice that's a problem
with the gala to total egalitarianism
this extrema Galit arianism where we're
not acknowledging any let's say
hierarchy of confidence sir well I use
the word I gotta turn this and basically
for valuing human being equally valued
okay zero sense so we can no human
beings have any value outside of our own
fantasy that we have equal value so
that's what you secondly turn ISM no I
would say it's it's it's a celebration
of mediocrity this is all about it it's
the idea that mediocrity will lead us to
wisdom it will not it will lead us to
end what's babbling and and so when I
see people who say that if you only sit
together and learn the art of
conversation son suddenly something will
emerge out of that that will be the
solution to our problem no will not
contain nuclear bombs it will not save
our source of climate disaster by talk
yeah okay and then our last discussion
you talked about how it's probably not
these sort of trendy movements that are
gonna save the world that's going to be
like some shaman in the forest or some
brilliant person or I think I understand
my question as a like like who's gonna
who's going to be the people who are
going to lead us you know leave this
Exodus that you keep speaking of
thinkers and preachers so there's gonna
be very few people who do that who can
do that and they gotta have to isolate
themselves and think things through
thoroughly Simon quickly says this is
not a time for revolution this is time
for a retraction yeah so
need to build monsters and we need to go
into deep studies beep history meat
psychology beep religion mm-hmm
understand ourselves in our predicament
much better we have to do so
the people who do it have to have a
servant's attitude like the servant they
have to get over these sort of childish
states that you find in the Joker movie
so you just just need just bored without
character once a phone you just get
poured with a secularized infantile
Western individualist
he's just a boring boring character to
reach the end of his history so get out
of that and start understand you're a
tribal creature you're social creature
in need serve humanity and humanity we
have a name for where we come from
that's called numerology so that's how
our genes operate they also operate now
increasingly within an environment we
called civilization which we built over
the last 5000 years and all human beings
on the planet are by not permanent to
settle got any jeans and a t-shirt and a
smartphone and are connected but that's
we can start fun we have major
existential threats that we need to deal
with but we must not be so preoccupied
with in the we don't also see their
power so for me today anybody scared of
nuclear bombs and there are things we
cannot a nuclear power is an idiot it's
a typical metrical reaction without
Fallot the phallic and reaction is that
nuclear power can be contained and used
to create enormous amounts abundance of
cheap electricity which is what the
world needs more than anything today if
you have bundles of cheap electricity
which is to me a concrete phallic mulch
of the day then we can put incentives
out there everywhere to contain the
climate control requirement and if you
can domesticate the climate we can
cultivate the entire planet mm-hmm
that's messianic
massive massive geoengineering and yeah
and then we have to portray ourselves as
in a faculty man you would say the tribe
has to become a work of art so the
subculture world long too has to be seen
as a forthcoming work of art ok that's
the other side I meant
this experimentalism read in a constant
state of fresh renewal not striving
towards perfection mind you striving
towards maintaining a constant state
refreshing manual a hollow thought okay
Messianic here how do we great
conversation is a great conversation
yeah yeah I got one last thing I'm in my
mind about the Joker and that's this
figure of of the trickster and where
does he fit in this sort of provocative
trickster cuz okay
the just to the gesture to the king or
the officer has a spy yeah yes somebody
sends out to check the landscape before
he heads there himself okay
the priest has the picture so the
trickster is a spiritual spy the
trickster is a guy who does not
understand or pay attention to
consequences of behavior that's why the
trickster comes first the picture walks
into the room and he tries everybody out
and he exposes that they have no clothes
exposes they have no cover and therefore
because he turns he shows to them that
their naked and they probably cut
important a podium or something like
that then the tricksters done his job
and after the tricks is done its job
decreased and walk into the room and
declare why you're in the predicament
you are a worry should go next
mm-hmm okay that's great yeah that's it
I think