[Music]
we're in the middle of the second
psychedelic revolution fueled by books
like Michael Pollan's how to change your
mind
interest in the drugs is spiking for
them to be truly accepted into the
culture many are hoping that medical
trials will show they work as medicines
so it's a significant moment as a new
film comes out showing the inside of one
of the biggest studies so far in the UK
using psilocybin the active ingredient
in magic mushrooms to treat depression
[Music]
he was taken back to very very difficult
memory people go through their whole
lives without ever really facing those
demons this was the big ride this is the
one that changed things and it found a
very mixed fascinating story I was so
surprised I mean in the first leg of the
Electra or medical psychedelic trial in
the UK and they they want to let cameras
in and we said to him look you know I
think it's brilliant that you want us to
do this but we're not gonna make a film
where we are compromised in any way so
we need to have access to all areas we
need to be able to ask whatever we want
to ask we need to just produce the film
that we see that it's presented to us
the film magic medicine follows three
participants all with serious
treatment-resistant depression through a
high dose psychedelic experience on the
morning of the session when people are
having the capsules especially on the
high dose essence it's a very strong
dose of psilocybin just this feeling of
you have no idea where they're going to
go you have no control and and it's just
this big act of surrender and Trust and
for someone who is maybe just coming to
the subject completely fresh they've
just seen this film is saying they took
people with depression and gave them
magic mushrooms and just think that
doesn't even make any sense why would
you do that what's what's behind it ya
know III really felt that the other day
we were making a poster for our new
study we're doing another psilocybin for
depression study and we were making a
poster for recruitment and it just you
know it was like have you suffer friend
are you interested in taking a magic
mush I mean it just felt like that you
know kind of a crazy thing to be asking
people to do and that's how having
worked in it for years and years I can
still see that it's kind of how people
see that it makes it actually makes a
lot of sense because well that the work
at Imperial is his work using brain
imaging so we have an understanding now
also Robin cohort Harris and David Nutt
who are there and they've led this
research program they're neuroscientists
and they have through sustained work
going deeper and deeper into the
neuroscience of it they have they have
realized that actually psychedelics they
deactivate that what's called the
default mode network so they have this
this this effect of kind of introducing
some flexibility into the brain so where
things have become very rigid and very
set in their way so people get stuck in
very negative thinking patterns
ruminating and magic mushrooms and other
psychedelics to have this effect of
introducing a state of intense
flexibility for that while the session
is going on and then the brain seems to
kind of reset itself of 20 seriously
depressed patients in the study the
treatment didn't work at all for three
another three are now depression free
the other 14 had a window of between six
weeks and six months where they were no
longer depressed I kind of feel like the
film ends where they are now and so if
I've been filming for another year I
didn't think it that made a difference I
think the film kind of ends as to where
these guys are now they are not in a
good place they just are you know in the
film and Rebecca John's daughter from
the Scottish farmer you know she was
saying better to have seen dad you know
for a brief moment again then not to
have seen it at all he thought it was
fixed he was four he came out and he
said I am
six I and he was four you know probably
four weeks completely and then eight
weeks kind of and then 16 weeks little
lessons on him and now he's back so back
to where he was maybe maybe even worse I
don't know so I'm glad it showed that
very mixed picture because it's an
important message especially in these
times of so much enthusiasm in the
circles of people that have know about
psychedelics it's still a very small
little niche but for people in that that
world although they've experienced it
themselves and had a profound benefit
there's so much hope so what does the
story tell us about the potential for
this therapy why does it work and how
could it work better the other thing is
that it really is a process it really is
the beginning of a journey so it's a
very powerful entry into a journey it's
a very strong beginning and it can
achieve in one session what normal
thirty might take a long time to achieve
it's very experiential it's very real
but it's the start of a journey it's not
the end of the journey so there's all
units like peeling an onion there's more
layers and there's more layers and more
layers so and the idea that I mean some
people have had these kind of mystical
experiences where they they have an
experience where they feel they suddenly
see themselves in the world in such a
different way that that kind of changes
everything they don't fear death anymore
and the way they see other people is
different that does happen but from what
we saw in the last study most people
have suffered from depression again now
and and they have really really wanted
for the psychedelic work that is the
work that they would have wanted
is there a tension between because a lot
of time with with the medical model the
idea is you take a pill and it has this
effect on you like it's a very kind of
material idea or a very mechanistic
assumption it feels that there's
something very different going on with
psychedelics do you think there's a
there's a weird tension I think it's a
very good tension because I think the
tension that is there has the power to
really transforms our system of care I
think what psychedelics bring about is
this absolute paradigm shift
in the you can't use psychedelics in
that way psychedelics will never be able
to safely be put into a kind of conveyor
belt system of care they will radically
transform any system of care they're
brought into because in order to do them
safely you need all the things I think
are important for therapeutic changes to
happen so you absolutely cannot give a
psychedelic substance to someone without
proper trust and that means proper trust
that they have for themselves for the
therapists for Silla psilocybin
substance like proper proper trust and
that doesn't get developed overnight you
have to you know you have to spend the
time getting to know someone before that
can develop there's also this importance
of being very real and in the
relationship with with the person
because you are about to embark on this
journey together you are both going to
be there in that room with them having
these capsules of psilocybin and they
could go anywhere they could go back to
a traumatic experience in their life
that is they feel they're going through
again they could be crying in pain they
could be facing something absolutely
petrifying terrifying but they don't
understand I know what it is but feel
that they're being pulled apart they
could die they could feel it not
literally dying they could feel they're
having what it's like an ego death
experience and feel that they're dying
or exploding or you know it can be very
very intense and they can have sweet
blissful experiences of oneness and
connection to all things but you just
don't know where they're going to go but
you have to be with them when you're
it's kind of like a roller coaster and
you have to be there on the seat next to
them wherever they go so there's just no
space for some kind of slightly
disengaged half their relationship that
you might have in normal psychology
services because you see people for an
hour every hour this is a full day
together and you get to a very real
place and you get to know each other as
people human beings it's not doctor
patient or therapist patient at all it's
two human beings doing something very
human and profound together as you sort
of just said then a lot of the the
psychedelics can give an insight but
often that insight will be something you
need to work on it won't be kind of
connection to everything and then
suddenly feeling like much more whole
can be while I never realized that I had
this pattern or I had this pattern we
behave like this and then it's up to you
to do the work to make yourself well
which is which is very different to the
kind of classical medical model yes it's
a very much an active process not
something that just happens to you I
mean the fact that the experience itself
can be quite grueling is is really this
will be the start of that process it's
not something to be done like me it's
it's all about willingness willingness
to surrender to open up to to feel
things and yeah I mean it's not just
that the day itself which can be kind of
like a really hard slog exhausting you
know six or seven hours of different
emotional experiences exhausting for
people and they can cry more than have
cried in the whole lives they can feel
even the ecstatic states can be quite
physically tiring but then yeah after
that there is this people often describe
for a few weeks after or maybe even a
bit longer this sense of spaciousness
and openness afterwards that having been
stuck in very fixed patterns of
elimination they suddenly feel like the
lights were turned on or they feel a bit
freer and there's more clarity and
there's this we think it's a kind of
window of opportunity in terms of brain
flexibility there's things are more
flexible for a certain amount of time
afterwards and then it might get harder
to change habits because things get more
set in stone again but there is this
window flexibility where if people want
to change their behaviour in that time
that is really the key time for a
therapy to maximize that that's
possibility but if people are on their
own you know people have the experience
and then in our study people have the
experience then they go back to
communities that don't know anything
about it necessarily or doctors that
don't know anything about it and family
members that aren't really sure about
how it works and they might have ideas
about what they want to change but I
think people in future as we optimize
these treatments people will benefit
from having much more much more
therapeutic support in those first weeks
to really help people determine okay
what's going to be different now I've
seen this I felt this what am I actually
going to do tomorrow to start changing
the patterns sitting as a therapist and
one of these sessions is a bit like
you're witnessing somebody choreograph
their own very very unique therapy
session
they go in ways that you could never
have predicted or even design yourself
because they're so subtle so you go into
the session you don't know what's wrong
really you understand that someone
suffering from depression but you don't
really know why or how and they will go
through a sequence of visions or lessons
or they'll go from here to here and then
it'll change and it'll shift into
something else and at the end of the day
when they're talking through their
experience you're left with this
profound sense of respect for the
process that that person's unconscious
mind was somehow able to take them on
this journey back towards some kind of
health or a journey with a step in the
direction of balance and health so
that's it's so exciting to me the idea
that we hold within artists potential
for rebalancing that it's not coming
from a therapist the therapist in
psilocybin therapy do very little really
it's more providing the safety in the
space and some of the experience of what
kind of things can come up so people can
feel trust view but essentially it's all
about the person themselves and what's
happening within them and that is the
most exciting thing because that is what
gives me hope that I mean how could a
manual that's been written or helped
everybody how could some very kind of
like kind of rigid template ever be
right for everybody we're all world
within ourselves we're all unique
universes so it something that allows
those universes to inside each of us to
come in balance I think we could see a
massive change in how effective
treatments are because they haven't
worked that well up to now I mean it's
like talking therapies announcer
depressants worked for like half 50% of
people it's a lot of people that aren't
helped by them this could really change
our healthcare systems and is there one
particular thing that you think people
maybe on the outside of psychedelic this
this subject maybe don't understand but
should understand I think that they're
they're nonspecific amplifiers so what
that means is that they aren't
inherently good or inherently bad and
some people often people describe it
after a psychedelic experience they feel
more connected to themselves and other
people in
around them and they feel much more
concerned about protecting nature and
actually they might feel a little bit
more concerned I mean after near-death
experiences people come away from them
and off and feel that they're much more
they've changed their life and they want
to do things for other people rather
than worrying about material things it
can be that same kind of thing a sudden
awakening of what's really important
however there's a romanticized view that
giving psychedelics to people would make
everything better there have been people
in the past they've used them and have
become the kind of Messiah Complex has
got stronger and stronger and they can
become much more narcissistic lots of
people that use psychedelics regularly
have become much more narcissistic
through that practice rather than less
so they definitely don't strip away the
ego for everyone so they're not
necessarily good but that you know
they're not necessarily bad I mean a lot
of people have the view that
psychedelics will make them go crazy and
you know and that's absolutely not true
either somewhere in the middle at this
for each person it's a unique it's a
unique experience for each person of
opening up to something of going deeper
into the self going deeper than the kind
of standard and Martin ensel chatter and
going deeper down and what lies there
will be different for for each person
[Music]
you
[Music]