hi everyone welcome to the September
version of my q and A's and thank you
very much for tuning in again hopefully
we'll have an interesting discussion
tonight I want to stop start that is
with demonstration of some new newly
managed technical wizardry I have a
program that I developed with my
colleagues that I want to talk to you
guys about for just a few seconds some
of you already know about this called
self authoring and self authoring helps
people write about their past to guide
it autobiography that's the past
authoring program and to write about
their virtues and their faults that's
theirs to present authoring programs and
a future authoring program that helps
people write out a vision and a
destination let's say an ethical
destination for their lives as well as
formulate a plan to put that vision into
to make that vision into reality and our
experimental investigations have
indicated for example that university
students who complete this program even
if they do it badly and I would
recommend at least doing it badly
increase their probability of staying at
university by about 30% and it has a
positive effect on their grade point
average as well so there's a fair bit of
evidence that your personality is
organized at the highest level through
articulated speech some of that you can
formulate internally by thinking and
some of it you have to do you can do by
writing you also do that in discussion
with other people but these programs are
designed to break down the problem of
articulating your life in the past
present and future into a series of
steps that are at least in principle
manageable and thousands of people have
done them and I think there are very
helpful programs and we spent a lot of
time perfecting them I supposed to the
degree that they are perfected anyways I
want to here's the high tech part of
this you see that's the website self
authoring com and I put a coupon
together
the coupon name is September so that's
what you have to enter for the coupon
and that gives you a 20% discount at
self authoring so and now all this is
even more high-tech because this marker
is in a different color and this program
is a personality test based on the big5
aspect scale which is a scale that
calling the young one of my students
developed when he worked in my lab along
with Lena quilty and the big five aspect
scale offers you a five dimensional
readout of your personality extraversion
neuroticism agreeableness
conscientiousness and openness the
classic big five and then it breaks each
of the factors each of the traits into
two aspects so you get a high resolution
map of your personality that takes the
test takes about 100 question takes
about 15 minutes to do and you'll learn
about yourself I think you'll learn
interesting things I had my kids do
repeated iterations of the big five
aspect scale when they were teenagers
and I learned a lot about them even
though I thought I knew them quite well
I learned things that were very useful
so you can do that and maybe you'll
understand yourself a little bit better
and so this is the site and the coupon
is September just as it was for self
authoring and that's 20% as well and
you'll see that amazingly enough this
advertisement I suppose which is what it
is is in purple instead of blue and so
that's another technological miracle
brought to you by the internet and the
intelligence of modern human beings so
alright so we've dispensed with that so
that's self authoring and understand
myself and you might find those useful
and I hope you do so on to more fall on
two different things I guess I just got
back to Toronto yesterday I think it was
yesterday I was out in Western Canada
I went to a family reunion on Vancouver
Island and then a reunion of sorts as
well in Saskatchewan with my side of the
family and finished a talk in Regina and
when in Saskatoon as well which seem to
be relatively well received so hooray
for that I've really enjoyed all these
lectures that I've been giving Tammy and
I Tammy's my wife we've visited 65
cities now on this tour and we're
starting again on September 5th we're
gonna go down the eastern seaboard
there's 20 cities and in the
northeastern US and then we're off to
Europe for another 15 cities or so and
then in February I think we're going to
go to Australia and then in March and
April and back to Europe and then in May
I'm going to spend four months
diligently finishing up what I hope to
be my next book assuming that I can get
that done in that period of time and
also that other opportunities let's say
or distractions don't rear their head
either positively or negatively and who
knows right because life is a very
uncertain business I've really enjoyed
the lecture tour a lot you know I've
been speaking to audiences of about
2,500 to 3,000 people and mostly about
the I would say mostly about the Nexus
the relationship between meaning and
responsibility trying to make the case
that because life is difficult as
everyone with any sense knows and
because we can make that worse with our
own stupidity and malevolence that it's
necessary to find a sustaining meaning
in life and my sense is and I think
people tend to agree to this is that the
most sustaining meaning can be found a
and the adoption of voluntary
responsibilities so in attempts to
decrease the suffering in life and to do
things that are worthwhile and admirable
and to take care of yourself
individually and your family and to have
a little bit left over for your
community and to have goodwill across
all those dimensions if you can possibly
manage it despite the fact that there's
something in life to make people
relatively bitter and then as well the
necessity of conducting yourself in a
truthful manner
making also the case to my listeners I
suppose that that one of the most
ancient presuppositions that underlies
the structure of Western civilization
which is a very functional civilization
in my estimation is the idea derived
from Genesis that truthful speech if you
confront truthful speech if you confront
potential the chaos and potential that
is in front of you with truthful speech
that you engender the order that is good
and that's a fundamental ethical dictum
it's it's it's a presupposition in some
sense that the order that you bring into
existence in all the choices that you
make will be the best possible order in
proportion to the degree that you
conduct yourself in a truthful manner
and so those ideas seem to be falling on
very receptive ears and they are the
most resilient ideas that I think I've
ever come across I mean I always take an
ice pick and a hammer - any idea that I
encounter and I really do that
diligently because I don't want to rely
on ideas that can fall apart and break
especially when they're stressed and I
don't see I don't I haven't come across
ideas that are more solid than that I
mean the first proposition you know that
life is suffering and that we make it
worse with our malevolence I think
everyone understands that to be true but
the second is that the best way to
confront that is to shoulder
responsibility voluntarily and to live
in truth I think those are even more
powerful ideas because you could say
that the cure for a malaise or the
treatment for a disease is more powerful
than the malhae malaise or the disease
itself and if responsibility and truth
are antidotes to suffering and
malevolence then that means that they're
there they have a power that's
transcendent over suffering malevolence
and you know it so it's a very
pessimistic viewpoint on the one hand
because I'm stressing for everybody that
is coming to listen to me talk the fact
that life has an inalienable element of
difficulty and and travail and suffering
and all of that and you certainly see
that sort of thing when you go to a
family reunion you know like a lot of my
relatives my parents generation they're
getting old my parents are in their 80s
now and there
some of they have friends that are older
and everyone's starting to suffer from
the inevitable deterioration that's
associated with old age and it's very
very trying and very difficult for
people and it's it's in those situations
that you see more clearly the fragility
of life and also the importance of
having a having a family that's
functional and people around you that
love you and all those things that in
principle can help sustain you through
difficult times so anyways I'm here in
Toronto for about 10 days got a lot of
media interviews again partly to discuss
the upcoming talks my book 12 rules for
life still appears to be selling
extraordinarily well it's quite amazing
all things considered it's approaching 2
million sales and in in the English
version and there are foreign versions
coming out
all the time so and I've also I'm also
in the process of putting together the
final arrangements for my next book
which I talked about so the plan is to
write I'm writing that now I've got it
about half written maybe a little bit
more expanding on the themes that I
developed in 12 rules for life and also
extending them as much as I possibly can
and I hope to continue writing during
this period of touring as well so that I
can stay on top of my deadlines and then
from May to September to spend most of
that time finalizing and editing and
polishing and all of that and then
hopefully the book is due in September
and the current plan is to spend
September through December likely
concentrating on a return to the
biblical lectures starting with Exodus
which is something I'm really looking
forward to but haven't really been able
to turn my hand to the other thing I'm
really thinking hard about doing I'd
like to do a series of lectures and I
don't know if I could do them publicly
or not but I might be able to finagle
that in some manner I'd like to do a
series of lectures on the sacred icons
of the radical left so I'd like to do a
lecture series on Marx and Foucault and
Derrida and then some some
the famous feminists to like Betty Ford
an whose work I'm not a fan of for a
variety of reasons and Judith Butler as
well but I'd really like to concentrate
on Marx so one of the things I might do
tea for you guys tonight or to you yeah
one of the things I might do to you
tonight as I found a poem by Karl Marx
that is extraordinarily interesting and
that might be worth reading if I can I
just thought about doing that if I can
scrape it up in time so let me just
check very quickly and see if I can find
it and then I'll get to some questions
because after all this is a QA right
that's the theory so give me 30 seconds
if you can indulge me there it is yeah
so let me read this to you and then
we'll get to the Q&A I think this this
is the kind of thing that I'd like to
shed light on in any possible lecture
series on Marx so this is called
invocation
invocation of one in despair so a God
has snatched from me my all in the curse
and rack of Destiny all his worlds are
gone beyond recall nothing but revenge
is left to me on my self revenge all
proudly wreak on that being that
enthroned Lord make my strength a
patchwork of what's weak leave my better
self without reward I shall build my
throne high overhead cold tremendous
shell its summit be for its bulwark
superstitious dread for its Marshall
blackest agony who looks on it with a
healthy I shall turn back struck deathly
pale and dumb clutched by blind and
chill mortality made his happiness
prepare his tomb and the Almighty's
Lightning shall rebound from that
massive iron giant if he bring my walls
and towers down eternity shall raise
them up Defiant well so on that happy
note that's perhaps perhaps some insight
into the spirit that motivated our
friend mr. Karl Marx so I've really been
thinking a lot about the Marxist
critique of Western culture especially a
fundamental Marxist critique is
something a fundamental Marxist critique
is a criticism of the fact that in
capitalist societies a disproportionate
amount of the spoils let's say the
wealth goes to a disproportionately
small part of the community and this is
of course a truism by the way it is the
case that that occurs which is why the
richest dozen people in the world have
as much money as the bottom two billion
something like that it's also the case
it's part of a more generalized law
sometimes called prices law and
represented with the Pareto distribution
purrito is P AR eto showing that not
only do the
bulk of the Spoils let's say the wealth
go to a disproportionately small number
of people but the bulk of the productive
work is also done by a
disproportionately small number of
people not necessarily the same people
that have the wealth by the way although
in a functional society there's some
overlap now Marx was correct in
observing that that happened in
capitalist societies but incorrect in
assuming that there are any societies
that have ever been formulated or that
could ever be formulated that would
escape from that destiny because you see
that same tremendous Pareto distribution
that proclivity of wealth to to accrue
in the hands of small of a small number
of people you see that in every human
society that's ever been studied and if
it's not wealth its sexual access or
repre duck t'v well that's the same
thing rep reductive opportunity let's
say or or or material possessions which
is obviously a form of wealth etc so one
of the things that characterizes the
West is that all our so our societies
produce inequality like every other
society including animal societies by
the way and even among plants even
amongst ours a disproportionate number
of the heavenly bodies have most of the
mass by the way which is not something
that you can lay at the feet of Western
capitalism the thing that the West has
been able to do that other societies
haven't been able to do is to produce
wealth along with inequality and that
wealth is definitely a fair proportion
of that wealth is actually going to
benefit the people who are in the
diarist straits and that process has
been accelerating over the last 20 years
so from the year 2000 to the year 2012
the level of absolute poverty in the
world is halved which is the fastest
rate of economic development in the
history of the world and I think that
rate is accelerating at least in part
because the Soviet Union for example
isn't around anymore to agitate the
economic masters and leaders of
developing countries into the adoption
of counterproductive collectivist
economic strategies and so what appears
to be happening is that as we spread the
fundamental Western ethos of
individuality and private property and
free
markets and freedom in general for men
and for women around the world that the
poorest people are becoming well at
least they're not starving they're
becoming richer even though at the same
time we do pay a price for that in
inequality so there's a rule and I don't
know how to formulate it exactly or
there seems to be a rule which is a
given unit of wealth in a is produced at
the cost of certain production of the
inequality a certain number of units of
inequality and that seems to be
inalienable to some degree so anyways
that's part of a Marxist critique the
poem first which is like you want to
listen to that poem a couple of times I
would say but then more fundamentally a
critique of the Marxist critique of the
West yes the West produces inequality
but it's not something that you could
lay at the feet of capitalism it's a
much much deeper problem and what that
means to is that those people who
purport to be on the side of the poor
and dispossessed are not being friends
to them by any stretch of the
imagination at all by attempting to tear
down the very hierarchies that seem to
be leveraging the world's poorest people
out of poverty as rapidly as possible
there's evidence as well that people
start to become very concerned about the
environment if you can get their family
income I think are its GDP I think up
about of 40 above about 4,500 u.s. a
year they start to have a little bit of
spare time to be concerned with the
environment around them and so the right
way to to ecological balance in the
world seems to be to make people rich as
fast as we possibly can to make the poor
rich as fast as we possibly can and
wouldn't that be lovely if that was
really the way out so anyways you know
for that so let's let's try some
questions here so any advice on
effectively implementing what I learned
into my life i resonate with twelve
rules so much when reading but struggle
to remember it in my day to day life
well you're not alone that was Sam
you're not alone in that Sam I mean
first of all you got to figure out what
your time frame is you know one of the
truisms of clinical psychology is that
slow and incremental improvement is
first of all normative
in the best possible way in the most
optimistic situation but also very
powerful and so of course you struggle
to remember it in your day-to-day life
because life is difficult and it's
harder to do things than not to do them
and it's harder to do them well than to
do them badly you know and it's easy to
sit around and be hopeless I don't mean
it's emotionally easy because it's not
but it's procedurally easy to be useless
and to fall back into your old habits
and to not discipline yourself and it's
it's a matter of continual practice slow
continual practice and I think a good
example of that is something like weight
lifting you know if you start a
weightlifting program which I would
recommend by the way because it it's
tremendously advantageous physically and
cognitively you're not gonna really see
results for a number of weeks and then
the results are rather slow but you can
get pretty decent results over a six
month period and absolutely stellar
results over a couple of years and so
you have to make sure your timeframe is
right and not to be too hard on yourself
and I did mention the future authoring
program earlier and one of the things I
would recommend too is if you're having
a hard time implementing your your
decisions say your ethical decisions
that you spend a bit more time thinking
them through and writing them down and
the future authoring program is really
helpful thought that's why we designed
it and so get your goal straight and
continue to practice every day and if
you're not succeeding then make your
goals slightly smaller you want to you
want to make your goals large enough so
that they challenge you but small enough
so that you have a reasonable
probability of succeeding at them on a
day to day basis and then you have to
also understand that if you fail on a
given day like let's say you're trying
to quit smoking and you quit for two
weeks and then you have a cigarette and
you think oh my god now I've screwed it
up I'm not quitting anymore you smoke a
whole pack of cigarettes it's like well
there's a couple of mistakes there and
one is well just because you had a
cigarette doesn't mean you failed it
just means that you had a cigarette you
can start stopping again the next day
and the fact that you had one cigarette
in the last two weeks is a hell of a lot
better than the two weeks that you had
before that and so you've got to be
realistically humble
you got to be ambitious enough in your
goal so that you're pursuing something
that you regard as truly meaningful and
worthwhile you know and maybe you can
judge that to some degree if you think
about someone you love attempting the
same thing and think about how you would
feel if they managed it and if you would
feel good then that's probably a good
what would you say that would be a good
evaluation strategy to use on yourself
you so you want your goals to be of
sufficient nobility so that you can live
with yourself properly if you're
pursuing them but you want them to be
small enough so that you have a
reasonable probability of implementing
them and if your implementation
okay it's good
it's back you can start again
maybe
we're back yeah okay guys well that was
interesting the software that I used on
my camera crashed and then when I
reopened it it told me I hadn't
purchased it and wanted me to re-enter
the serial number which is quite the
interesting experience so so I'm just
getting my questions back up this 3/4
person that you see here is Julian who's
you know reasonably helpful about these
sorts of things now and then I've out
I've almost actually learned how to do
this I tell you you do get slower
technologically as you get older it's
kind of annoying or maybe you get just
fed up with it more it's hard to tell I
think you're probably stupider and less
patient and so then you justify your
last your stupidity by just assuming
that you're less patient so ok anyways
we're back thanks Julian ok so Paul
Maloney says you mentioned analyzing one
of your wife's dreams that left you
feeling hopeful that will emerge from
this chaos okay do you still feel this
way any new signs well who knows right
because because the future is
complicated and no one's a prophet I
don't know what to think I think this I
guess I already mentioned earlier in
this Q&A that on a global level there is
all sorts of reasons for real optimism
as far as I'm concerned there's reasons
for pessimism as well but there's
reasons for real optimism and what look
it looks to me like what's happening is
that the spread of the Western free
market individualist ethos around the
world is producing a substantive
increment in wealth substantive decrease
in poverty and the consequence of that
decrease in poverty is also in places
like China
which by the way China is reforesting so
that's pretty interesting China is now
rich enough so that it can afford to
reforest so there's more forests in
China than there was in 1990 which is
quite a remarkable thing anyways my
point is is that on the global scale
things appeared to be very positive and
but then in the West we seem to be
suffering from a crisis of confidence
and that's destabilizing us and making
us act foolishly
and I don't know how much of a threat
that is to the integrity of our
political system and I'm so much in the
middle of this let's say personally that
it's hard for me to have a clear hand
about it now I'm very optimistic about a
variety of things that I see I'm very
optimistic for example about the fact
that so many people have are coming out
to these long-form lectures and paying
attention to high complexity educational
and political material on YouTube
there's a real hunger for that and I as
I said before the lecture tour that I'm
on has been extremely positive it's
really something to see all these
thousands of people come out to
concentrate on getting their lives
together and I do believe that that's
why people are coming out and then you
know I think I don't remember if I did a
QA since I did the discussions with Sam
Harris but I did for discussions with
him for debates let's say each of which
was about two hours long - in Vancouver
one in Dublin and one in London UK and
there were about 3,000 people at each of
the Vancouver events 8500 people in
Dublin and something approximating 6500
in London and the audience was very
attentive for the two-hour stretch for
all four discussions and so I do see the
I see more intelligence in the general
population say then I think we presumed
was there and
more hunger for serious discussion and
I'm hoping that people who are
clear-headed and sensible can push back
the idiot collectivist radicals on the
left and on the right we'll see
so yeah I'm hopeful because I think that
people are remarkable creatures despite
their limitations and the absurdity of
our existence and our proclivity toward
malevolence I think that we can whatever
constitutes our essence is capable of
transcending that and I think that
people know that and I think the more
people that realize that consciously and
start to implement it the better off
we'll be
and so nested inside my extreme
pessimism about the structure of life
and the frailty of human character is an
exceptional optimism exceptional
optimism about our potential so we'll
see but I would also say to all of you
that are listening you know it is my
firm belief that each of us have a
responsibility to set the world right in
the manner that we are able to end that
that is a fundamental that's a
fundamental import I really believe in
some sense it's of cosmic import in the
same way that consciousness itself is of
cosmic import and consciousness reflects
being itself and so and I do believe
that we have the ability and the
responsibility to bring new creation
into being and that our decisions help
us then our ethical decisions that the
value of that new being is dependent
directly on the ethical decisions that
each of us make and I think we can
realize that even though it's a
frightening thing to realize marcus
perry asks you said the narrow bandwidth
of TV has made us think we are stupider
than we are well internet centers
censorship lead to the same problem once
TV is supplanted well god
other incredibly complicated question
you know whenever I think about
censorship I actually talked to Mark
Zuckerberg a while back and we had a
good conversation you know and
Zuckerberg who I think is a very
straightforward person as far as I could
tell is optimistic about Facebook and
does see it as a platform whose primary
goal is to connect people and mostly at
the personal level although the Facebook
has made forays into news provision and
that's complicated their corporate
vision now I'm not a pro censorship
character I do not like hate speech
legislation and I am absolutely opposed
to compelled speech legislation of the
sort that's been introduced into Canada
I think it's violation of the principle
of free speech and free thought and I
think it's exceptionally dangerous but
having said that you know nothing is
ever simple and that's part of the
reason that things are so annoying
politically so you know one of the
things that Apple and Facebook and so
forth those the large social media
platforms had to contend with say was
the attempts by organizations like Isis
to use their platforms for recruitment
now let's say that I'm a free speech
absolutist which isn't exactly true
because I realized that there are the
constraints that have evolved in some
sense naturally in the English common
law system on free speech and that
they're necessary you can't libel
someone you can't outright lie about
someone you can't slander them you can't
counsel them to criminal conduct etc
there are restrictions on free speech
well but I think those restrictions
should be minimal well let's say that
one of the restrictions you assume
should be placed on free speech is that
those that you are at war with are not
allowed to use your platform to recruit
which doesn't seem to be an unreasonable
proposition and is perhaps even the sort
of thing
the conservative or a libertarian much
less a liberal or a left-winger might
get behind well then that means that
you've defined already a framework in
which is that censorship and or maybe
I'm not thinking this through clearly
but is that censorship it's certainly
self-protection
well then having established the
principle that a certain amount of mod
what would you call monitoring of the
use of your platform is necessary where
do you stop and the answer is it's
complicated I think that what Facebook
etc did with Alex Jones was a big
mistake
I think that was because well it wasn't
just Alex Jones that was punished let's
say it was all the people that were
watching him and not everybody that was
watching him was an avid follower of him
some people were just watching him to
see what the hell he was doing and what
he was up to and that's necessary but
you don't just censor the one person you
censor everybody that's paying attention
to him and then you make him a martyr
and you persecute someone who's paranoid
which all that does is validate his
conspiracy theories as conspiratorial
theories and the conspiratorial theories
of his followers I guess one of the
things I've really been wondering is if
the wild and woolly reality of Facebook
and YouTube and Twitter are actually
sustainable in a corporate environment
or if the radical freedom that was
associated with those technologies was
only something that was possible when in
some sense all of that material
provision all the provision of that
material was outside the standard legal
framework because it was too new to
regulate you know I can't tell I don't
know if corporations can manage
something like YouTube or Twitter or
Facebook for that matter because their
internal conservatism and their and I
mean that in the in the temperamental
sense their unwillingness to take risk
is what I mean in that pretty
your case is liable to make it
impossible for them to be neutral
purveyors of information some of which
is going to be extremely radical so well
so there's I have no conclusions to
offer there I and I guess I'm glad in
some sense that these complicated these
particular complicated problems aren't
mine to solve I certainly think that the
production of automated sensors is a
very very bad idea but I'm also someone
who's constitutionally opposed to such
things it's closed-circuit TV monitor
monitoring of the general public as well
and and cameras that that watch people
at stoplights and any automated system
that that enforces the law or the or
what's hypothetically the law to me is
to be regarded with deep deep suspicion
so okay that's that much of my early
work deals with alcoholism yes and with
and at the biological level that's what
I did my PhD thesis on and much of my
early published papers where I learned
about brain function because alcohol
affects every part of the brain so I had
learned a lot about the brain what
prompted my interest in that area and
your apparent shift to issues clustered
around personality well I was always
interested in motivation for drug and
alcohol abuse you know what it was that
drove people to use drugs of abuse let's
say and I got the opportunity to study
at McGill under dr. Robert Peel who was
an excellent supervisor and he was
deeply involved with drug and alcohol
abuse research looking at motivation for
alcoholism and he offered me a position
in his lab and and that was what he was
working on and I thought well that was
one of my cardinal interests although
perhaps not my my fundamental interest
which even at that point had to do with
motivation for totalitarianism and the
commission of atrocity and the service
of of group belief but I thought well
it's a broad topic and I could learn a
lot about biology and neurobiology as a
consequence of working on something that
was so biological so my my early work in
psychology was extremely biologically
oriented and it was
unbelievably useful I learned a lot from
the animal experimentalist in particular
people like Jeffrey gray and later yak
panksepp I have a reading list at Jordan
B Peterson comm that outlines some of
those emotional so those books on
emotional neuroscience um what was my
why did I shift well there was a variety
of reasons one was that the National
Institute of Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism
and I Triple A which funded grant
research in the United States
essentially made the kind of research I
was doing with Robert Peel impossible
and it's part of the consequence I think
this is one of the things that the
universities are doing so terribly wrong
as the ethics committees made our
research impossible both to fund and to
implement so here's why so we were
bringing people into the lab so here's
who we picked for subjects if you are
going to be a subject in one of our
experiments you had to be a young man
and you had to have an alcoholic father
and an alcoholic grandfather and at
least one other first or second degree
male alcoholic relative
well I hope I'm back again you know my
software updated and obviously the
update has a bug so that's rather
annoying apologies for that once again
so back to the alcoholism discussion
where was I oh yes
so we would get these subjects I
mentioned who they were they were young
men who weren't alcoholic but who drank
socially who had an alcoholic father an
alcoholic grandfather and at least one
other male alcoholic relative now why
did we pick subjects like that well we
knew alcoholism ran in families and we
couldn't really study its transmission
in women because if you're a female
alcoholic can you drink when you have a
child in utero then the you child can
have fetal alcohol syndrome and whatever
abnormalities in psychophysiological
response or psychopathologies might be
associated with their alcoholism can
easily be masked by the presence of
fetal alcohol syndrome so we couldn't
use women and besides alcoholism is a
problem that fundamentally characterizes
men although there are female alcoholics
I think it's four to one if I remember
correctly from from those days it's four
to one male to female so it was you know
when we thought if we concentrated on
those who had the highest probability of
developing alcoholism because of their
loaded family history that we could shed
some light on the mechanisms associated
with alcoholism and that would be useful
for men and for women so we studied sons
of male alcoholics sons of
multi-generational male alcoholics those
were our target group very hard
populations to fight we have people
hired full-time to do nothing but find
us research subjects and so we did
relatively small in studies because we
were lucky if we could gather four or
five subjects a month in the Montreal
urban area anyways we did discover a lot
about alcoholism we discovered for
example that if people with this
multi-generational history a substantial
proportion of them if they drank enough
alcohol to move their blood level up
above 0.08 which is legal intoxication
level and if they did that relatively
short period of time then their heart
rate would increase above I think the
average was about 12 beats per minute
do the standard control of zero zero or
one or two it was very low and so and
then we did figure out overtime our
whole team that that seemed to be a
consequence of susceptibility to
alcohols effect on opioid production in
the brain and secondary or opioid
effects on dopamine which is both
opiates and dopamine are primarily
primary reward chemicals so it looked to
us like people with multi-generational
family histories of alcoholism got an
opiate response from alcohol so but we
had to get people drunk in order to find
this response and it turned out that
0.08 which was the legal limit at that
time for driving was approximately the
place where we saw these psycho
physiological effects and also saw
fairly pronounced cognitive and motor
effects of alcohol because we also
studied that so now to bring we bring
people into the lab and we'd give them
three large shots of alcohol that they
consumed in ten minutes we use
laboratory alcohol which was I think 95%
pure alcohol usually put it in orange
juice and so people would be you know
reasonably intoxicated and then we would
let them sober up until they were at
point O four which is half legal
intoxication which we thought was useful
and then we put them in a cabin and
they'd go home and we you know we had
our own mishap now and then someone
would throw up and that was well I'm at
least getting better at fixing it when
it screws up now so you know and it
anyways now and then we would have
somebody who would be coming in the lab
and that was always unpleasant but then
we'd also let people sober up but it
actually takes quite a long time to go
from point O eight to 0.04 especially if
you're a big guy because your your dose
of alcohol is proportionate to your body
weight and so we used to have people
wait in the lab for a couple of hours
you know and they were not very happy
necessarily about having to wait before
we paid them and so forth and and and if
we didn't treat them extraordinarily
well which we tried to do then of course
they were much less likely to come back
and participate in another study and
since it was very difficult to get
research subjects then we wanted to
treat them very well apart from the fact
that we would have done that anyways but
then and I triple ace
well you can't let your research
subjects go home until they have a blood
alcohol level of 0.02 I was like we
would have had to have people in our lab
you know sobering up for for 6 to 8
hours this keeps happening I'm very
sorry about this everyone I don't know
what to say about it except that that's
a consequence of software updates I
suppose anyways so that made it
impossible because we just couldn't keep
people in the lab for that long all it
did was annoy them to death and then
they hated us and they you know people
would get quite irritable and upset and
no bloody wonder so then also and I
triple-a decided that half our subjects
had to be women or we couldn't get
funding well now our subjects couldn't
be women it was impossible to do the
kind of research that we were doing with
women for the reasons that I just
outlined well first of all alcoholism
doesn't affect women as much as it
affects men depression and anxiety tend
to affect women more and it's perfectly
reasonable to study those things but
that isn't what we were doing and and
then we couldn't do multi-generational
studies for for genetic predisposition
with women because of the fetal alcohol
syndrome problem and you know this was
something I think this came in under the
Clintons this requirement for absolute
gender equality in in subject selection
and they didn't give a damn if that
meant that there were certain kinds of
research that just couldn't be done
anymore and so I had to stop doing it
and no one's really doing that kind of
research anymore because it's just too
difficult it's like it was always a pain
because it was really hard to get the
subjects and then you had to get people
quite intoxicated and then you had to
deal with them when they were drunk and
you had to do your psychophysiological
recording and all that sort of thing and
then they had to sober up and you know
it was complicated clinical research is
unbelievably unbelievably complicated
and difficult and then you had like two
more restrictions to it and people just
go oh okay well we I guess we won't
study the psychophysiological
consequences of alcohol anymore
or so people would use low doses you
know and only get
their subjects blood-alcohol level up to
like point O two or point O three but
that's completely irrelevant because
alcohol doesn't have much of a
physiological effect at those low doses
and so well this is one of the things
that made me absolutely despise ethics
committees and I believe that the
proliferation of ethics committees is
one of the reasons that university
research human research is is doing
badly psychological research is doing
badly there's a variety of reasons but
that's certainly one of them so I was
interested sorry this is a very long
answer but I was interested in
personality as well you know uh because
I was a clinical psychologist and I'd
read Freud and Jung and Adler and all
the great clinicians of the 20th century
and when I went to Harvard I was offered
you know I when you're a new faculty
member there's usually a set course that
they require you to teach that's one of
the core courses and then you have some
freedom with your other courses and so I
said I'd teach personality and then I
got more and more and we were looking at
personality models with the alcoholism
research - at that point the big five
was starting to establish itself and I
wasn't much of an admirer of the big
five because I like well I like theories
as well as empirical research and I
thought the big five well there was just
no theory at all it was just brute force
empiricism but well but you know the
data eventually became convincing and as
I got more and more interested in in
personality I got more and more
interested in the use of personality and
other psychometric technologies to
predict things like academic and
creative success you see it at McGill my
Bob and I and a variety of other people
were using psychological tests of
various sorts to predict things like
alcoholism and antisocial personality so
we could use the big five and
neuropsychological tests tests of dorsal
lateral prefrontal function at least in
principle to predict to some degree who
might be susceptible to the development
of antisocial personality and then when
I went to Harvard I thought well hey
maybe we could use those tests to
predict who was going to be good at
things as well as who was going to be
bad you know the people who are creative
or the people who were academically
oates
standing or people who did well as
managers and administrators and
corporations might do well on
personality tests and and
neuropsychological tests that assess
dorsal lateral prefrontal functions
that's higher-order cognition so we
started to put together tests batteries
that assess that and that was a
fascinating research I did that with
Daniel Higgins who's the partner my
partner in the development of the self
authoring program and understand myself
that things that he's labored for 20
years on before they really became
successful and he wrote a bang-up thesis
I think it was the best thing ever
written on this on the topic of
intelligence and and launched that he
started working on and in 1993 which is
about the same time that the bell curve
came out and so his research actually
became relatively politically
contentious even though all we were
trying to do was trying to determine
what attributes predicted success among
creative people and among managers and
administrators in acting and Anika
academia and so forth pure empirical
research but it became we're very
rapidly politicized anyways so I just
got more and more interested in
psychometrics partly because I realized
way back when in 1993 that almost
nothing that psychologists measured was
actually real and so we were interested
in what was real and Daniel is an
engineer trained at MIT and so he was a
very very metha
method a methodical person and he didn't
like to move ahead with his research at
all unless he had nailed absolutely
everything down in a way that only an
engineer and a software coder would and
so we started working on personality
models and I've been doing that and
concentrating on that more specifically
ever since as well as writing the more
theoretical material that was associated
say with 12 rules for life and maps of
meaning so okay so that's that answer
are you aware of any of your critics are
you aware of any critics of your work
who are deep and credible well of course
not someone who had a minimum had read
maps of meaning well it's a complicated
question you know I've never read a
critic of Jung who actually understood
what um was talking about
and I actually knew a number of
scientists including yoga panksepp who
wrote affective neuroscience was a great
book who is a real admirer of young and
and the psychoanalysts I mean panksepp
was very interested in neuro psych
analysis and most of the people many of
the people who are interested in the
half in the neuroscience of emotion were
also very interested in the
psychoanalytic types most of the people
who criticized Jung don't have a clue
what he was talking about and it's not
surprising because he's very difficult
no I haven't come across a credible
critic of maps of meaning and I think
and I don't know I mean that may also be
because you know up until I became
notorious let's say over the last couple
of years it was it influential it did
pretty well the book did pretty well for
a an academic work it was no massive
seller although it's hit the bestseller
list now on in the audio version which i
think is pretty amusing that's the New
York Times bestseller list given that
they wouldn't list twelve rules for life
so I don't know if the lack of criticism
is a consequence of its lack of
influence or its difficulty I've had
social psychologists talk to me a little
bit about the ideas of maps of meaning
and I tried to talk to them especially
the people are interested in such things
as terror management but they're they
usually don't know the neuropsychology
and they don't know the mythology and
there are very few people who are versed
in the world of neuropsychology and in
the world of mythology simultaneously
and I'm drawing these parallels you know
like and they're very complicated
parallels so I made the assumption see I
studied these Russian neuropsychologists
Vinogradova and Sokolov who were
students of Alexander Luria brilliant
students and they discovered this
phenomena called the orienting reflex
which I wrote a lot about in maps of
meaning and the orienting reflex is your
automatic response to what is unknown
and you have a very deep automatic
response to what is unknown and that
really means that the unknown is a
conceptual category and it was my
proposition developed in maps of meaning
that the unknown is a fundamental car
of category or maybe even a fundamental
category of reality depending on how you
define reality like I'm defining reality
phenomenologically as experienced but as
experienced universally and as
experienced biologically by animals and
by human beings the unknown is something
like unexplored territory and it's
reasonable to assume that there's a
fundamental distinction even
neurologically between the patterns of
action that obtain in territories that
you've thoroughly explored and the
pattern of action that's necessary when
you step outside the domain that you're
familiar with where your reaction as a
prey animal or perhaps as a predator has
to become paramount and so the
fundamental proposition in maps of
meaning is something like the domain of
the unknown that's reflexively responded
to with the orienting reflex which is a
very very fundamental reflex and basic
to the entire process of learning itself
is reflected in our mythological
representations and I think that that is
a absolutely if that's true then it's a
profound realization I wouldn't exactly
say discovery because I don't know if
you bring two literature's together that
have never been conjoined if that
constitutes a discovery but I've
certainly never found anyone who was
able to suggest to me any reason why I
should assume that that hypothesis is
incorrect you know when I've had pretty
damn bright graduate students and
they've gone off to be credible
professors and most of them have
maintained that viewpoint and I think
Colin DeYoung is probably foremost among
them so you know it would be nice
actually if if I could encounter critics
of maps of meaning who were credible
because I'm sure there's some things in
it that I wrote that were wrong and I
don't know what they are I mean I've
been thinking about the damn book since
1982 and I've been thinking about it a
lot and my work in 12 rules for life is
an extension of what I did in maps a
meaning but
I can't see holes in it and nothing I've
learned since then and that might be a
consequence of my own stupidity but in
narrow-mindedness is I haven't seen any
reason to radically revise the
propositions that I put forth in maps of
meaning I think they're credible I think
the idea that and I think there's
actually more evidence now that the
propositions were correct than there
were when I wrote the book originally
the idea for example that our
hemispheres are specialized one for
action in the domain of the known and
the other for action in the domain of
the unknown I think that's well
supported by the work of what's-his-name
another student of Luria Greenberg it's
a Greenberg Alcona and Goldberg El Cajon
and Goldberg and Ramachandran as well
and an arrow a physician who's
well-versed in neuroscience has has a
theory that's quite similar so no I
don't think maps of meaning has been
subject to proper critical evaluation so
and then with regards to critics of my
of twelve rules for life well most of
the time they don't criticize what I say
they criticize their what would you call
it ideologically motivated pathological
oversimplification of who they wish I
was so they didn't have to take anything
I said seriously and those people don't
constitute critics they constitute they
constitute the chattering puppets of a
certain form of ideological possession
Wesley yang reported that you met with
tech Titans Marc Andreessen and Peter
Thiel both of whom advocate
decentralized education can you share
anything about this um I don't know if I
can share anything interesting I mean I
enjoyed the meeting mark and Peter I've
met mark several times I've only met
Peter once although I've spent some time
with Erik Weinstein who works with Peter
you know Peter is libertarian oriented
and so
he he shares concerns about the
potential totalitarian function of
Internet technology and manifesting
itself well in the constant monitoring
of our behavior and also in in the
emergent censorship let's say Marc
Andreessen well Marc's a smart guy and
he knows a lot of other smart guys and
we spent a lot of time talking about the
possibility of online education and and
and but there isn't anything really
exciting I can report about that I mean
they were all preliminary discussions of
a sort to see if we could get along and
if we could talk and so far we've been
able to I am making a fair bit of
headway with this university project
although we don't really conceptualize
it as a university project anymore we're
conceptualizing it as a adaptive
learning system and we're trying to use
it to index people's no index knowledge
on the web funnel money to creative
producers of educational content allow
people to test their knowledge no matter
how its generated and to accredit people
properly and we'll relief release more
information about that in the upcoming
months as we move closer and closer to a
functional prototype the plan at the
moment I've talked to lots of people
like Andrea sand until who are very
interested in technology and education
and who also are very well capitalized
and have had the opportunity multiple
times to pull in investors into this
educational project but I haven't done
that partly because weirdly enough you
know you think money is a solution to a
problem but it's also it's often a
problem in and of itself and if I
generated several million dollars let's
say to fund this educational endeavor
then I would not only have to worry
about how to design the educational
system but then I'd have to worry about
how to spend that money and Shepherd
that money intelligently and that's
actually a huge administrative problem
of sufficient magnitude to stop you from
doing any creative thinking at all so
what we're doing instead is I'm funding
the university project at the moment or
the online education project as a
consequence of my patreon funding
ha fix that in about five seconds this
time so I'm funding that from my patreon
donations and I like that model better
the only problem is is that I would like
to offer the people that I have as
employees a certain amount of financial
stability and so and you know it isn't
obvious to me how stable the patreon
funding is although it's been very
stable so far but you know who knows how
that will work out so I think what we're
going to do is to crowdfund in October
or November once we have a minimal
Viable Product and I I think I'd rather
do that and raise money privately
anyways because I don't want this
project to be beholden to anyone and I
want to maintain control over its
direction with a small group of
programmers you know it's often a small
group of people who are working tightly
together that solve very complicated
problems and that's certainly been the
case with working say with Daniel
Higgins and Robert Peel on the self
authoring programs and so forth a small
team we we've thought about going the
venture capital route and expanding and
trying to make a big business out of it
but our sense was more that it would
maybe we were wrong about this but that
was better to go directly after
customers and to build the business
incrementally and to test it along each
step and not to get enticed by the
possibility of unicorn level money and
so anyways that's the that's the
situation there and I've got three
really bright people working on this
open educational platform and and it's
really quite exciting and I would say
we're well ahead of schedule from where
I thought we would be so that's pretty
cool have you spoken to Nassim Taleb
following your brief twitter exchange
would love to hear a conversation with
the two of you I'd like to talk to him
too because he's very very smart
he's uh he's touchy though and so I have
some apprehension about that I've talked
to lots of touchy people over the last
couple of years and I'm a bit
apprehensive about it but I would like
to do that a lot of people I'd like to
talk to he's one of them and and you
know it's I'm having a hard time setting
up those conversations at the moment
because I'm doing so much touring I am
talking again to jonathan height the
in the near future and I think probably
to Steven Pinker as well and by the way
for those of you who are wondering I am
going to release thee and so is Sam
we're gonna release the videos from the
Sam Harris Peterson debates I'll put
them on my youtube channel Sam will put
them on his will make them into podcasts
as well I'm going to release the first
one on September 1st and and everyone
will have access to it it's taken us a
while to figure out exactly how to do
this partly because Travis Pangburn who
hosted the events wanted to raise some
money with the videos at least in part
to help offset the costs that he
incurred for those events which were
very expensive believe it or not and
difficult to generate a profit for from
on his end and also he wants to
translate the material that he already
has into multiple languages so we agreed
to let him win we had to make a
three-way agreement for this you know
because Sam was involved and I was
involved and so was Pangburn and so and
we didn't know how the events would go
you know so we weren't actually that
concerned with the damn videos to begin
with because we take we we'd taken a
risk I'm not complaining about this by
the way like I'm not complaining about
taking a risk but we didn't Sam and I
hadn't even met you know we didn't know
if we were gonna have conversations that
were worthwhile we didn't know if
anybody would show up for the events and
so we were way more concerned about
whether or not we'd get a crowd of any
sort whether the events would be
successful and whether we could actually
talk then what we would do with the
videos if the or even if there would be
videos if the events were successful and
so it turned out that we couldn't talk
and we did have useful discussions at
least we thought so and the audience's
responded very well and there was large
crowds and so it was successful so then
it turned out that the videos were
worthwhile but we hadn't discussed who
had control over the videos or who was
going to edit them or any of those
things that we had to do that post talk
after the fact which isn't the best way
of doing it and then it took Travis a
while to assemble a team to do the
actual editing and so that was our
compromise and you know it would have
been
if we could have released the videos and
all of that immediately after the talks
but you know when you're doing something
new and you don't know exactly what
you're doing you're not going to do it
perfectly and so we didn't do that
perfectly but the events were good and I
enjoyed talking to Sam and I learned a
lot from the discussion I really had to
sharpen my thinking I really figured out
something you know I figured out that I
think the fundamental issue here is how
you take the infinite world of facts
that presents itself to you independent
of the value of those facts so value
neutral thoughts and they have to be
filtered to a single point like a single
point of perception because you have to
point your eyes at one thing and your
attention at one thing and a single
point of action and so there's a
tremendous reducing of the world of fact
to the extraordinarily simple and
targeted rule of veil or world of value
and your your brain is the instrument
that does that reducing and it's sort of
it's in keeping with Aldous Huxley's
suppositions about and that and they
were motivated by honoré Bergesen the
idea that the brain was a reducing valve
and that what psychedelic experience did
was open the doors of perception
something William Blake also talked
about the brain seems to be in some
sense the part of the structure that
reduces the infinite complexity of the
world of facts to the finite and single
point domain of world of values and
that's partly neurologically
instantiated and partly sociologically
instantiated becomes we come to a
negotiated agreement about what
constitutes value just like we do about
what constitutes value economically and
so the structure that reduces facts to
values is a reducing structure that
simultaneously instantiate instantiated
neurologically and sociologically and I
understand that a lot more clearly
because I had these discussions with Sam
and I'm writing a lot about that in this
next book which is it's a follow up I
suspect that's the plan at the moment
212 rules for life because I had written
originally 40 rules so I have more to go
I've written about half the new book and
I spent a lot of time writing about at
least in part when I
to become clear about as a consequence
of my discussions with Harris and so I
took a look at the videos and I think
the debates were productive and and the
audience's seemed to find them so and
certainly Sam and I did I really enjoyed
meeting him we got along quite well he
has much better sense of humor than I
presumed from listening well from the
two podcasts we did of course I wasn't
in great humor when I did those either
and you know I also think that I'm also
what would you say a fan of Sam's
motivation or at least as far as I could
determine it I mean he wants to ground
the world of value in something that
isn't merely arbitrary revelation and
fair enough man that's a good that's a
good aim to ground ethics in something
that that's solid and not just arbitrary
opinion but I think that the Devils in
the details and so that's basically what
we discussed so how do you reconcile
studies that show genetics superseding
environment in life outcomes with your
own experience conducting successful
psychotherapy yeah well I'll tell you
one thing man that I really did come to
realize more and more in the last three
or four years partly I would say from
dealing with my own health problems to
some degree but also watching the health
problems that my daughter had I think a
lot of what we think of as mental
illness is physical illness it's a lot
more than we think even but and I think
that that is reflected in the genetic
studies but I also think I also still
think that that doesn't eliminate the
role of learning you know people
obviously learn and they can learn
better or worse and they learn better
when they voluntary voluntarily approach
things that are frightening and
threatening and they challenge
themselves and so it's made me more
humble I would say in some sense both as
a person and as a psychotherapist
because I'm more attuned to the fact
that the apparently psychological
difficulties that my clients might be
experiencing may be a consequence of an
under
destabilization of physical health I'm
really unwilling to discount that even
if what they're experiencing is very
idiosyncratic but it still seems to me
that there is credible evidence that
exposure to to what you would rather
avoid is curative and so is the weaving
together of a coherent and a coherent
map or narrative of your experience I
believe that those doctrines are solid
so and that's what psychotherapists do
essentially they help you get your story
straight about your past and your
present and your future they help you
establish your point in life they help
you lay out a map so that you can
negotiate through the territory of your
life past present and future and they
help you develop strategies to deal with
to help deal with emergent complexity
and the fear that goes along with it so
Michael Tom Rose asked a very hard
question please comment on young Polly's
that's Wolfgang Pauli's unas mundus
hypothesis one world hypothesis
essentially so that
so Michael Tom Rose asked sorry I got
frozen there again momentarily please
comment on yo Pauly's illness mundus
hypothesis does this correlate with
quantum theory solutions to the hard
problem
eg Penrose Hameroff or CH or or C hor I
don't know what or chore is I know
Penrose and Hameroff I'm not an admirer
of the Penrose and Hameroff attempt to
reduce consciousness to two microtubule
function quantum mechanics and
microtubule function I did my best to
understand it I couldn't it seemed
hollow to me my experience has generally
been if I find something
incomprehensible and hollow it generally
is I've read better books on
consciousness like the user illusion
which I really liked
that's the user illusion by the way and
Jeffrey gray wrote a good book on
consciousness as well the only and
Paulie I'm not gonna be able to answer
this question very well because I'm
starting to get a bit worn out here
Wolfgang and Pauli and young recognized
that man this is really a complicated
problem I don't know if I can I don't
know if I can answer this ok let's try
this
god it's been years since I thought
about this and wrote about it so we'll
see how I can do
you could think about this from the
perspective of Piaget and constructivism
so imagine that what you confront what
you confront fundamentally in the world
is what is unknowable and what is
unknowable has an intrinsic meaning it's
both frightening and compelling
simultaneously it activates predator
detection systems that protect you in
the way that a prey animal is protected
by freezing and withdrawal and that sort
of thing but it also makes you curious
so that which you do not understand
which is something that you can
conceptualize as that which has not yet
been made habitable world has an
intrinsic meaning now the question is
whether the fundamental stuff of the
world is that meaningful unknown or
something material you can make the case
that what we recognize as material is
actually a pragmatic reconceptualization
of the meaning of the ambivalent meaning
of the unknowable now I know that that
that's hard that's a hard concept but
imagine you see it depends on whether or
not you believe that our descriptions of
material reality are the superordinate
descriptions of reality or whether our
conceptualization of material is
actually a form of pragmatic tool use
that's oriented towards our survival and
this is not an easy thing to sort out
it's something that I did try to sort
out to some degree with Sam you know is
do we have an objective description of
reality and is reality something that
can be objectively described or are we
using a technology that produces
so-called objective representations to
facilitate our tool use it's a hard
question right because obviously our
advanced technology which we use in a
tool like fashion is a consequence of
our materialists
which begs the question is the science
is the fundamental purpose of the
science descriptive or pragmatic now I
think I tend to think it's pragmatic
because I think our fundamental problem
is a problem of survival so there's a
way of looking at the world where the
fundamental reality is the chaotic
potential that gives rise to fear and
curiosity and that's how your nervous
system responds by the way and see
that's interesting to me because I would
say well it's a truism of evolutionary
biology that what your nervous system is
adapted to what you're adapted to as a
consequence of your 3 and a half billion
years of evolution is reality and that
there's no other real way of defining it
and so the way your brain construes
reality is as if what you're confronting
is an indeterminate chaotic potential
that first generates something like
apprehension fear and curiosity
secondarily the apprehension to freeze
you so that you don't get eaten or
destroyed and the curiosity to allow you
to engage with what's unknown and to
transform it into habitable territory
which in large part consists of tools
now the onus mundus that pauly and you
talked about seems to me to be
associated with this idea of that
chaotic potential and I think that's
related to the physicists wheelers
proposition that the fundamental reality
of the world is information rather than
material that material is a secondary
what would you call it it's a secondary
manifestation of information and I think
that what we confront in the world see I
don't think we're driven by the past and
or determined by the present I think
what we do is we apprehend the potential
of the future the chaotic potential of
the future and
and I think that that's associated with
a toe huva bohu which is the chaotic
potential that God confronted with the
logos at the beginning of the of time in
genesis i think the genesis story is a
reflection of that fundamental truth and
I think that that capability
characterizes us and so the onus mundus
is the informational substrate that
constitutes the world before it's
divided into psyche so that would be
spirit that'd be human spirit and
consciousness and material so there's
something underneath that and this is
what Jung and Paulie were driving out in
my understanding there's something
underneath that which is the pre
division unity of reality and that's
something like the toe huva bohu or the
tail which is etymologically cognate by
the way with the word Tiamat and Tiamat
is the goddess that the Mesopotamian
creator god Marduk confronted and cut
into pieces and made the world from so
that's all outlined in maps of meaning
although not so much the onus Mundus
hypothesis you know and I haven't
thought about that for I wrote about it
but these are in papers I never
published because they were too damn
complicated and I tried to publish them
a couple of times with people
but people didn't understand what I was
talking about and you know I hadn't even
thought about oh man
okay well here's a weird thing
all right well the rate at which my
camera equipment is crashing seems to be
accelerating so it appears that
discussion of the onus mundus is
irritating the structure of reality in
some manner anyways let's get back to it
for a minute so this is a different way
of conceptualizing the world I think
it's a phenomenological perspective so
and I don't know what to make of it so
think about it this way so it looks like
your left hemisphere is specialized for
operation and territory that you
understand so it's specialized for
operation in those places where
behavioral patterns have been made
habitual and explicit whereas the right
hemisphere is specialized for response
to chaos itself to the unknown and what
that implies is that the division that's
expressed for example in the yin-yang
symbol which is essentially chaos and
order is actually actually represents
something fundamental about the
structure of reality now you might say
well only the structure of reality
insofar as biological organisms
conceptualize it but I don't know if we
can talk about the structure of reality
outside the conceptions of biological
organisms like if you're a strict
believer in objective material reality
in that transcendent existence of strict
material reality then you might say well
of course you could talk about it
because strict material reality exists
in the absence of biology and
consciousness but it isn't so obvious to
me that material reality does exist
in the absence of consciousness because
I can't conceptualize what existence
would mean in the absence of
consciousness like is there time is
there duration is there sighs maybe all
of these things are relative in some
sense all of these things presuppose a
conscious observer even in the
materialist description so it looks to
me like what reality is is this unas
mundus that jung and Polly were pointing
to its chaotic potential now I also
think that we treat each other that way
so if I'm treating you properly then I
treat you as if you're a moral agent
who's actively engaged in the
transformation of the chaotic potential
that manifests itself as the dawning of
the future and that attracts your
attention I treat you as if you're an
act of moral engage an act of moral
agent engaged in making the moral
decisions that determine how that
potential is going to manifest itself
and if I don't treat you that way
then I'm patronizing I don't give you
your full I don't grant you your full
stature as an as a sovereign being
and I impinge upon your debt at your
intrinsic value the same value that that
allows you to claim the existence of
natural rights and and also the presence
I would say of natural responsibility so
I treat you as if you are well I would
say made in the image of God in the
Genesis terminology that you are part of
the process that turns the Tohu I bow
who I never pronounced properly into
habitable order and I think that that's
the onus mundus and I think that that's
reflected in your neurological structure
and I think the fact that it's reflected
in your neurological structure and in
the neurological structure of animals
with this you know almost Universal dual
hemisphere neurological structure which
also by the way is it is something
that's necessary even in neural networks
which is where we got the idea for
plasticity and stability by the way for
in the big five aspects scale models and
the higher order personality factors I
think the fact that that bifurcation is
reflected in neurology is a reflection
of the fact that it's it exists in
reality now of course how defining
reality is no simple thing you know it's
you can think about it as an objective
materialist but you can also think of
reality as the sum total of that which
is experienced and those aren't the same
things they aren't the same fundamental
presuppositions and I think that we've
predicated our society insofar as our
society is functional on the proposition
that each individual is a sovereign
entity
what would you say characterized by a
spark of divinity that uses the
responsible
full word to confront the chaos of
potential and generate the habitable
order that is good I think
I think we act that out and look guys
I'm gonna call it a night a because
obviously this has got to be getting
somewhat annoying for you to be
constantly interrupted by these idiot
software crashes and it's also
approaching 9 o'clock so even with the
delays that's a good hour and a half and
so I think maybe we'll call it a day and
I didn't get too many questions although
some of them were very very complicated
and I would like to thank you for tuning
in and maybe I can remind you again
about self authoring calm and understand
myself calm and the discount coupon code
September so if you guys want to try out
those programs I think they're real
helpful and I think that's how people
experience them then you can do that and
then I'll have another Q&A probably I
would say probably in mid-october
because I'm on the road now you can see
that in Jordan B Peterson calm at events
I'm on the road now until mid-october
and so I'll do another Q&A then and
hopefully have an update on the
educational progress of the educational
material and all of that and so thanks
very much for tuning in and I hope you
enjoyed the discussion it got quite well
far beyond what I thought it would get
to I haven't talked about that Yunis
mundus idea for a long time and it's
very very radical idea it's sort of
central
that idea is central I would say or at
least central in an implicit sense to
maps of meaning
all right well look obviously the
technological problems are mounting
exponentially by all appearances so I'm
going to call it a night thank you very
much and good luck to all of you get
your lives together man it's it'd be a
good thing for everyone including you
but also everyone else and maybe the
structure of the world itself I really
believe that's true by the way so for
the what that's worth okay guys bye