[Music]
hello you found the portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and this
will be our second interview episode to
be released I think we have something
really remarkable for you today because
we have a human being who's led a life
that even though he makes movies that
are fictional I would say that his
actual nonfiction life is more
interesting than any movie he's ever
made this is a person who has been shot
on camera
a person who has stolen who is forged
and who's taught other filmmakers to
steal and to forge the person I'm
talking about is Verner Hertzog now i
first became aware of Verner Hertzog
when I was 16 and just entering the
University of Pennsylvania and a friend
of mine said you've got to see this
movie Fitzcarraldo I said what is
Fitzcarraldo he says if nothing else
it's a story about a man so possessed by
an IDI fix that he drags a boat over a
mountain in the jungle in order to
somehow build an opera house and the
whole thing sounded incredibly mad and
in fact what was so interesting about
this film was is that the director
actually had to do in real life what the
crazy fictional character did inside of
the storyline this led me to a
fascination with today's interview
subject Verner Hertzog this is a man who
has lived so richly and so profoundly
that I actually started to get a
different idea about what he was doing
as a filmmaker the idea that I could not
shake was as that Verner Hertzog needed
to live so deeply and so profoundly that
he had to make movies simply to justify
what it meant to be Verner Hertzog now
I've often asked myself this question
what is it the great generals do between
wars it's hard to imagine let's say a
patent or a MacArthur in normal times do
they just sit around and open dry
cleaners do they write essays for their
local newspaper what is a Winston
Churchill do if there's no world war
to win in such a situation I think it's
very hard to come up with an answer but
I think that the best answer that I have
is that these people would make movies
[Music]
the following interview was recorded in
front of a live audience
we joined the conversation in progress
may I just ask first of all before I try
any theories of the kind now do you see
any clear organizing principle that
unifies your output that is sort of
subtle and not obvious to your audience
yes I do believe so people are quite
often puzzled about the range of the
subject said that they'd have attracted
me there's a world's champion ski flyer
from Switzerland and there's a
Paleolithic cave and there's a man who
moves a ship over a mountain in the
Peruvian jungle and there's a film on
the internet in there's a film you just
name it so and it's looks perplexing at
first sight but I do understand although
I don't like to look back at my films
two of my I do understand that there's a
some sort of an architecture of of
concepts and that's you would
immediately understand there is a common
worldview very much is about the
worldview and you could probably spot it
very very quickly if you walked into a
room and the TV was playing and there
was a film within and and you didn't see
any credits probably within two minutes
you would understand this must have been
my film people see it they understand it
how they do it I don't know and how I do
create this common worldview I don't
know either but it doesn't really matter
now one of the things that I've been
very struck by which is what we all get
wrong about Verner Hertzog and
because many of the stories that come
out of these films and these
undertakings involve tremendous seeming
danger physical risks chaos madnesses
all the things that are usually
associated I was trying to figure out
what it was that those stories might
cover up as if sort of cheap icing on a
very rich cake and one of the things
that I saw was what and correct me if
I'm wrong it seems like you have
tremendous concern for the people that
you bring out on to these crazy projects
for their safety and well-being am I
getting that wrong no we shouldn't waste
any time of what some people get wrong
about me it doesn't really matter let
them be wrong mm-hmm but one of the
things that comes up quite often seems
to be an identification of the creator
of historia creative character namely me
with qualities that the Creator
automatically has to have in other words
if I do a film like a Gary the wrath of
God about a demented crazed conquistador
1560s in the peruvian amazon people
quite offer misled to point out Hertzog
must have these qualities obsessive in
demented and borderline paranoia and so
now they there
I understand them but they are not my
qualities the invention sir but you
picked an actor in Klaus Kinski who
might I mean I would venture to say did
have some of those qualities is that
wrong and they may be of course of
course he had it a part of being a an
actor who was really under the grace of
creation took to to make things that we
have not seen before after on a screen
so but otherwise he was the mildest I
could express would be he was the
ultimate pestilence
but he was also destructive he would
destroy a set he would when we had we
actually had two plane crashes on
physically those small aircraft hmm and
we didn't know what had happened we had
a very sketchy shortwave radio
connection with Iquitos about 1,100
kilometers away and garbled messages
would come in plainest down and and we
desperately tried was it nearby could we
send out a search party or what who was
on board what had happened and we had a
habit in in our camp
sometimes on days where we'll start in
the afternoon and shoot into the night
breakfast would be served from Huck's to
her to hurt and so the last Hut's would
have cold coffee this morning by
coincident Kinski was the last hut and I
heard it from from hundred fifty yards
away screaming out I mean at a complete
not not just a tantrum it was it was
just an an outburst of Rage because his
coffee was lukewarm and he stormed at
the place where we were checking on on
the radio and trying to figure out and
he kept screaming and screaming I could
not calm him down I could not get him
away I tried to tell him there's a plane
down you have to keep quiet we must
listen to to what has happened it
wouldn't help at all I would scream and
he would scream he could scream a glass
into he could shatter a glass of wine
glass he it really a minute I do not
exaggerate and so the only reason the
only way I could after an hour and a
half when he had already froth a
hardened froth at his at his mouth I
went to my heart and I had a little
piece of Swiss chocolate left which I
people would murder for a search of
treasure in our camp and I stepped in
front of him and and ate this chocolate
and
that silenced him there was that there
was something which was stunning and you
knew you intuited that this would have
that effect
I should have have the intuition after
five minutes it took over an hour so but
probably Mei said quite often qualities
of the characters in my films have been
superimposed on my on my own character
for example I've acted in some Hollywood
films and some independent films Jack
Reacher for example and I'm playing the
real real dangerous badass bad guy and
and I am very very dangerous in the head
- and I'm unarmed
and I have no fingers left and and I am
blind on one eye and and yet I had to
spread terror from the screen and I did
it so well I did it so well that my
reviews were much better than the
reviews for Tom Cruise now it's true
it's I'm not exaggerating I was good but
it not that I can say this kind of vile
dangerous character is really in me
really and it came very easy I did it
unprepared you see and I have learned
that when we did Fitzcarraldo in the
first round of shooting there was Mick
Jagger as a sidekick of the leading
character in Jagger's spend some six
weeks with us in the Changi we shot half
the film had to stop because the leading
character became ill we had to send him
to the States and the doctors wouldn't
allow him to return to the journey so I
knew I had to start all over again and
on Jagger's contract mmm there was no
time enough left for doing the whole
film all over I shot the film actually
one and a half times and what what what
is strange about this recasting and in
restarting the whole thing I knew if I
did not find
acta quickly in such a case I had no
alternative but playing the part may
myself because I would have been
credible and I would have been good not
as good as let's say Mick Jagger and
Jason Robards or Kinski and I learned
one thing from from Mick Jagger which
astonished me
he took me once backstage when they were
recording and I was there and and he was
arguing with somebody about some totally
trivial things completely and utterly
trivial things and also on my set he was
arguing about the mineral water about
the per diem or something and I said to
him make the cameras rolling and he
looked at me and he sees we are already
doing it and he steps three steps in in
front of the camera and within three
steps he becomes a demon from a trivial
trivial little bickering mediocre kind
of character he steps in front and he's
a demon and and that's in in a way I
learned that from him and I didn't
prepare myself I when I stepped in front
of the camera I knew there was only one
thing become and be frightening and I
can do it yeah and I would accept it
only because I knew I could do it so
you're really not the ultimate badass
because I can't maybe I am but
unbeknownst to me well okay if it feels
to me like I was just watching video
view video of you being interviewed by
the BBC and him probably you're shot in
the abdomen while being interviewed and
you seem to be somewhat type yet
somewhat irritated that the interviewer
is treating this as a big deal and like
this otherwise that how would I know
that you wear Paisley underwear I mean
you take your your pay
when you're bleeding
oh yeah and you're treated like why is
it's not that big of a bullet that's
that was your ad no I actually I said
something more beautiful I said this is
an insignificant poorest ruler and and I
knew it it had not perforated everything
it went through my jacket in the catalog
in the pocket and everything but didn't
perforate into my intestine so that was
insignificant but they immediately hit
the hit the the the the ground the
camera flat and I hate the feeling stay
let's finish at least the center this is
great video I mean what they admit was
great video it would have been but but
what I'm trying to suggest sir is that
you are the unreliable narrator you are
at no no no I made sense no no no I'm
the one who makes sense I'm the one who
puts order into a chaotic situation
that's what you did but when I'm about
what I'm saying is is that when your
autonomic nervous system is is triggered
it barely registers you've been shot in
the abdomen it's registered it hurt it
read it threat a year because when I was
laughing hard it was still hurting yeah
yes but there's a sense of duty then why
I very much appreciate but that's very
unusual
the deserve yes but it's part of being a
good soldier of cinema that I try to be
with a sense of duty a sense of you have
to be reliably you have to hold an
outpost that others have given up its
loyalty its and its loyalty to the
entire crew that was there however they
they argued we should call the police
right away and I said let's not do it
because do you want to spend the next
six hours in in a police station to file
charges and do you want to see
helicopter circling there and do you
want to see a SWAT team in ten minutes
flat right do you want to see that my
answer is no but it's okay let's move
out of the danger zone
because
man with a with a rifle was still
somewhere hiding on on a terrace in
hiding now inside the building get get
out of there but let's continue let's
continue this all your team has come
from from the UK and you have to return
tomorrow let's get over with it so it's
a sense of duty I appreciate that very
much but I mean what you're talking
about is the highest levels of
discipline and military-style leadership
I mean this goes far beyond yes but you
should be careful about me confusing it
with military discipline where there's
some sort blind adherence to given
orders I do think I do think what I'm
doing and I do not ask anyone to do
blindly something in front of the camera
but there's a safety margin whenever
things are difficult in tain let's say
borderline dangerous I would always do
it myself first for the actor I would go
through the rapids with a small RAF to
see the xerath
survive these three consecutive Rapids
were very simple thing Christian Bale in
rescue Don he plays a german-born Navy
pilot
who is shot down 40 minutes in his first
mission over Vietnam who allows he
actually was the only American POWs
managed to escape from petit Lao and
Viet Cong captivity an incredible story
and Christian Bale who plays a part of
him and they are starving to death
almost starving to death and they get
some food that is infested by hundreds
and hundreds of wriggling maggots and we
used maggots said native people would
eat but they would rouse them not not
alive and still wriggling so and I said
to Christian that was what dieter
Dengler the real character told me they
had
- there were nutrients a lot of
nutrients in these maggots ate it and I
said to Christian you know what give me
the plate and give me a spoon I'm I'm
gonna eat a few spoonfuls which I did
and he said oh come on stop it stop it I
let's roll the camera and I'm gonna get
over it quickly so he did and that was
one of the very very few moments of
controversy between the two of us
because I told him and he didn't hear it
apparently I told him Christian you know
what you stop eating when you really
have when you had it and he keep eating
eating eating until the plate is empty
and then I say cut and he said why
didn't you say cut before why what what
happened and I said Christian you are
the one who should have cut said cuts
but he didn't hear it and he was kind of
miffed but but those those moments say
they do happen ment and in the
unexpected on on a set that's movies
yeah right
that I guess those moments do happen so
it does strike me though that but I
tested it first
but you see would do that always test it
first seems like that's you know the
Israelis have a theory of leadership
which is called follow me where they
take the highest value person on the
team the the general of the colonel and
he goes into danger first because the
morale of the troops is so much
heightened when when you see a leader
saying I will actually take that kind of
a risk that seems to be a part of a yes
fanatical it's a very long tradition
Alexander the Great
for example always on foot with his
soldiers he would not ride on his horse
he would be on foot thousands of miles
he would be the first to to climb the
ramparts on a ladder he would be the one
who when
thirsty and and almost dying from thirst
one soldier collected a helmet full of
what a bit by bit drop by drop and and
when the thirst was at his worst this
foots foot man comes in steps in front
of Alexander and says I saved this for
you drink this and Alexander looks at it
and spills it away and he says too much
for one too little for all in marches on
so that's leadership or Hannibal who
crossed the Alps on elephants he would
sleep with his soldiers at the outpost
wrapped in his in his coat and he would
lose an eye crossing an ice cold river
south of the Alps and he would do things
that nobody else in his army would ever
do do you feel that this aspect of
leadership of putting oneself in the
greatest situations of risk and harm is
no you avoid harm if possible of course
but you eliminate harm before it even
appears you see you have to be prudent
and in any kind of business including
the business of warfare you you have to
evaluate a situation and you have to try
to to avoid the danger for anyone the
leader and in the troop you better stay
out of it and you you use all sorts of
military tricked trickery deceit right
you use ambushes you use the so called
cowardly things and before you really
put anyone into a very grave danger
eliminate whatever you can sometimes you
can't eliminate everything but cheat
source of course a large and lying
I liked by the way it comes to mind
Jesse Ventura
who used to be a bodyguard of the
Rolling Stones by the way and he used to
be a studio wrestler who played that the
bad guy by the way in the ring
completely stylist and he became
governor of Minnesota and I always liked
him for his down-to-earth approach and
he said once about his time in the ring
as a restless as one of these
WrestleMania people and he said when if
you can lose if you must but always
cheat so I really like him for that yeah
so this is one of the things that I
found most endearing about your approach
is that you teach film in this
completely different fashion it's it's
let's be honest you're an outlaw before
you're a filmmaker and you say to your
students you have to be prepared to
steal to forge to pick locks to do
whatever it takes for its documents but
steel you see I wouldn't say steel I
have stolen once in a while but more
expropriation than stealing then theft
like my first camera was expropriated
from a institution but mmm do anything
that's outside of the legal norms as
long as it does not hurt anyone and in
foraging shooting permit in a country
that has a military dictatorship ship is
something fine and you should do it you
force for it you must yeah
so so you have to do it definitely try
this at home alright so your your and
you break into countries as on a student
visa that might severely punish you if
they found out that you were filming you
did this in China I know not well yes I
did in China filming and in the
westernmost part Koshka near kashgar
where there's an extremely high military
and police presence and I was filming
with Michael Shannon but we had no
shooting permit no working permit we
just went out to a local market a very
traditional market of weaker tribesmen a
cattle market and there was that the
real obvious thing was that we had a
contraption built on the body of Michael
Shannon a tripod that held a camera in
front of his face so when he walks into
a crowd everybody who walks by would
inevitably turn around they'd look after
him I wanted this effect everybody
staring at him once he's moving through
a crowd and he said to me when I'm gonna
do it as long as you're around next to
me because if I get arrested you should
be arrested as well and I said fine
let's do it and and because it was so
brazen it was so brazen that nobody
actually stopped us there was a lot of
police and and when you have one or two
police people Bend it's dangerous
because they would arrest you or they
would stop you at least and check you
out but if you have 17 18 20 of them
there's a strange psychological reflex
everybody thinks I are the other one
will stop you and you walk straight
through the middle weather and I keep
saying where the enemy comes it at its
thickest walk straight through there and
I look it into some sort of a vague
distant
Sisyphus had spotted a friend 50 yards
away in a walk with his gaze upon them
and while I pass them I say something in
my variant dialect I say host to an
Arctic saying have you seen my friend hi
T and they step aside and I'm out so you
have to you have to understand the heart
of men and you have to understand the
the way police would would react and in
what would they do it's so brazen that
nobody of the chinese han chinese police
would ever suspect we were working
without any permits at all yeah now in
in our time there's this mania for truth
and authenticity and for acknowledging
that there's always the group and never
the individual that matters the the
so-called great man theory of history is
certainly at its cultural low and yet
here you are talking to us about the
need to deceive to break the law and to
affirm the violent act of creation in a
very strong leadership context in which
you're taking on all of this additional
risk just too and in part inspire and
and protect your people even you seem to
be a man completely out of out of time
with the current era and it seems to
suit you fine is that wrong not really
there are few of us but I wish there
were more hmm but of course what what we
are doing in filmmaking is not always
based on boardroom decision the way
we've shaped the dialogue today in the
Hollywood industry is determined by
wardrobe decisions and and that's why
moviemaking has become so stale and so
uninteresting and so predictable so if
you do the the most the wildest of the
stories and that's all we said counts
you see I too
not step outside the boundaries of
legality it has to do with with a
caliber of your quest with the depths of
your story with a vision that you are
pursuing if that has real real depth and
you know it has enduring depth then you
have you have the task and the duty to
do the things that are necessary as long
as I said as you do not damage or hurt
anyone know what you are taking a fair
amount of responsibility we had Jim
Watson come to this office and he he's
he the co-discoverer of the
three-dimensional structure of DNA of
Watson yeah okay yeah yeah yeah yes but
he he said something which was you know
I found very disturbing but also very
sensible he said you're given about five
opportunities to really level up in your
life this was how he saw it and he said
you have to take each one of those even
though sometimes each of them comes with
an opportunity where somebody may be put
at risk or hurt and I was curious you
have a very strong relationship with
risk where you're both putting people at
risk and trying to make sure you put
them at risk as little as possible if if
both of those are true do you believe
that let's say Watson was correct that
you have to take these opportunities
even if they do put others at risk or do
you really have a way no harm well I
think it's more than five opportunities
and you're these things if I've seen a
hundred times this these moments and in
risk-taking per se as now there's no
great value it depends on what you are
doing and and what kind of purpose he
serves and it's not a quality per se to
take risks I try to to avoid risks and
and and you see my proof that I have
been prudent circumspect and
well-organized is that
over 70 films not a single one of my
actors ever was hurt not one I was hurt
sometimes sometimes it has happened that
some very close collaborator physically
next to me like a cinematographer with a
20 kilo a handheld camera at that time
heavy flies through the air on the deck
edge of a ship that bangs into a into a
rock and yes and we were flying some 10
meters and he bangs with his hand on the
on the deck and the camera split his
hand apart so yes it happens and and he
didn't mind by the way where he
volunteer dream I write of course use
every every since that who's coming with
me
nobody has to yeah sure and actually in
this case when we went with cameras
through the rapids that and we had shot
the the sequence with cameras on on the
shore there's no real source but in the
rocks on either sides of these Rapids I
was even pushed by some collaborators we
should have a camera on board I said
really yes of course I see that but but
we do not know what's gonna happen it
may sink what happens then it the ship
probably is not gonna sink because we
established it with a lot of very very
solid air chambers in there it probably
wouldn't have sunk even under the worst
of case scenarios well let me ask a very
very difficult question that assume that
you were trying to make Fitzcarraldo in
which you drag this in steamer over a
mountain and it's not the year 1982 but
it's some year maybe around now maybe a
few years in the future where it's
possible to do this completely with
computer-generated imagery so that you
could do it in CGI now my question would
be this would if it produced the same
visual effect as you didn't fit Scarola
would it be worth doing if it could be
done cheaply and safe
no it doesn't mmm it doesn't create the
same effect and even the five-year-old
six-year-old viewers know it this was a
digital effect and and you will always
know it I don't think that digital
effects will ever create some sort of an
equal experience may be to some degree
visually but you see and moving a ship
over amount means you are exposing
yourself to things that are unthinkable
and unexpected you incorporate in your
approach the the totally unknown and the
totally unknown invades you in the
unexpected in the unthinkable invades
your every hour and you create something
an authenticity of story not only visual
effect you create an authenticity of
event that is unparalleled and it's
unparalleled by anyone who is sitting in
on a computer and creates a steamboat
moving up on on a hill it does not and
it will not so do so in the future if
you're quite confident of that because
the the experience of of a thing in
rooted in reality cannot replaced it can
be substituted it can be somehow
paralleled in a way by by an artificial
world by digital effects until today I
would I would still insist I should if
it's me who does it I should move the
ship is in one piece 360 tons right and
let the others through their stuff and
it will be inferior to mine well this is
this is just it I mean you mentioned
professional wrestling and Jesse Ventura
yeah and you know that there is a theory
amongst our group that maybe
professional wrestling is a lot more
real than anyone really wants to believe
that it it's commonly thought to be fake
one interpretation of your work sir is
that you are making many more
documentaries than you claim to be
because in fact in something like
Fitzcarraldo it's a fictional story
about a man moving a ship over a
mountain made by a real man who moved a
real ship over a real mountain and I
remember when it came out in 1982 my I
was in college we were electrified by
this concept then if he had been done in
CGI and we had known that it would been
in CGI we would not have been that
interested in the story but it was the
fact that there was an insane man moving
a ship over a mountain in reality
clinically sane man 2050 sorry fair
amount I don't want to you know a
necessity aspersions yeah but but
functionally sir it's a it is a crazy
quest and you and you spoke about it no
it's not a crazy crazy those terms no no
it's not a crazy quest it was doable
yeah and you and I to the to it'll yeah
you see you to not go out and and try to
let's say go to Mars and spend there
half a year on Morrison and coveri and
getting footage you you will fail it's
not gonna work and we will see the
technological utopias coming to an end
in our very century well you know as
various entry like we saw social utopias
coming to an inevitable end in the last
century
communism paradise on earth Nazism a
master race dominating the planet and on
so we will see so to the to little to
the to a bland I knew it was doable
because I had figured out how to move a
very very heavy object in one piece on
top of a hill for X I'm trying to figure
out they have the ancients move yes
Neolithic peoples would say more about
how you solve that you saw that as a
puzzle I was searching
coastline of Britain if a completely
different movie and I end up at night
when it was already dark at carnac it's
4,000 mineus these slabs of stone
erected in parallel lines Hill uphill
downhill uphill down it's it's stunning
and what I saw in the headlights was
stunning and I slept in the car and next
morning I I see there's a little kiosk
they sold Pro sugar and in the pursuer
it's written that this couldn't have
been done by Neolithic people they
didn't have any technology yes I had a
rope and things like this it could have
been only alien astronauts and I thought
nel I can let I will not move from
this place until I as a Neolithic person
could do it so what I would do is let's
assume I have the rock already three
four hundred tons I would need
disciplined men to build a ramp but
maybe one kilometer ramp which has
hardly any inclination which is almost
flat at the end it would end up in a ten
meter high hill and I would take a
crater hole into the hill and then I
would move then I would move the the
stone on oak trunks on hardened oak
trunks and it's very easy to move it
either with turnstiles in ropes or
pushing it in a way with levers and at
the end it would drop into the crater
hole and then you would have it erect
with a heavier part up and then he would
remove the hill until let's say it was
sticking only into two meters of
grounded Hardin the crowd so he would
have it erected and I I kept puzzling
about one mania the heaviest ever 1100
tons
Hevy near the coastal place Lokmanya
care not to far from Karnak and this
stone this slab was broken into four
pieces in the major the biggest of all
pieces at leasts six 700 tons heavy was
aligned in one direction and a little
bit further out the rest of the
fragmentation was perfectly aligned in
one line so why does this happen if a if
that stone falls it breaks it will align
the fragments but it didn't so I think
what has happened he said they moved the
stone dropped it into a hole and it
broke it broke at the rim and in the in
the smaller fragments aligned in
thousands of years later due to erosion
some of these many years fall over
topple over in the toppled over in a
different in the wrong direction so an
accident a Neolithic accident which must
have happened spoke to my fear as if it
was proof of my way how I would do it
and that's how I bought the ship of an
abounding Wow so and I knew it was
doable if it was doable for Neolithic
people seven thousand years ago I can do
the same thing as well
I have no doubt whatsoever and and in an
ideal case you would according to
primitive laws of physics you could have
one single child pulling it over the
mountain let's say you introduced a
pulley system of 10,000 fold returns you
pull on a string five miles until the
ship moves 50 yards and the child could
pull it over a mountain so you have to
think you have to think the bold ideas
but also those that are outside the
common trend
it can only have been the alien
astronauts - I showed you because I'm
very proud of it you should try to get
hold of it because it's very interesting
it's called The Vanishing Area paradox I
keep it in my agenda all the time and it
was published in the Scientific American
and it's very strange you have you have
a configuration of elements of of pieces
and when you rearrange the configuration
of these all of a sudden there's an
empty space of something that has filled
out the entire space without a
millimeter in between and I kept
thinking about it because it defies all
my experience with reality so within my
reality it is unthinkably it is
impossible so and I kept thinking about
it and and I was misled the whole thing
is a hoax it turns out it's a hoax
it's fraudulent and it gives it a
certain veracity because it's was posed
this vanishing area paradox the question
is posed in the Scientific American you
do not believe that they are cheating
you and they cheat you and what what
what is happening is when when you look
at it very very precisely the area where
all of a sudden in the middle there's an
empty space has been artificially made
slightly larger by giving slight slight
more Angus in in the industry lines in
summing up creates a little empty space
yeah and I I solved it myself because I
thought I cannot solve it because it
defies my sense of reality in the sense
of reality of everyone around me
something is wrong what could be wrong
what could be wrong and I started to
check in one of the questions I asked
myself could it be that this is a hoax
that this is a fraud and if it's a fraud
how do they cheat you on how do they
cheat you senses senses of observation
in this case well that touches on
something that fascinated me there's a
quote of yours where apparently you were
facing a booing audience booing at you
and you had the sense to say to them you
were all wrong sure if they were all
wrong they were all wrong yes what is it
in you that has the courage to stand up
to seemingly I don't know arbitrary
levels of negativity to problems of that
other people think are insoluble where
they have to invoke ancient aliens
there's something so disagreeable about
your personality that you're capable of
shepherding an idea through that much
negativity what-what-what trade is that
well it was a specific case when I was
filming the the fires in Kuwait in the
first in the first Gulf War when Saddam
Hussein's retreating army set every
single oil well on fire and I filmed it
in a way that it looks as if it was shot
on a like a science fiction film it
cannot be our planet and yet we know it
must have been filmed on our planet and
so it's highly aesthetic highly stylized
and in the immediate outcry was
aestheticizing of the horror but it
wasn't really horror it was not horror
for any human being nobody got burned of
course it was a crime against creation
itself obscuring the sky for a wide wide
area and in something that should not
happen not only a
crime against the human race it was a
crime against creation and and and in
this screamin and people actually spat
at me when I walked through the central
island that somehow reinforced my
resolve and I I stepped up and I said
Dante in his Inferno has done exactly
the same
Geronimo's Bosh has done exactly the
same in his hellish visions and Koya in
his disastrous Tillich era has done the
same thing and and and and then the end
I said and you are all wrong so do we
have to burn the book the Divine Comedy
now do we have to of course we don't
well so indeed that is a there's an
amount of certainty in me that and it's
not really anything that I can say was
paroled
it was totally natural to say that yeah
I met to me it sort of strikes me is we
need people to inspire us by showing us
that it's not only possible that it's
necessary to stand up to large numbers
of people inside of a crowd now one of
the things that we could have it was
literally the entire crowd the entire
pretty yeah well that's how I perceived
it walking down the central aisle there
probably was a an amount of well-wishers
and there must have been also some
applause but it it was overwhelming it
was so overwhelming that some some very
credible reviewers like Amos Foley who
wrote for the Village Voice describes
the scene he described it so it's not a
figment of my fantasy you know that
there's this very strange story with the
reviewer Joe Morgenstern when he first
saw Bonnie and Clyde he gave it a
terrible review because the violence was
so disturbing and it was set to up-tempo
happy music and he said well this is an
abomination and then strangely a week or
two later he's
I have to review this film again I was
totally wrong the film is a masterpiece
because it took a while to just
understand that that wasn't an error but
it was actually a brilliant artistic
choice do you find that you do not find
it nowadays anymore I had no one last
have been 40 years ago somebody hit the
nerve in the guts in the caliber to
declare himself wrong and taking a new
fresh look at it
so yeah you hardly see it at all so let
me ask I would love to ask you one final
question before opening it up to the
audience you've spoken quite a lot for a
filmmaker about the importance of
reading and the written word you've
written obviously beautifully and so
many of your thoughts and in this guide
for the perplexed and you you have
previously spoken about how television
was turning us into idiots and dumbing
us down and that reading would be the
the key quality that determined who
would inherit power in the future world
what do you see in the 21st century as
having changed in this equation with
television having gotten much better in
the internet having seemingly gotten us
into a state where we weren't even able
to get there with with the idiot box as
well television hasn't gotten that much
better in some segments yes in in this
long limited many season big story set
all of a sudden you can narrate large
large expansive forms like war and peace
so all of a sudden we can create
Dostoyevsky on a TV screen or Netflix
screens or whatever of course the
situation has become more precarious
with the advent of the internet but of
course there are forces that have
started way way before the internet we
cannot blame it all for example people
who would read if the numbers have
declined considerably
fifty years or so and in today in
universities even in humanities I even
in classics Department where they should
read ancient Greek and Latin they do not
read anymore and they have a hard time
and I have witnessed it I've witnessed
it in in person they are not even
capable of of writing three coherent
signs and expressing one coherent brief
argument and that's alarming that's
alarming and and that's why I still
young aspiring filmmakers yes watch
films into whatever you need to learn in
technical terms but read read read read
read read if you don't read you will be
a filmmaker but mediocre at best if you
really want to become somebody of
significance and everyone who is around
at this time of significance is reading
they're all reading everyone and you are
not and it's not only for filmmaking is
probably in your profession the same
thing
you cannot lose yourself in in
algorithms and in in in in software
questions and in articulating of things
without conceptually being up to to a
very high standard of of evolution of
not only technology but civilization per
se we have a very very deep task and in
reading in my opinion this is the thing
that is absolutely needed and what I
keep saying sometimes but nobody will
understand it but I say it anyway
traveling on foot and irrespective of
the distance and I have done very long
distance traveling on foot gives you an
insight into the world itself and I can
say it only in a dictum and I've
repeated it before
the world reveals itself to those who
travel on foot nothing else does with
such clarity in such transparency
nothing nothing and yet nobody travels
on foot it doesn't matter
stay where you are but I just say it as
a as a sign of help if you really want
to understand the real world and also
conceptually where we are standing as
human beings at this very moment in
history travel on foot and read it's a
fantastic advice let's see if we can
anybody can follow it and I would love
to open it up to questions what
questions do we have foreigners it's I I
don't want to give you one or two books
because and here we sit down and you
would read them and you think yeah you
have done it so you should not read two
books but 2,000 books but I give you for
those who are into creative things and
and including I would say including even
creative forms of mathematics it's a
it's a book written by an obscure
British writer published in 1967 and
it's called the Peregrine about watching
its Diaries watching peregrine falcons
at a time when the falcons were almost
extinct jay a baker i think we now only
after a few decades we even know what
jay and a stands for i even don't know
what his first names were in his middle
name and it has pros that we have seen
not seen since since joseph conrad and
it has precision of observing a small
segment of the real world with a
precision and also with an emphasis and
the passion that is unprecedented in
literature so in whatever you
doing whether you're a musician or a
filmmaker into mathematics or into
computers this kind of very very deep
relentless passion for what you are
doing very specific and it's a it's a
great wonderful book and what else well
there are many but I have a list of
mandatory books from a rogue film school
some guerrilla-style antithesis to film
schools and there's five or six books
what comes to mind is bear analogy are
still Castillo the discovery and
conquest of New Spain that the original
title is much much longer he was a foot
man of Cortez and when he was old he
wrote from his apparently some diaries
and reminiscences he writes down an
incredible story incredibly rich in
details and insight into the into the
heart of men in anything else read read
the Russians read Alda lean and Kleist
the Germans Buena also a German reads
Hemingway he reads Joseph Conrad the
short stories in particular so but if
but don't don't don't believe that this
would make you into a into a different
person it's it's the permanence of
reading the insistence of reading
is it filling to you did you sneak up as
material is it more fulfilling for you
to expose people to he wants where they
puff report extremes or the reverse
this is more important to expose people
to do us or more fulfilling yeah expose
people to nuance we're the hip up there
was extreme I have never asked myself
this question it doesn't factor in my in
my work well I I follow a very very
clear vision I see a film very very
clearly and of course it has it has a
big story and it has it extremes in it
and it has nuances and and of course I
would never want to touch a story that
was not really big where I was convinced
this is big and it has excesses in the
test all sorts of things at the same
time the the real life the real life
comes from the Neos and from the details
so but it's I cannot even separate it I
cannot give you a satisfying
juxtaposition of both but it's it
doesn't it doesn't function in in a way
I make my films
bolt cutters well that's bolt cutters
you you have to take metaphorically I
have a whole list of of things does
anyone have the the book a guide for the
perplexed here because I I a seat here
on that can you give it to me please
thank you
a guide for the perplexed and we spoke
about before the title is so beautiful I
had to steal it from Maimonides the
great Jewish philosopher middle-aged
Spain
I think Seville or a Cordoba I don't
even remember but anyway and and here at
the on the back end oh yeah by the way
it's a real pair it's no Photoshop my
wife who sits back there did this router
so in in here nerve I don't know how it
was put together but it's it gives it
sums a lot of things always taken in it
speaks of bolt cutters always take the
initiative there's nothing wrong with
spending a night in a jail cell if it
means getting the shot you meet send all
your dogs and one might return with prey
never wallow in your troubles despair
must be kept private in brief learn to
live with your with your mistakes expand
your knowledge and understanding of
music and literature old in modern that
role of unexposed celluloid you have in
your hand might be the last in existence
so do something impressive with it the
laptop in front of you may be the last
one in existence you do something good
and impressive with it there's never an
excuse not to finish a film care carry
bolt cutters everywhere Swartz
institutional cowardice
there's too much institutional cowardice
in the film industry and and I do
believe the
the computer industry and software and
cell has has bolder bolder designs I
think there's not too much institutional
cowardice it comes now after things like
Facebook have been established how do we
stop excesses on Facebook how do we stop
excesses on Instagram do we show do we
have to stop a real beheading of a
hostage in real time or do we not do it
so the the institutionalization of of
content is coming post Westham after it
has been normally but in the film
industry for example the institutional
cowardice comes before you even make a
move they ask you do you have do you
have for example a and o insurance do we
have a how do you call it some sort of
insurance completion bond now I don't
and I make a film anyway and there was
there but in that case I had to finance
it it out of my own pocket and can I
move in a wild way back to a very early
question about something that is
fabricated like WrestleMania has a lot
of truth in it they get away with
bruises and dislocated elbows the last
film I made is a feature film called
family romance LLC romance as a business
in Japan in the Japanese language where
you can hire a missing friend a family a
father of a family during a wedding
ceremony because a real father allegedly
suffers from epilepsy in truth he's an
alcoholic and cannot be shown
the groom's parents and family and
there's an interesting thing that
happens 30 men who actually in reality
founded this company family romance who
sends out 1600 agents and actors to help
you and to feel less lonesome and
replace a family member
he was filmed by Japanese television
they interviewed him and they
interviewed one of his clients who had
rented in his solitude had rented a
friend and he's in the in the film as
well it turns out that the client was
actually not a client he was also a
rented member from family romance he was
a he was an imposter put in front of the
NHK cameras NHK apologized profusely in
print and on on the air and the founder
of family romance say something very
very significant now he says I do
believe that the imposter that was sent
out from my pool of actors tells you
more of the truth than a real one
the real one would lie to the cameras
because in in Japan in in their society
you have to keep face and you cannot
admit that your life is miserable and
you allowed some and you were crying at
home in your pillow and so this person
the real person would not say that he
would lie to the camera but Mike my man
who was put in front of your camera my
man who is Stanley 200 times comforting
solitary people he tells you the gist
the real truth about what is going on
and I think he's right
I'm sure he's right yeah so that's how
stir the imposter has more truth in him
then the real person who wants to keep a
force a
of whatever well-behaved behavior in
public you could make a film about our
generation my generation sits in this
room what do you think the log line
would be I wouldn't know any log line
but I have I have done a film on the
internet lo and behold which has
appealed very much to to the two years
in a race where even the younger ones
you are all already a veteran it's a 15
year old who probably come up and and
have to teach you that the 35 year olds
a 25 year old now I don't know a logline
but I have made a lot of films that
apparently were for a general audience
when I made them 40 years ago 45 years
ago the enigma of kaspar hauser all of a
sudden I get emails of 15 year old young
kids from Missoula Montana because today
they can have access to the film by
streaming or other ways through the
internet piracy for example which is a
successful distribution system and and
all of a sudden it's a very very young
who respond to my films and it's not not
foreign to me that I have always made
films for those who are mentally active
and into a turmoil and who are looking
out for organizing their lives so I've
always been in in a way I've been young
and now the film in Japan is is a return
to the times when I was 23 24 25 when I
made a Gary the wrath of God you
wouldn't know what would come after the
next bend of the
would there be a would that be Rapids or
not so and in this kind of readiness to
to face whatever is going to be thrown
at you and and you just face it and you
deal with it you actually in terms of
the generation that is might now be
rediscovering your films do you have any
thoughts about the way in which we are
going back in reevaluating cinematic
work based on our new feelings about the
directors I'm thinking of Tarantino who
put Huma Thurman at rest at risk in Kill
Bill which I thought was a fantastic
film Woody Allen of course with his
difficulties having his work reevaluated
are we how do you feel about bodies of
work being reprocessed through the lens
of the alleged failures of the creators
I think there will be a renascence and
we see it already for example classical
music all of a sudden as I just read
yesterday or today has a new platforms
on the internet that's all steered
towards mainstream pop all of a sudden
you can access it or for example in
movies The Criterion Collection which is
a very very fine collection of films had
disappeared and reappeared apparently as
it's either independent streaming label
or within Amazon I have to find out I
don't know yet
but all of a sudden these things are
back and the 15 year old from Missoula
Montana is not just back his is just
emerging so now I have no doubt that we
are gonna see films that are outside
outside of the regular mainstream but
have depth and vision and in wonderful
stories I will not disappear the sheller
will disappear
the shallow of of yesterday when you
look at talk show so it it it pop shows
of the 1960s it's it's just stunning how
how shallow they are and they disappear
very quickly yeah there are some other
questions
well when I'm speaking about
technological utopia set inevitably will
come to an end what comes to mind is
immediately space space colonization not
only is it an obscenity it's also
undoable obscenity because it hints it
asks the human race like locusts grazing
our planet empty and then moving on we
can move on to Mars for example but it
it should be contained and it's doable
for a few scientists a few astronauts
who have a small tiny little habitat
where they have enough drinking water
enough shelter against radiation and
enough air to breathe yes we can create
that we will not put 1 million humans on
planet Mars it's not going to happen
it's techno technically not really
doable and unwise and a part of Mars we
cannot reach anything outside of our
solar system because it's simply too far
it would take you a hundred ten thousand
years to reach the next one which is
only three and a half or four and a half
light-years away we just won't be able
to do it it's period and in this kind of
illusion this kind of utopia technical
utopia will come to a fairly quick end
in our century or other utopias had come
to mind
immortality' of course we can stretch
out longevity to a certain point but
that's about it
we are going to die that's what the
entire creation everywhere and not only
on our planet
everywhere points to the same thing that
there's an impermanence of what is
around everywhere so that's that's one
of the things I have to think about
other utopias take technically utopias
but you are much closer to approaching
technically utopias in I am so you have
to find out what what we should do and
what we should not do and what is a
utopia and what is within the within
realities of human beings you have time
for one or two last questions
the camera changes a real situation
you talk about the real world when you
meet rejected camera into it how it
affects the perception of people
we're yeah it's an old philosophical
question and a physical question of how
deep do you insert your camera or your
position is observer does it change the
reality that's out there hopefully it
does because I'm a creator I'm not a
observation camera in the bank that
waits for 15 years in no bank robber
ever shows up so we are not we are not
the fly-on-the-wall
I want to insert myself I want to create
I want to mold
I want to influence my story even the
documentaries and I I do change facts
and I'm quoting now entre sheet the
French writer who said I change facts to
such a degree that they resemble truth
more than reality and it's a wonderful
way to say it and you see you are too if
you are seriously asking the question
with an indignant undertone it means
that you are very much fact oriented
which I don't believe in your case but
many people are too fact oriented and
cinema and does not have to be even
documentaries have to only partly be
effect oriented because effects do not
equal truth they do not and it's the
same thing like with family romance a
imposter gives you a deeper truth than
the real person and my simplest of all
explanations is and I have used it many
times so if you have heard it from me my
apologies Michelangelo creating the
sculptor of the pietá Jesus in the arms
of Mary sir face is a 33 year old man
and when you look at Mary she is 17
his mother is 17
so of course it's not factually correct
but he didn't want to cheat us or lie to
us or whatever he just wanted to point
out an essential truth was something
that resembles more truth because I do
not know what truth is nor two
mathematicians I think only deeply
religious people know what it is so they
they have an easier life than those who
are not religious
cheerio the enemy watch developer
passionately converse side
the truth the passion of the wood
carvers courier and there's a scene at
the end of the raid and they wanted to
be very much the focus on that and find
who the Raven was in Blaine's
like we couldn't really find them
and the implication being that it wasn't
real in your film accordingly so I guess
I'd wait a while to ask you this what
was the real of this matter and all
these questions about truth are there
any things in documentary film
would be remotely like for example Marty
Scorsese was recently accused of putting
a fake character and his Bob Dylan is
there any thing that wouldn't be okay
no I think putting a fictitious
character in a Bob Dylan documentary
congratulations to Scorsese who who is
normally cowardly when it comes to
expanding forums he follows he follows
very much the norm he's a wonderful
filmmaker but but not really
extravagantly courageous in into
creating new things but I have not seen
the Bob Dylan film but I welcome what
you are saying what you are saying about
Harmony Korine and David Blaine the
magician he seems I don't like David
Blaine at all his his repulsive in
everything he's doing and and but but
what seems to be significant is he tries
he you started as an illusionist doing
card tricks and illusions he seems to be
moving away from the illusionist into
trying to strain his body to its utmost
limits to the brink of death which is
stupid its outright stupid to immerse
yourself in a water tank for for a whole
week it can't get any more stupid than
that and and he is just making a living
out of something that is definitely
obscene so do you not have a cactus
needle stuck in your kneecap nasty now
it stayed for a few years in my knee in
my knee seen you I jumped for a cast of
midgets I made a film even dwarf star is
small and one of them was run over by an
by a car that was driving his going in
circuits one caught fire inside at the
end I said yourself on a midget to put
out the fire well you better do that
because everybody else was was just
looking at like it it had a Christmas
tree burning and indeed the first thing
you do throw yourself on him and
extinguish the guy I didn't smother him
I didn't squish no we're saying that yes
but but I said if all of you
unscathed at the end of the the movie
I'm gonna from this ramp I'm gonna jump
into this field of cacti and you all
have you at that time eight millimeter
cameras and your photo cameras and you
can take your picture and I take off and
I leaped and yes right some some of them
got stuck in my knee seniors and and
they don't get out easily it would be an
honor sir to take you to lunch with
David Blaine to work this thing out yes
now now to the next parking lot not not
forbidden I do I wouldn't like to have a
dinner with him I do not want to ruin my
appetite
but I would gladly take him to the men's
room or two to fight it out or to take
him to the parking lot
Oscar as we settle this our Agosti ask
the valets to step into obscurity and
and just let us sort it out among men
okay Berner I gotta tell you your life
has been an inspiration to me since I
was 16 and it doesn't even feel like you
can meet over in our Hertzog in real
life this is a very special day in my
life I want to thank you for coming
bringing your stories your wisdom your
views on arts and your admonitions which
no one is following I think that
probably there are some in our audience
who are going to make a special note
that this is the this is the advice
that's hard to get but it's your life
you don't need to listen to me you you
will find you will find your own
guidance and your own vision best of
luck - best of luck to all of you so
alright can you change for Verna Hertz
[Applause]
[Music]