hey everybody you are back it is Jack
Murphy you're on the Jack Paar podcast
that delicious tacos here he's laughing
at me ruining up my shill intro you can
find me Jack Murphy at Jack Murphy
live.com on Twitter at Jack Murphy live
basically Jack Murphy live all over the
Internet I actually planned it that way
so reach out find me the book I'm
chilling is still Democrats a deplorable
song very well please check it out on
Amazon also come down to the liminal
order and check out what we're doing
there in all men's international
organization with 200 members spanning
seven countries and three continents now
we are worldwide come on down check us
out liminal - order calm and that's
because some jackass squatted on liminal
order calm as I was brainstorming names
for the group a year ago I've been cyber
squatted so it's liminal - order calm
come down and check us out I have today
a return guest somebody who people
report that the podcast I did with this
guy delicious tacos was the best podcast
they'd ever listened to on any subject
matter at any time in the history of the
podcast universe so that's quite quite a
feat that have to follow up this time I
think look for think we'll settle for
mid-grade ladies and gentlemen my
favorite fiction writer in all of the
world the one and only delicious tacos
how you doing sir welcome good morning
somehow I'm nervous for this one no I
was totally like your podcast last year
was one of the first ones I'd ever done
I was totally relaxed about it for some
reason hyping this book has made me more
anxiety ridden than anything of anything
I've done in my life I did a podcast
yesterday with conte Bhatt and one of my
favorite authors Sam pink and I was I
felt like I was about to take the
 SATs for some reason and I've
tried like prayer and meditation about
it when I do these podcasts what I want
is to be a nun like I'm an actor here
this is not this is not my show it's not
my job to lay the groundwork and the
structure of it I'm here to support you
and your podcast
and try to tell the audience something
and try to be unselfishly contribute
something to the world and so I pray to
do that before I do these podcasts my
god please let me serve Jack Murphy in
his audience it just doesn't like God is
not sticking with me maybe it's
something about the quarantine but I'm
just I have this feeling of like I gotta
 sell this book you know the
books been out for two weeks not even
two weeks yeah and there's just more of
a sense of like I got it and it's
doing well it's doing better than any of
my books have ever done before oh I'm
making substantial money from it people
like millions millions yeah well that's
the thing that's sort of part of me
always wants even though I know that
there's no big break part of me always
wants something to become a viral
sensation mm I thing that I the the
philosophy of art that I always think
about is the Grateful Dead who never had
a radio hit until the the lead guy was
fat and old and looked like Santa Claus
somehow finally in 1987 they had a hit
but before that they just kept
performing live and people kept showing
up and it was this cult thing mm-hmm and
they you know this is a Grateful Dead us
that's what and most people hated them
right most people were like there when
you when you looked at their shows it's
like a fat guy that looks like Santa
it's a it's a weird gay looking guy in
dolphin shorts they seem like dorks
their audience is all like crazy hippies
and yet somehow when you go to that show
it's a mind-blowing experience every
show is different they didn't you know
they had one big hit and then they
didn't play it every time and they just
kind of did they they had an ethic of
feeding off the audience's energy never
playing the same show twice
experimenting yeah and a lot of times
they failed and it sucked and
but there was always a couple moments
when it was incredible yeah and so
that's what I'd like that's where I'm
like I'm gonna stop just gonna keep
showing up I'm going to keep playing the
music that suits the energy of the time
and
do my best but then suddenly when I have
something where I can measure with a
metric and also like I have there's a
there's a real desperation that I'm
trying to own I'm like I I'm coming to
realize like I was always like I do want
to have artistic integrity in other
words I can't I can't sell out I just am
not capable of doing something that's
sort of popular or tailored to Taylor to
The Times or whatever but I want the
trappings of success I want lots of
money a beautiful girlfriend and I want
people to recognize me on the street
sounds like this sounds like the
beginning of Trainspotting and we know
we know where that ended up right so the
Grateful Dead is an interesting thing to
bring up because they were one of the
original content marketers right because
they would allow people to record their
shows and then distribute their shows
yeah underground and they didn't charge
or license or anything and it was those
underground tapes that got me into the
Grateful Dead in the 90s because you
know there was only like six archetypes
you could pick of who regular character
you were gonna be in high school and
Grateful Dead was one of my character
selections for a couple of years and
yeah that's how I got into them because
somebody handed me a tape of a show and
so really that's kind of like the
original original content marketing from
our perspective you put all this
out there for free and then eventually
when you got something to sell hopefully
your people will see well we'll buy it
now let me ask you a question sir yes
what is a metric of success for you the
the white whale that I'm hunting is not
having to have a job it's look
independent book sales providing me with
a middle-class income that's adequate to
raise one biological child in a
middle-class manner that is the it's see
how oddly specific it is to like I've
really regressed spiritually I think
last time I talked to you I was like I'm
really grateful that I'm making five
bucks off this and I love you know all I
want is to share my truth with people
and make them feel less alone and
somehow this year I'm like it has to be
 BMW
our house in Southern California but you
certified preowned yeah you know I mean
right now I'm driving a certified
pre-owned Subaru Legacy which is the
 fine vehicle you love it I do
I fell in love with it in your book it's
a great hits the fan car because
it's got all-wheel-drive but never the
 thing is never gonna break it's
plenty of room this is one of your
talents being able to make you know the
sexy list sexy the Subaru I'm into it
dude I want it now it's a great court I
don't know what you drive but the foot
it's the the AWD on it it's a great car
for commuting to like my nerd job and
then also once in a while you take it up
to Idaho and there's this
hailstorm or something and this thing
just handles it yeah totally you know I
have four-wheel drive in my car and I
think the only time I ever use it is one
of my seven-year-old gets in the car and
she starts pushing button though she
goes what does this one do daddy
yeah yeah and I'm gonna go I go this is
when we're driving off-road literally
never except now this is an exciting
time because there we got a little taste
of might hit the fan yeah it's
there's a feeling I think that it's not
really going to wear merely going to
enter a second Great Depression where
life just becomes marginally more
annoying like you're gonna I don't think
anybody's thinking that basic needs
aren't gonna be met or anything like
that but I think I think this this era
of prosperity might be coming to an end
and there was a there was a little taste
of uncertainty where nobody had any idea
what the disease was really like because
it came out of China that's never gonna
tell you anything and what if it does
eat your testicles what if it does cause
permanent lung and brain damage
what if you know the fatality rate for
some reason is there's some more
malevolent strain that kills some huge
number of people and it really does
become packs of roving ghouls in the
streets it's exciting and good content
yeah this is where in the shift from of
the energy from Corona being sexy to it
becoming very boring mmm yeah yeah I
definitely
feeling that I tweeted out the other day
it's okay to be bored by Corona yeah
quarantine yeah I can imagine I mean a
lot a lot of us are but you know we'll
take one moment of seriousness here to
reflect upon being a knowledge worker in
these days is a very fine and Keaton
place to be yeah I saw a good example
there's white blue collar white collar
no collar and knowledge worker zoom the
zoom class economy as I've been writing
about now is the no-collar economy and
it's a good place to be if you were set
up to be that way and so you know
there's there's some positives and
definitely some negatives and by the way
I just want to note it took us eight
minutes to get to corona yeah there's
not talking about it I was gonna I was
gonna explicitly rule it out but there's
no way to avoid that and I was I was
thinking about it because one of my
questions I had for you was it was your
last book you know finally some good
news and I forgot I forgot to
pimp the book at the beginning by the
way hey everybody
delicious tacos has a new book out it's
called the savage spear of the unicorn
it has a beautiful or blue cover and
with an excellent drawing of its unicorn
that got my seven-year-old attention she
goes daddy I love unicorns what's this
one about what does savage spear of the
unicorn mean and I was like I don't know
they're just magical animals honey but
anyway go get it to think of the book
well you know she's halfway through and
you know her margin notes are intense
but I gotta hide that from around
here it's worse than having a penthouse
laying around this huh but it is the
opposite problem like I wrote a book
called the which nobody can leave
around their house finally some good
news has an atomic bomb going off in the
cover and the title is endorsing mass
death yes this one I hadn't thought
about that is that it's a it's a playful
children's looking cover designed by an
artist named Owen Cyclops and and Matt
Lawrence who does all my covers I wanna
give a shout out to from them from the
old days yeah and both of them did did a
brilliant job but yeah it looks like
something that a little girl would pick
up and want to read and then the stories
are called like and
I try to I try to put that one on the
top shelf next to the weed so if I
really really really want to get to it
they can who's gonna stop them in that
case but I wanted to ask you though the
last book finally some good news was
apocalyptic porn fantasy basically yeah
about it being a good thing and you know
in some ways the apocalypse has come in
and said happening right now and is it
going the way that you saw it's there
it's a little different I'm getting laid
less I mean the part that was a naked
fantasy in the last book was he the
character travels around with the hot
girl from his office who also survives
the nuclear explosion that has not
happened to me there's no I didn't get
trapped in quarantine with an attractive
woman instead it's just me with my bag
of lentils and rice there you go
but you did get enough of those in
advance as well I will tell you that
minutes when started getting
ominous I was absolutely in a great
position because I'd already thought all
this stuff through like I'd thought
about what weapons to buy what you would
need how you might up and so if
 really did hit the fan
I had a four-wheel-drive vehicle I got
myself first I got a bow and arrow I
went to the gun store and I thought I'm
too crazy to have a gun so I'm gonna get
this bow and arrow which we should
discuss later because it turned out to
be a really fun hobby for the quarantine
I did end up also getting a gun I got
you know twenty pounds this is back in
January February
probably February I'm buying you know
the twenty pound bag of rice you know
bags of beans and proteins and huge jugs
of vegetable and I'm putting tap
water in every every container that I
have in the house because I sort of had
thought it through I had thought through
this prepper fantasy but what so what
what doesn't happen in in real life is
an exciting plot happens but I was
prepared I had you know duct tape
paracord knife other weapons flashlight
everything I might need you know
comfortable shoes to put it in a
backpack and walk over the Angeles
into the wilderness just in case
 really starts hitting the fan here
yeah but instead what have you found sir
instead I'm stuck in my house working
from home on zum meetings doing
conference calls people that are people
don't people in the business world are
rudely not acknowledging apocalyptic
times or they're thinking about ways
that it's an opportunity for their
business and instead of letting me just
be lazy and lay around nude in my yard
which is what I'd like to be doing I I'm
working high yeah and all the
girls on hinge want to go on skype dates
which is preposterous and I thought I
was trying to write this gimmicky short
story about a Skype date but the reality
is too boring to write about it's just
awful like nothing is happening
California is this giant anticlimax
where no real outbreak happened and
they're trying to push up these
preposterous ly small coronavirus
numbers like it's a big thing like what
would have happened if we hadn't done
this it's like okay but did you have to
close down the beach did you have to
close down the hiking trails I
understand I understand what they're
doing and I get it's out of an abundance
of caution however
some point I you know we're kind of at
the my fear about the California
lockdown is it's gonna extend way past
when it's at all interesting to anybody
yeah the good things about it are I was
out in the park yesterday I'm looking at
a girl two girls sitting on a blanket
talking having forbidden within six-foot
contacts one of them is wearing like a
white puffy dress and she keeps shifting
around and I'm seeing her panties and it
was it was so exotic to see like a real
woman's panties it was like being 12
years old again every time I get once in
a while there's a food truck I get food
truck food and it feels like growing up
sort of not rich in a small town and you
eat out as a treat and that's what it
feels like I called in a warm takeout
containers like oh my god I'm gonna eat
food that I didn't cook myself this is I
feel like you know I feel like a king
right now is lavish feast of whatever it
is barbecue joint so are you
feeling a sense of gratitude creeping
for some things that is the good aspect
spiritually there's a lot that I'm
grateful for it happened that last year
or end of 2018 I got evicted from my
apartment which I really liked a lot
because my landlady was just a conte and
she threw me out for no reason and so I
was forced to move into a nice house
with a yard and I'm it's like being on
house arrest you know it's like when dr.
Dre was on house arrest and they asked
him what it's like and he's like I
 I live in a great house so it's
not that bad and it's really not that
bad I've got an illegal archery range on
the side yard where I shoot bows
and arrows with my neighbor
he's my like he's my conspiracy buddy so
we both bought bows and arrows and like
seeds and all this other and all
these supplies I'm like we're in a
beautifully fortified position we've got
a natural backstop behind me so no
Morlocks can approach from the top
coming up the place there's a there's a
choke point like it's if you were a Navy
SEAL and had to defend this house like
you'd have a hard-on because it's so
great there's like a cactus field behind
my house so anybody that wants to get
to me has to go through the nastiest
tumbleweeds and cactuses and you know
all these crazy like rusty tetanus lated
laden fences it's a great place to be
but I'm lonely for sure mmm I can hear
it in my voice now this is something
happens every time I get on a phone call
and I'm hearing it now too like you
asked me some unrelated question about
14 minutes ago and I've just been
rambling on and on because I'm like an
Old West mountain man I've got a lot of
words in me they're not particularly
profound so you know they're not like
great written words that I can put into
something I just have a lot of extra
horseshit trapped in me way to get out
yeah that's interesting how have you
been dealing with you know if you read
your books you say you sound like lonely
but we know that there's a lot of
there's a lot of depth to your life I'm
sure but so what are you doing now to
deal with maybe this extra sense of
isolation or separation that's a real
thing you know how are you what are you
doing about them what I'm missing is
touch I mean once in a while I a
hooker every two weeks to get touched by
somebody mm-hmm I'm supposed to be
shocked by that yeah it's normal people
do it and it's a normal thing to do I
have to seeking arrangement girls that
are not you know they don't have
coronavirus and neither do i and they
come over and I em and we give each
other back rubs and shoot the but
otherwise I mean I - you know I mean
Alcoholics Anonymous I gotta talk to
other alcoholics on the phone once in a
while I'm going to a a zoom meetings
that are occasionally get bombed by
4chan so people will post like Adolf
Hitler will come in the meeting and it's
a 15 year old boy with like a you know
picture of Osama bin Laden or something
I had the greatest day zoom bombing ever
because there's these meeting moderators
that just don't you forget how non
internet savvy people are so there's
literally like 15 year-old boys called
like Mike hunt and jackoff and the
moderators like Mike hunt would you like
to share and then my think he unmutes
Mike
and my just starts screaming Heil
Hitler and then the old guy that's
running the meeting has no idea what to
do
it makes the meeting so much less boring
it's so much more interesting to hear
these kids but do you poo it a little
bit but I think you find comfort and
spiritual growth yeah good energy and
positivity there yeah so here's the
positive spiritual thing that's
happening I've got the beautiful front
yard where birds come and feast on the
weed seeds and I'm seeing you know God
God is present in my life I'm spending
time with this stray cat that I take
care of that lives lives in the
neighbor's yard and so it's been great
that way I'm getting lots of sunshine
I'm working out like a convict and
running up a mountain lifting I've got
great set of weights in my back yard and
probably in the best shape of my life
I'm eating home-cooked meals every day
with tons of vegetables you know nice
fatty meats connective tissue I mean I'm
in great shape for an old man
but you know we're the same age I think
you've got a great amount of white
nobody's seeing the video but you have
this incredible wizard beard with a
perfect white pattern like this enjoyed
dying all the time I do not die it do
not die but you I think you and I are
about the same age mid 70s yeah yeah
exactly
I'm 44 and my body looks great my face
as I'm white I'm a fair-skinned white
person so I do look you know I'm
starting to look like a casually we are
going to age poorly that's that's the
price yes that's the but there's that
that's the real white man's burden you
look like when we get old
especially if you're like me and you
choose to live in a subtropical desert
you should walk around with no sunblock
on ever I'm looking you know I look like
you ever you look at me looking at
yourself you look at yourself in the
reflection yeah I'm in natural light on
my crystal eye webcam I look like
but it's it's like if like there's
always documentaries about like white
people from Rhodesia or you know namibia
namibian farmers and it'll be some guy
talking in his accent to be like it's
the bricks and the watts of conflict
he's always in front of an old Land
Rover
with a crank on the front and he always
looks like he's a hundred fifty years
old and he's my age and that's how I
started to look like the guy that has
like a yam farm in Namibia that has to
scare off elephants from his crops all
the time
well you know you know my kid my kids
are like uh you know I feel like taking
a nap or I feel like taking a shower I'm
like okay these are two signs that
you're growing up you wanna take a nap
you want to take care of your stuff
you're going to clean yourself now one
of the clearest signs that a white dude
is getting older is like when you start
paying attention to eye creams and
moisturizers in shape bro this is let me
tell let me tell the podcast guests
about the delicious tacos I serum so I
was dating a woman that worked at a
cosmetic or like a fancy like eye cream
store basically and she used to bring
her most incredible like $80 per
milliliter eye cream and that
really does work mm-hmm it really does
really just so goddamn expensive and she
stopped seeing me so I wasn't getting it
for free anymore but what you do is you
take a couple drops of organic rosehip
seed oil that you can get on Amazon and
then mix that so it's about like five
parts rosehip seed oil to a hundred
parts just a low from the drugstore aloe
vera gel for sunburn mix that up it'll
turn into this off-white paste and put
that under your eyes don't get it in
your eyes but put it in your eye bags
and it works about 70% as well oh well
there you go but it doesn't work as well
as being black it definitely doesn't and
who knew you were gonna tune in to get a
homemade eye cream recipes from your
favorite smut writer delicious talk yeah
this is my hair stylist told me about
that she said organic rosehip seed oil
is nature's Botox so I bought some and
it's nature's bug yeah it's like 20
bucks you got a decent sized bottle and
it works great there you go well you got
it mix it with the aloe and you got to
mix it so it's not so really thank you
yeah you should please post a recipe
I'll - I'll tweet it out maybe I video I
thought I made a home beautiful
and beautifully I'm making this
it's hard to hold the phone at the same
time as you're mixing the homemade like
ingredients it's got to get a tripod do
that you got to get a tripod a ring
light and learn how to dance
or I could just not make eye
cream videos because if we look at me
I'm looking at my own eyes now like why
would anybody listen to me I look like
 but you should see me without the
cream all right all right so I have
script and an agenda and lots of
questions here all right well I want to
ask you sir since the last time we
talked we your book was in you know we
were launching your book which is on
sale for $3 right now the Kindle version
I like $3 for my book so it's a good
price it's for the corrent like people
it's my quarantine de Cameroon sale like
people are stuck at home so it's very
it's a very gracious and very nice of
you what has happened to you since then
riding riding wise like I know that the
novel was something that you said this
is my absolute best if I can't make it
with this I can't make it at all this is
a hundred and ten percent effort you
know god damn I hope this works
what's the what's the the debrief what
what happened afterwards how did it go
what do you think what is your
assessment now that the books been out
for what like a year or something yeah
it's been out it came out December 2018
so it's been a year and three or four
months it's done well it didn't again it
didn't give me the it didn't give me the
make a living off it but I made another
salary off it and a ton of people read
it and liked it and appreciated it in
the way I intended and discovered things
in it that you know were buried in it
and I'm grateful for the great response
it's gotten looked at there's two
versions so the two things that I had in
my head the two outcomes were a
beautiful beautiful harem of models
sucking my dick as I Drive my
gold-plated Aston Martin with my book
proceeds the film is made starring Brad
Pitt as delicious tacos and at the end
he turns toward the camera and
five hundred million dollar blockbuster
and says you know this is based on a
real guy named Lucia tacos and you
America should have sex with him and
then the other version is the book comes
out and it's a never end immediately
even people who like me are like what
the is this this is retarded like I
liked when you were writing blog post
about your dick but this is like
literally retarded it's not even a book
and it was a lot closer to the positive
version where a lot of people were like
I really enjoy you know they enjoyed the
novel one of the things that I dreamed
of one of the end States I dreamed of
was people pick it up and how like I
want to build this so when people pick
it up they can't put it down and that's
what a lot of people said when I read it
in one sitting
definitely what I wanted was people to
read it in one sitting and then read it
again because that's what I do with like
Michele Welbeck books and any books that
I really love and so I put a bunch of
stuff in it that people would get on the
second read and some people did it so
I'm grateful
like I'm incredibly grateful it was it
was what I was trying to say was not I
was not completely in my own head
speaking in some retarded language that
only I can understand it wasn't
communicable to other people and it's
been sort of the six I mean I've sold
like many thousands of these books
mm-hmm if it were if it had been a small
independent press book it would be a
success if it was a Simon & Schuster
book it would be a complete bomb
but for a schmuck working out of his
dining room it's Star Wars like that's a
huge hit and this new book savage spear
of the unicorn available now is selling
a lot more than finally some good news
dude when it first came out Wow
so this was sort of my my my same plan
for this book was like each the thing I
noticed when I put up finally some good
news is that the the book before
that also sold a lot better when the new
book came out so and this you know so
each book cumulatively enhances the pick
up of the previous photo and so a lot of
people are reading my books more books
than ever before
however again I've regressed spiritually
so I I want the doorbell to ring and
it's a
chick being like I stalked you from your
business license and I need you to
impregnate me now so let's think let's
dig into that for a second
so most people that write books or write
anything literally never have anybody
read them okay
most people that blogger tweet literally
have no one ever read them most people
that put effort into writing books they
never get published the ones that they
self-published no one reads those have
an uncle that self-published a book you
know he sold
he sold like fourteen copies and you got
two reviews from his wife and his you
know hit my mom and were they at least
worth a three star review where they
were moderate really good
[Laughter]
and so there is I'd say 99.9% of people
that write anything get nope don't even
get a chance to get feedback
right so then you've got the blog you've
got probably had millions of views over
all these years in total you have all
these people giving you great feedback
then you put out a couple books and you
put out a novel it sells so much that
you're saying it's another salary yes
and you have achieved a level of
commercial success while compared to
Star Wars is not quite there but
compared to every other single writer
that ever wrote anything you are on top
of the game yeah as you deservedly
should be thank you and and then once
you sort of had that in the in your in
your rear view mirror now well how do
your motivations change what's
motivating you what do you want now
now you get are you an artist anymore
are you a businessman what wouldn't what
do you what do you need to feel to feel
like oh you did it now well here's the
thing about Schilling Schilling is a
good hobby to have when you're really
out of inspired creative gasps like if I
had a great story or a chapter of my
next novel coming to me
at any given moment I wouldn't be on
Twitter being like my books on sale in
all caps right but you don't you don't
have that all the time there's you you
get really a couple really inspired days
a month if you're lucky and then the
rest of the time you got to be doing
some horseshit and it can be playing
Nintendo or it can be Twitter and
pumping your and so this is okay
there's two there's two instances of
like polarized aspects of myself that I
struggle to bring together one is like I
try to write honestly and I do I don't
like ever put anything on there that's
horseshit
I don't ever change details to protect
other people's identities period there
always has to be emotional truth in it
that's one thing and then the other
thing is like it I want to be
 famous and have money and not
have to go to work sorry I do I want
that I want to get and I want to
have financial security and I just want
it and maybe I won't get it but it's I'm
allowing myself to admit that I want it
right I want to be I want to and I also
may you know I want that so that
because because I try to do honest work
it helps people feel less alone I hope
and I want it to spread around and
there's so much horseshit in the world
that maybe something that isn't
horseshit needs to be spread around a
little further something that isn't
trying to sell you diversity at
Hewlett Packard or some other garbage
the other the other two things I want to
bring together you know there's this
delicious tacos thing which is not it's
not really a persona because it's close
to the real me but there's also like my
real name my bill-paying identity and
this is something I've been in therapy
about for a for a while now it's like I
want to bring those two things together
I'm tired of hiding my face and I'm not
ashamed of what I do and so it's
up that nobody who knows me in real life
like knows that this is really what I
care about like I I do my best at my job
I try to be of service but
I don't you know this is really what I
what I love to do and care about doing
and it's up that I don't that I
can't share it with people and it's also
like it's starting to drive me insane
that delicious tacos feels like a slave
master who's whipping my physical body
forcing him to write and shill and post
and market to get like his message out
there like delicious tacos is becoming
an outside a demonic outside entity
who's beating I can't even say my real
name but whatever Fred Johnson it's just
me it's just whipping poor Fred
Johnson so that he has to get up and
write every day and I get blog posts out
there and just shill
I would like to bring that I would like
to have the the oneness I want to bring
all these beings together into a writer
who is honest and creative and not
afraid to fail and just putting himself
out there also not afraid to support his
own work and be like it's not bad it's
really not bad like I'm not ashamed of
it and so it's okay to shill it and tell
people they should buy it and also I'd
like to be able to tell anybody that I
meet on the street like my name is
 delicious tacos you can look at
my website delicious tacos dot-com and
read my books Savage spirit a unicorn
and you might enjoy it and it's nice the
problem is like I'm too horny I write
about horniness too much and people are
grossed out by it and you can't have a
job and be horny at the same time that's
there's so much interesting stuff in
there man hey I can totally relate to
wanting to feel as a realized whole you
know there was definitely years there
where I was Jack Murphy over on this
side and and John Goldman everybody
knows my real
on the other side and they and they were
so distinct and different that I would
get so paranoid about Daxing myself for
saying the wrong thing to the wrong
person err or accidentally sending an
email from mail on my eye from the
brought from the wrong address like oh I
 did that once at work and I was
like who's Jack I'm like oh never mind I
don't know
and so I totally get wanting to bring
those two things together in fact as as
the two personas your your your outward
self in here your writing so become even
more mature and realize the the tension
between the two probably becomes even
greater right because it becomes it
becomes more of a thing and you're
getting feedback and you you do exist in
this universe as an entity delicious
tacos does the writer with the fans and
the money in the and you pay bills you
know with money and it's like it's a
real living entity and I can I can
relate to the to the increasing tension
and a desire to want to bring those two
things together I have found personally
and I don't know this is gonna help you
but it was so liberating at the
end of the day after I picked my
tattered resume off the ground and
burned through every last dollar I had
ever saved and gone through the shame
process with people that were judging me
who didn't understand once all that was
done right and everything came together
I do feel as a liberated person as a
self actualized individual who it can be
creative and honestly creative and then
be able to stand behind it
that that has been a really fantastic
thing and and you know I don't know what
industry working exactly and I don't
know you know your personal situation I
have found that states congressman that
makes perfect sense I had I have found
that people's reaction and my ability to
build a new universe around the one that
identity that I wanted to actually be a
little bit easier than I had anticipated
what serious consideration have you
given to to becoming a whole unit it's
all about the money
this point yeah first of all as far as
jobs go my job is a great job and I
don't want to over the people that
I work with and up their lives in
some way so there's a there's a level of
just not being inconsiderate about it
but once I have enough money and the
books are making enough money that's
when it'll happen
yeah and once like once my job like
which is not you know this is not
happening next week look if I got
 fired tomorrow then it would be
tomorrow all right
it's really but what's interest so I got
a Twitter message from somebody that I
went to college with who had tracked
down my fake identity and she was really
excoriating me for for pandering to what
she thought was the worst elements of
our society basically like you know
rapists and Nazis and went on and on
about how she knows all these like
publishers and agents and none of those
people would ever touch me with a
ten-foot pole and it's exact sort of
nightmare that you have of a hostile
read by some you know someone who's
really into like kunti center-left
politics right and
you know just like because it's possible
to read my stuff and it like look
I don't believe any of those things I'm
not a Nazi or a rapist I just don't care
people who are like it just doesn't it's
not my like society is not my
problem
but also those aren't real problems so
yeah well although you get deep enough
into it you see there really are like
net there really are like legit Nazis
and there were legit rapists out there
and there are but whatever like the way
to first of all there's nothing I can do
about it
second of all if there were anything I
could do about it it would be to write
honest messages as a person who's not
hateful and just put non hateful vibes
out there however giving my a nasty
read you can read it as as mean
destructive evil and people are
very eager to do that and like that's
what I'll have to eat I'll have to eat a
lot of people from my past giving it
hostile reads and then being disgusted
at that people that I refuse to
disassociate myself from because they
too are misinterpreted yeah I know about
that and there's a general like hatred
and the reality is like I do a lot of
 that people find nasty I go to the
Philippines and I whores and look
they're consenting adults and the
argument that people come back is oh
they're exploited and sex trafficked
they're not they're not they
speak English over there and they're not
like I I love hearing their stories and
talking them I'm still friends with them
online I talk to them all the time and
it's just not that bad it's not maybe
that exists out there there's certainly
children being sex trafficked over there
but that's not what I'm doing yeah so
maybe maybe I'm into
deep maybe we're both maybe we're too
close to the material maybe I don't know
but you talk about hope right and as as
I read the stories that's what I get
hope out of it actually it sounds like
despair this that's how this book is
structured so yeah these books this is
book is like the and that it's a
collection it's blog posts and short
stories kind of mixed together and in
the the chronology itself just
gave it a three line like they're in
chronological order
this piece is bookended with some
exclusive stories that are for the book
and the first two pieces our book
exclusive content that are very
deliberately cynical and the last two
pieces are very hopeful and that's the
sort of development is is from despair
to spiritual growth and yes there is
it's it's about the struggle you still
there's the worst parts of you are
battling with the best parts of you and
the worst parts of the world are
battling with the best parts of the
world and what you're trying to achieve
is some kind of surrender to God's plan
mmm-hmm I think I as I was reading the
book I was feeling I'm asking myself
what's the arc gonna be here I know that
there's not gonna just be a collection
of just ran bang yeah well they're
kind of is too it kind of is but you
know I'm reading I'm reading I'm like
okay where's the arc where's arc I'm
feeling where's that I felt set up for
hope to be honest and so I was looking
for it and I feel like I found it even
in its own way but you know what you're
doing is real art and I think that
because of that people bring their own
biases I mean to everything but in
particular to art their own perception
and history and expectations and their
own value of themselves and their own
self judgment to the observation and
interpretation of real art and in near
case if they're reading your book and
they feel like about themselves in
the world maybe they're gonna come away
feeling feeling like but like if
you read the hope comes from the fact
that you're grappling with issues that
everyone has to grab
with fur and so it's like a it creates a
community community in a way in that we
can all relate to this shared experience
of basically wanting to love and be
loved I mean is that a fair yes fair
assessment that's absolutely what the
book is about and that's definitely what
the next book is about like the next the
next novel is called true love and
that's really the big one so this is
this this this book was by the way it
was meant to be like a creative vacation
where I collect oh just to collect all
my old again and and you know
it's about time for another collection
and then it just became like it became
so much more difficult than that this
was supposed to be a pallid palate
cleanser between novels and then I
wanted to put like new stuff into it and
then the new stuff like so the last
story in this book it's called the
spirit and I think it's one of the best
things I've ever done but it's a
transitional the last two pieces in this
book are sort of transitional into the
the style that I'm trying to build for
the the next book and I forget what the
question was at this point but hope yeah
hope and that's that's the message I'm
trying to build toward more like hopeful
emotionally open vulnerable less jaded
less persona and I'm trying to but I'm
trying to both do that I'm not trying to
sort of artificially do that as a writer
I'm trying to do that as a person and
the writing will reflect that but it's a
hard journey man because I'm still horny
and the world is still stubbornly like
giving me stupid hinge broads
that won't cooperate with my desires
you know and I'm the I'm you know still
alone in this house and so the journey
ins is part of the journey is accepting
being alone in the house one of the
things that's been great about
quarantine is the abandon all hope
element of it right I'm not going to
meet my girlfriend during quarantine
right so I can just relax I can just go
out in the park and look at a chick's
panties and listen to a bird sing and
that's
the peak that I can attain right now
there's a limitation on what you can do
in the world and it's very valuable but
it definitely tells you what you find
yourself to be valuable yeah and it also
reveals your motivations for why you do
certain things whether it's not getting
a haircut or are you working out
or yeah you know what do you hey you
always said if you only had the time
 well you got the time you
got the time now bro yeah that's the
other that's I err on the side of
kicking myself in the ass too much
because say because this is I was
reading something on Twitter like the
guy was talking about all the writers I
know are not writing and they're feeling
really bad and like I'm always writing
like a fiend and I should stop I need to
write less because I'm trying to post
all the I got a new book I'm trying
to keep the views up for the blog and
it's becoming really repetitive it's
like it's like this I've got these this
I'm doing these Corona Diaries and it's
like the CSI franchise when they're
getting to like shitty towns and it's
the same show over and over again it's
like it's ok to have a couple weeks with
no blog post and just like let it
there's another thing and I struggle
with right because I knew I used to know
that a book does not have a big opening
weekend it's not a movie right and so
this book did well and it but I had to
look at my old book sales to remind
myself that it's doing better than my
past books which I consider to be pretty
successful I just had so much
anxiety built up about and then I got is
like I gotta be writing the Decameron
right now and it's really this new book
is the dick hammer own it
literally has a bunch of crazy stories
about unicorns and birds and this is
another area where this is a departure
and unlike my old books because the
stories and this one are much more
fantastical there were fantastical
stories in the in the that all
sort of still centered around the same
character but these ones you know
there's the Mark Zuckerberg stories in
this book there's the story that's
literally from the perspective of a bird
in this book there's a artificial
intelligent robot story and there's just
a lot of like more imaginative
happen
but I really kick myself in the ass
still like well why aren't you reading
them to come around I have put out a
book two weeks ago right
that is the Decameron two weeks ago and
now I'm already like dreading the next
book the next book is really the beast
this is like the next book is really
like the big one and it's its job is it
has to unite all elements of my
personality and the earth yes and be
this great piece of spiritual
advancement while just getting out there
and having fun and writing it yeah every
good thing that allows the the the the
unison the singularity of delicious
tacos and Johnson into one money-making
machine with free all shame and and
public scrutiny yes that's the one
that's gonna get me on the red carpet I
also have to translate a bunch of Latin
literature myself in order to write it
it's like Jesus Christ well you know at
the same time though it's griten away
it's like so what if this last book had
popped and it made me a bunch of money
and got me a bunch of would I be
motivated even like this next book for
however much of like it has to exist it
has a message I know what it is and it
has to exist right
it has to be borne so what if I succeed
will I then not care the home guys I
mean maybe we'll never know right it
would be nice to have the answer to that
question like it turns out if I
succeeded I just got lazy I think that
happens to a lot of people actually
complacency is a killer there's no
question about that but a true artist
the true art URI dude you would be
writing even if nobody I was reading we
know that yeah yeah so you will continue
to write and as you sell out more and
more and as you hear yourself towards
debt financial independence you know
your motivations will change and you
know you evolve and I want to commend
you for that actually you and I traveled
some of the same similar early internet
routes to get to where we are today and
I think that we can look around and see
the sidelines littered with a bunch of
bodies of people who never evolved and
never were able to write honestly about
themselves and then reflect enough to
know that they themselves have changed
and then therefore their content should
have changed and perspectives could have
changed you know so good for you man and
and I'm happy to hear that there's you
can see the next step up and the next
evolution for your art because you
yourself are evolving kudos to you for
that that was one of my main questions
and thrust I want to get to it this
conversation was you know you've made it
this far dude you're Murie you're
financially successful at this people
love your work now you have this chance
you know to like consolidate all that
and let me keep some more pressure on
you and to and to have freedom and
expectation and a built in market
waiting for you to deliver your
opus or the camera and where the
that is I want to look that up after
this podcast but yes
you can do it you're ready you're now
congratulations right it's it's always
been like this though where I'm just I'm
thinking about the next one I'm hearing
a little echo do you hear any echo I do
not hear any echo and if so we fix it in
post whatever that means
I'm hearing it in my headphones but what
the are talking about it's always
been like this with where when I do when
I
when I deliver something like when the
book through the book now exists and
again it's been out for two weeks like
and immediately like ah now I've totally
condemned for it I'm thinking about the
next one right at the next one is the
big one the next one is always like
always over the next over the next tale
is where we will find paradise if only
so which is a good way to think in a way
but like I need to think for my own
mental health at some point I need to
relax I put out four books in the last
five years yeah but it's like it just
feels like so now it's like the next one
is the scary beast that I got a hunt
while enjoying it you better enjoy it
mmm
we're right about that - man that's this
you know that's what the people say
write what you know I mean that's so
 cliched and retarded advice but
it's the absolute goddamn truth there's
no question about that and then and then
practise what you preach it's backwards
it's preach what you practice no that's
what I have figured out and so you know
you just you'll you'll you'll find that
feedback and that that examination and
it'll be a new product and a synergy and
a synthesis and then there'll be a new
then the next cover will be like a
Phoenix you just emerging out of all
this stuff and then going to you know
become the singular person and the
artist and the real-life person fusing
into one your artistic level unlock
freedom enhanced level 99 it's coming
all you gotta do just sit down
and write dude come on get to it yeah
they're pressure they're right I mean
it's in there right yeah I'm in a weird
state - this is also like I'm creatively
bankrupt today because again I just put
I had to I had to make some new content
for the book and then I make a bunch of
new blog posts and like I my vault is
pretty tapped out because when I put out
the last book I went through and
put it anything we can see that we be a
post I rushed it onto the site
mm-hmm so I need to like let myself
recharge for a couple of minutes
have some experiences read some good
books and and you know I need to accept
that this is the time right this is this
this is the shilling time I'm already
with this book to like for instance I
did a podcast yesterday and now I'm
doing a podcast today the last book I
took me like three months to do pockets
Mike I gotta get out there and
not go to do these podcasts and blah
blah like I just I need to relax yeah I
need to relax and let people
discover the book let it have some
 where do people are liking it at
this stage I have no idea whether it's
good or not like whenever if I pick it
up and I the good sign is like if I pick
it up and I start reading it like I find
myself reading it this was the true of
nice and good news too if I was reading
my own book once I gave it a month or
two after going through it for typos
like a chimp
you know picking ticks off another ticks
back once I had some separation from it
and was able to look at it again and not
I really agonized over what to include
in this and like is the first section
about like sex addiction like too
 long and all this and then
once so right now I'm sick of looking at
it but once I get some distance from
anima I'm able to appreciate it like
okay my is pretty good it's not as
good as Michelle Welbeck but it's pretty
 good like I'm doing okay
definitely
I remember finishing my book and I
didn't want to talk about it think about
it see it or anything for a while
afterwards but now when I pick it up I
just ran a page everyone smile
end up reading like 20 pages in other
words I put I'm like a book bed that's
what you'd build a style for it so you
build a style to pull people forward and
that's what you sort of you learn how to
you know you're kind of controlling the
eye right you're controlling how how
fast you drag the eye along the page and
that has to do with like sentence length
and how many words you cut you mentioned
on the last podcast that like a lot of
the sentences are cut really down to
where like the verbs are cut out and
stuff and that's because like that's a
moment where you got to really pull the
person forward fast yeah so that's why
you do the work of building a style is
so that you can modulate you can you can
pull people alone
where were you going fanatically do you
think cuz I want to take this time to
say one on one hand I'm a huge fan of
your work I followed you from about more
than a decade my friend isn't reading
 since the old days Jesus Christ
yeah you know it's that's true right
think back think back to some of the
forums and stuff and this is we used to
congregate at Laura's point 20/20 brown
or in ten years right so I've been
following and tracking you for a long
time where are you going through
matically and I'd like to challenge you
I think I think you could tackle any
theme that you would like the next the
next book is called true love and it's
about true love and there's kind of a
plot to it and I have maybe the first
chapter that I may or may not keep and I
have the last sentence and then I have a
structural I mean I think you need three
beats when you're with any story you
need a that correspond with three
heuristics right you have the way you
remember a long story is by three
heuristics primacy recency and
availability in other words you remember
the first thing primacy the last thing
recently the last thing you heard and
availability which is the thing that
pops and the thing that pops is the end
of Act two it's the moment when your
character is at his most despairing
point so I have those three things
and I have kind of a framework of how I
want to fit those things together and I
have I have concepts of the books the
stories that I wanted to resemble but I
need to experience true love or
understand what true love is
and that's the journey right I've
already I've also been travelling around
the country like interviewing people
about this I've been doing like a ton of
the yeah they're you know I don't I
don't around like I'm not lazy
about this stuff I go gather store
especially when I have to write about
women
I very intensely talked to lots of women
and hear their stories and put them all
together because I don't it's hard to
write from a woman's perspective so you
have to you have to go and you have to
kind of earn their trust and listen to
him hmm so I was driving around like
titty bars and the Southwest had like
small towns in the southwest like
getting lap dances and then getting the
strippers to tell me a story huh
interesting
I mean you are obviously you're a
professional and you were telling me
that's debatable pit get out of here you
were telling me in the last book about
how you went to like some yeah I mean
that's that's not as exotic as it sounds
it's just that unbeknownst to most
people there are Los Angeles is ringed
with a series of anti-nuclear air attack
defense sites these Nike missile sites
that are missile bunkers where they'd
launch anti-air missiles for
anti-missile missiles or something but
they're just out there so I went up and
crawled into one probably I'll have
cancer in ten years because it's not you
know it's like a bunch of rocket
fuel I mean look there's out you go in
there and there's a rocket
launcher under a forty foot steel door
and it's just up there open people I
mean teenagers go drink up there and
spray you know I talked about the
graffiti in the book but you know they
get they and they did they got rid of
the missiles because they decided to
just move the nuclear weapons around Cal
to move our of our nukes away from
population centers so that so the
Russians wouldn't attack I mean we
wouldn't lose the valuable nukes
hmm that's one way of looking but the
reason that I bring it up is because you
you are a professional you work every
day at your craft you edit the out
of things that you said you go out in
the field you're doing research you know
you're not quote just a logger which is
such a 1995 diminutive that doesn't mean
anything anymore I work really hard and
I practice really hard I throw out 95%
of what I write and there is there is
there is a concept of debate there's
there's a concept of the big break where
you're so talented that somebody
discovers you at the Schwab's counter
and then the next day you're on
them you know American Idol and you're a
big star and you get the record deal and
 that like my sucked when you
were talking about the forms around 10
years ago my was retarded stupid it
sucked I was trying to sound like
somebody else and it took a long time to
break that habit and I did that by
busting my ass and if somebody else can
just sit down and write something great
easily them dude I'm gonna go
 beat that person's head in with
a shovel that for having
for having such incredible luck it's I
mean look there's such a thing as talent
too right but there's also like it's
gruel you have to enjoy practice you
have to enjoy when I first started
learning guitar I was 13 years old and
like like everybody else when you first
start learning it's really hard you know
it's physically a hard thing to do but
once you hear the first few chords of
that Led Zeppelin song coming out of
your hands it's magical and it makes you
want to practice every day you must
enjoy practice and writing really just
journaling is writing practice and it
has therapeutic value to you write about
how you feel and like if something
shitty happens you write it down and you
feel better and so that's really
valuable and that keeps you doing what I
tell writers aspiring writers aspiring
writer is such a ridiculous thing
there's no barrier to entry to being a
writer like if you hyper writer
but what I did was when I started
delicious tacos dot-com I wrote and I
restored that in 2012 and in
eleven I wrote for like an hour every
day for a year without posting it or
maybe I was posting it on my old blog
but i sandbagged material and just tried
writing just is an endurance contest
with myself just tried writing everyday
for a year and just try that don't think
about posting it anywhere just take a
year and get good and you will if you do
anything everyday for a year like I'm
doing archery right now
I bought the bow and arrow I just scare
people so I could be Burt Reynolds and
deliverance and scare people away from
my house and it turns out it's fun to
 shoot a garbage bag full of
insulation out back every day and you
just get good I'm not an especially
talented Archer but I could
light a match with that thing at ten
yards now yeah that's awesome
but with writing writing is a mmm
writing is a mechanism it is a mechanism
for expression and that expression comes
from introspection and observation and
those are some things that you need to
have honesty and vulnerability in order
to in order to be successful ass so yeah
you can you can mechanically learn how
to how to produce prose but it's the
it's the honesty and yeah I guess bring
yourself a self introspection that's
gonna lead people to being successful I
think this is the thing that I was
thinking about today
right like you have to accept who you
are like basically accept that you're a
dork I was listening to you I was on the
cop-out podcast with Sam Pinkett I'm
listening to it I'm like I sound like a
 dork why why and it's because I
am a dork I am gay sounding
 and that's just the way it is in
my my physical body is that of a six
foot to weight training enthusiast who
runs up mountains now so I look like I
can kick your ass I'm a huge
that's who I am and it's okay so that's
one other thing when it kind of
irritates me when people talk about like
will your persona like it's not like I
am Who I am I'm being real
and I I think a lot of people on what
you know what you what you would call
our side of the internet or trying to be
too manly and like they like everything
the advantage we have is men it's like
everything is manly every
accomplishment that was ever done until
like you know Mary Wollstonecraft and
besides Sappho was done by a man so if
you want to write a poem that's manly if
you want to you know if if being horny
is mentally right desire is manly and
that's okay yes okay and and I I think
what's partly driving your success is
the relatability of it and then the
honesty and then the ability to put it
down on paper and so people read it and
they feel like they're not as alone and
then they give a little bit of hope and
they're entertained and grossed out and
weirded out they'll have all at the same
 time that's why it's beautiful
bro that's why I have so much faith in
you and I know I know that as long as as
long as you just keep doing this man I
think everything that you ever want to
achieve with writing is going to come
your way and I know that this is
something that you have had you've
written your whole life basically
I do remember at least every 10 years I
took a 10-year break where all I wrote
was love letters from 18 to 28 but self
expression my friend self expression
you're just talking about a different
medium yeah you need a different tool
you're still writing you're still
thinking I remember an inner podcast you
did with a mutual that we have I don't
know that it's even still published
anymore but I do remember hearing about
some of your early writing experiences
and so I do know that something that
it's passionate obviously its passion
for you WEO because you got to be bat
you got to be retardedly passionate in
order to make sort of internationally so
irrationally so I mean at this at this
point it's been so long that it doesn't
feel like an obsession anymore it's it's
also like if you're listening to this
this is I think like you don't psych
yourself out like just make it a habit
it's just got to be a habit that's all
yeah make it a habit and then there
there's an element you can control which
is
you're do you not even I hate to use
that word discipline about it because
it's not very disciplined to sit out
there and type in your laptop in the
backyard and be like it god damn I
really want to this girl but it's
just the habit of going there like if
you want to get in shape don't not go to
the gym alright you don't need there's
that's all just don't not go don't not
right and everything else is gonna be
fine and it's not like it's an obsession
to an outside observer but to you it's
just a habit and then when
something happens the words are there
because you've got you know calluses on
your fingertips from practicing that
guitar every day so when it's time to
play the blues you can write somehow I'm
always ready to write when it's time to
play the blue yeah when something really
hurts like you got it that's your that's
that's how you make it like yeah hurt in
a pure way right share it with other
people and they've been through the same
 one thing I have remarked upon
recently is that to be crass I have
monetized my personal pain I've been
able to have dirty negative experiences
in life and then buy it by way of
writing I've been able to monetize that
and turn that into something positive
for myself my family my community people
around me it's a miracle and I
step back and I and I appreciate it
every day I I am gratefully in a place
where my writing identity is Who I am I
am the writing time all these things all
merged together I'm feeding my family
I'm I'm I'm helping the world I'm
helping my brothers and it all came from
this ability to tell my own story and to
and to monetize pain that is a really
crazy 20/20 phenomenon and I'm just like
honored to be a part of it that's so the
money part is something I'm still coming
to terms with like you're much more
comfortable with I'm gonna do this as a
professional thing I'm gonna have
multiple tentacles and things like a
podcast you have your secret society and
like all this other
I mean I still have a job too so that's
where a lot of my like horseshit energy
goes that's real like my business energy
largely goes towards my job yeah but I
wonder about like you know I'm getting
over this is a thing I like I'm coming
to accept the fact that like I want
 money from this like I want
money yeah yeah yeah I want money and a
claim and I want people to uh you know
it's not the city really are you joke
come on are you joking this is where I'm
at now because I'm in a spiritually
desperate place because I'm creatively
out of gas and I'm like tracking my
watching my book sales all the all day
you know this is what happens like this
is just like this is the equivalent of
like eating pizza and drinking Mountain
Dew for two weeks and not being healthy
right you gotta let yourself be like I
gotta allow myself there and I'm gonna
 check I'm going to check my book
sales and that's what I'm going to do
and it's okay to do that for a couple
weeks and it's okay to think about the
money for a couple weeks
no but it's not okay to ever like I
would not change a comma to make a
dollar if the comma didn't belong there
I would knit like and that's that is an
evil act that's that's evil and I will
not do it so I would never like to lie
to the reader is evil and that's
a thing that like and there's so much
evil out there if I open a new tab in
Firefox right now and let's do that as a
demonstration right it's got like here's
the here are the lazy piece the
suggested blog post now is the right
time to switch your car insurance these
days adaptability is a must-have trait
here's how to spot it and increase it
the best running tips of all time should
Neiman Marcus exist the good guy bad but
bad guy myth why are you so
smart thank mom and your difficult birth
blah blah blah zoom fatigue is taxing
the brain we expect too much from our
romantic partners like none of this
you know people get trapped in the money
and they're not even making good money
right so I have such a counter drive to
that and it's we
like I don't know if I'd still like I'm
not spiritually there on it right
well here's I wish somebody would just
give me a million dollars
i I had to come to terms with this and
I'm still a little hesitant to talk
about it because there's some sort of
evilness around money but like the
people that buy things from me
whether it's book or participate in
community or whatever
they want to give me that money like
they want to because they're getting
something that they want in return
so it's actually like a beautiful thing
it's a beautiful it's a beautiful thing
and there's nothing evil about it
whatsoever and these people want you
your fans
people who bought every single one of
your books they want you to find that
point at which you don't have to you
know go and do a job that you don't
really want to do so you can follow your
passion I I maybe I don't know you as
well as I think but I think that you're
joking a little bit when you're like
it's all just about the money I
think it's really about the freedom yeah
exactly rich to me when I say get rich
rich means like just not not worrying
about money
I have very simple tastes man I like
cooking a pork chop that cost a dollar
ninety-nine a pound and like my
entertainment is watching a bird for
free right so right I like freedom
I'd like to travel to places where the
median salary is $1,500 a year so it's
not exactly the four seasons you
want freedom and you're gonna you're
gonna find it and I think you'll find
also too that once you take that
business energy that you're selling to
somebody else and then you start
applying it exclusively to your own
stuff yeah you'll find more
opportunities and more more and more
energy and more momentum there as well
yeah I think it's just sort of
decoupling the anxiety front of it like
I felt a great deal of like I got it
like really like I really felt like I
had to get this book out and it's sort
of faithlessness and pessimism rear
their ugly head when I rationally know
it's not true like I can't fail at this
point I cannot fail like what I wanted
in life was to be a novelist I wrote a
novel already it's good
and a lot of people like it that's it
I can drop dead and that's I know what
it feels like and I did my best right I
can drop dead but still there's
something like weird I don't know
I don't why am i kicking myself in the
ass like why can't I just relax
to perspective and he's and finding that
relaxation is is something that people
try to do for thousands and thousands of
thousands of years unsuccessfully now
what I used to tell my therapist was
that that drive that that never being
happy with what you got think that's how
successful people get successful and
that's how I tell myself forward I think
that was a cop-out maybe it was just me
telling myself what I wanted to hear but
you know I think maybe there's some
truth to it I think that you know you
you find ways yourself in your personal
life to find a spiritual satisfaction
and you get that energy I think you can
slow things down and separate that
anxiety from it and focus on your art
what you have yeah right you've already
done it so just like with everything
it's all about perspective and I don't
want to I want to make a quick heart
jump here because perspective
spirituality hope I wanna ask you a
question okay
why did you dedicate this book to your
dad oh he died in 2016 so the was
dedicated now finally some good news was
dedicated to Courtney it was my my
ex-fiance one of my best friends who
died and in 2015
and you know my dad died and he had a
book coming like I would have dedicated
finally some good news to him but
somebody beat him to the grave you know
like so God willing the next book won't
have a dedication right I see yeah so
dead people get books I had explained
this to Angela he's really a lot of
these but all three of these books were
kind of about Angela so they all should
have been dedicated to Angela but I had
to explain her like sorry somebody else
 bit the test so she's what what
did he know of your writing uh not much
he didn't use a computer I don't know if
he
new I think he probably knew that I was
writing books I mean he died before the
 came out so at that point I had
released in eBook so what was that a few
hundred people bought so it wasn't like
it wasn't they didn't it kind of didn't
exist and the there was a blog like I
would have had to explain to him what a
blog is you know the conversations we
had were about other things he was very
he literally never used a computer and
like didn't have a cellphone and
somebody had to hand him myself and he
had a real blessed life that way
my father was an interesting cat man he
was a you know he was a United States
Marine
former who's a real bon vivant like
let's he he had a lot of a lot of
exciting criminal activities in his past
and he really knew how to live he was a
great man
interesting to what extent does your
family is your intimate close family
aware of what's going on and whatever
they read you know my mom and stepdad
know that it exists I haven't given it
to them like I think they've they're
respecting my privacy on that but that's
another thing like I'm gonna have to
show it to them someday
maybe the next one maybe this one I
don't know but there's but there's I
don't want you know but it's weird cuz
that's the thing I write about
whores and you know I used to write
about doing heroin so you don't want
your parents to read that just because
they'll worry about you at the same time
I don't have I'm like one of those
comedians that can't go on The Tonight
Show cuz I don't have five clean minutes
like I don't have a family-friendly
thing and then to present the
family-friendly pieces out of context
with the Henry Miller ish it
doesn't work it kind of works as a whole
it has to be you know the collections
work because there's contrast between
you know clashing desires and elements
of humanity I don't know but yeah I'll
show them I'll show my books I hope
unless they drop dead like this is you
know then I'll dedicate the books to
them yes they get Corona unless they get
Corona interesting I was curious
actually as to as to how that
relationship with your dad
in fact did you and your perception and
your writing cuz you know putting them
as a dedication that's you know that's
not that's not like the hugest thing in
the whole wide world but you know you
were thinking about him when you wrote
it and go put it right there the front
page it struck me now after actually I
read the whole book I went back I
skimmed it again and then this morning I
went down like let me just see who was
dedicated to your hoping it was Jack
Murphy no you you talk trash about
me a couple times where when all the
rest of you can suck my dick you
can't write for you you with the
gay ass podcast no no I know is that
about me I'm just kidding but when you
know I wanted to turn to the front page
and see who was four and it struck me to
say you know for dad yeah
and fathers and sons have such an
interesting interesting relationship and
they have so many there's so many
different ways that we can relate to
those I was thinking about it yesterday
because I'm trying to figure out what
true love is and I'm remembering him you
know taking me fishing waking up early
to take me up to New Hampshire fishing
when I was like maybe you know between
six five and eight and like remembering
him taking cushions off the couch
putting him in the back of his f-150
super cab so I could keep sleeping while
he drove to drive us up to the lake
that's true love right that's an example
of true love and so how does that work
how does that work in fascinating so is
the is the the next book whose theme is
true love will it stray from simple
romantic love and male-female love you
might have to originally I was like here
was my original ambition I'm going to
fall in true love first of all I thought
it was gonna be with Angela this book is
gonna be about me rekindling my
relationship with Angela so it's like
and she's in Europe so I was like hey
can I come visit you know it's just like
 no
shithead are you kidding me I still I
talk to her every day where I love her
to death we're best friends but like you
know so that that put a crimp in that
plan so so now I'm like trying to kids
like try to understand what true love is
is that the love between the met you
know is it there's an expression of like
is the love between a man and a woman is
its love between a man and his child as
it's love between a man and God between
man and nature between man and himself
what is it you know it's so there's a
 philosophical question and
what's the answer I don't know no now I
know the emotion that it comes there's
something I really want to understand it
like I have to come to this is where
I've had a sort of disadvantage compared
to the last book because I knew what the
message is the last novel was really I
never had any doubt which is like just a
moment where you know you're sitting at
work and like you want a
asteroid to hit the earth so the you
don't have to work anymore
and I kept feeling that it's like that's
real that's real that's what this is
about that's what every little beat of
that book is about so like what is true
love is still an unanswered question I
got to give myself the time and space to
explore it maybe answer it maybe not but
I do have the answer in the last
sentence right I do have the answer but
it's just how do you get there I only
laugh at you know you're like I just
need to give myself a little time to
figure out the answer to the question
what is love yeah sweet yeah hope you
nail it I know no pressure except that I
do at the same time like I believe like
right the last sentence first like yeah
I got it so or at least I got headache
you know Express I got it so yeah I'm
alright like that that's your anchor
right it's like being on a ship in a
storm and like I got the mast that I can
hold on to so that's why I kind of have
no doubt that it will be something this
book will exist and it will be something
because I have that like I have like was
one two three it's four words I have
four words and that's like that's all
you need and then I killed her right
exactly
my book um huh true love anyway
bitch writing Z exactly I find it
interesting that you picked that anchor
point like that I myself have never
really written a novel or novella or
like extended fiction like that so I
already always have maybe the themes
aren't there but like I know what I'm
like I know why right now like I'm
sitting I'm writing this thing that
happened to me or happen to somebody
else I know I'm like sort of reporting
but doing it creatively interesting to
think about setting the end and the very
end and then trying to figure your way
back from there I've read or heard other
writers say yeah I just you know pick an
amazing situation and our amazing
problem and then describe how everybody
got to that point yeah and then you know
you have the end as well too but have
you found you found your prep I did that
a little bit with the the finally some
good news which is like them you know
pick an amazing problem as a nuke goes
off while you're at your office right
but I'm sorry where was your question
well I was just gonna say to has your
process evolved over time you know last
time we checked it's a you know never
check Twitter read something good while
you're taking a dump and then sit down
and go right right then has the process
evolved have you been able to turn it on
and off any more easily you know are you
writing the evenings now or what you
have to so for something good it has to
have an emotional core and that hasn't
changed you have to have an emotion
around it so a short story has to have
an emotion right so there's a story in
this book called Norwood and that's
about fear of aging and mortality right
and you know what that is and then
there's that one level of emotional
inspiration and then there's sort of
like you're you have thoughts kind of
stewing and you have images and like
Norwood is something I wrote at the
beginning of like you know years ago and
then at some point you're in the
shower or you're walking and like all
suddenly like disparate elements go
click
and then that you have the whole plot
that's what happened with the novel to
like one day I was like so how does this
guy cause the nuclear holocaust ought
about it probably thought about it for
like two years and then one day I'm
driving to work or walking from my
 parking space to my office and
it's like click oh and there it is
and it's all like irrevocably there the
plot the plot is always maybe it's my
 script development experience
from Hollywood that makes it like this
but it's just like the plot is always
like a series it's like you're about
having your back cracked that same
sensation of like things are popping
clicking bones are aligning with each
other and it's just a natural real like
process where it's indisputable what
that plot is and it just comes and you
can't force it you got to kind of let it
come so there has to be inspiration and
I'm a little easier on myself with the
Twitter like I get a lot of
inspiration from Twitter there's I wrote
a story called universal basic woman
which was probably monthly it was my
biggest blog hit of last year by far and
that's entirely I mean the emotional
core of that is fear of dying alone and
like the question of am I just totally
unlovable like if if they forced if the
government forced somebody to be my
girlfriend would I still end up alone
and however every detail in that story
is entirely from Twitter every little
 thing is completely a current
events thing and because you but so what
you want to avoid is having something be
entirely ephemeral like the details can
be the details can be stupid passing
things from current events because
there's a there's a real emotional core
like there's a story in the new book
savage spear of the unicorn called the
Bitcoin it was written in December 2017
at a specific moment when Bitcoin was on
this incredible asymptotic curve towards
infinity and everybody was gonna make a
billion dollars and it was that there
was the heat of that moment but it's a
magic beans story where it's about a
person you know chasing their own
desires
to their death and that's always gonna
be real so you can you can forgive
yourself using horseshit details from
the day to day because when you read
like you know a Roman story if you read
the Aeneid and he's on his way to his
destiny and then he has a dalliance with
a woman in a cave that once that tries
to seduce him into staying but he's like
no baby I gotta go and then she
off herself like you know you don't you
know you're not a woman in a cave
but you've been with that woman right
right and that's ancient Rome right like
you read Catullus and what is he talking
about I don't know like you know gossip
and rumor mongering blocking him
from getting his woman and you know look
he didn't know what snapchat was but
it's it's the same right so in 2000
years the aliens
basketball-sized head
super evolved people with their thought
technology will read my be like I
don't know what this Twitter was but I
understand loneliness so this is this is
my morning read right now nice aristotle
Nicomachean ethics and what's
interesting in there I'm not the first
one to discover this but you know it's
2500 years old but it still rings
absolutely true and nearly universal to
this very moment
and that is why people find such value
in your stories and they are universal
anybody from any walk of life can
appreciate them because you really do
dig down to our base human emotions and
needs and desires and our senses of
inadequacy and and I it strikes me that
as we're talking you know you're able to
put it in such context and it makes it
it brings a maturity and a depth to your
work which if you just skim it you're
not going to you're not going to get
that you really have to read it and
appreciate it and then
these conversations listen to your books
I'm wondering could they use an
introduction well this is a thing that I
this is another thing where I'm like
okay I do I do my best with the short
stories but I so don't want to have them
be like part of prissy inaccessible
literature and so it's good that they're
mixed with a bunch of where it's
blog posts about me talking about
jerking off right the model is the the
notes of a dirty old man books the
Bukowski books because they had short
stories mixed in with just him
rambling about drinking and it just
works because there's such a like I
think people have a real whatever
whatever I want my books to be or not I
don't want it to be someone's
homework assignment that they feel that
they have to read right I want it to be
something that somebody discovers for
themselves and picks up and enjoys and
it doesn't feel like they're doing it to
impress some credentialing committee
right but I do I do appreciate the
giving the greater depth to this and I
and I am glad that my listeners are
going to hear this context and then be
able to read the book with this in mind
because it's not flippant it's not smut
it's not inconsequential the universal
truth there are things that every guy
can relate to every girl can relate to -
if they just let let themselves get into
it and I just wanna say thanks man I
mean I love reading I pick up I have all
of your books I've read each one of them
straight through from the first word to
last word each time I go back to them
you're my favorite
you know fiction writer that's tackling
these issues out here in the world today
and I want to help get the message out
and so I'm really grateful that you came
on the podcast today thank you for
coming on the lasted from the last time
I'm gonna pimp the out of this
podcast and your buttock your the next
couple of months here because it's
important to me I like you and I love
what you're doing man so congratulations
to you on your success may you find your
personal singularity in the next year or
two I have a feeling I have a feeling
it's coming for you and
when it does happen please do take a
moment to appreciate how long you've
worked for it and how much you
appreciate it instead of just Piske
thank you yeah you're welcome
it's the savage spear of the unicorn oh
yeah
yes make sure you get a hard copy so
that one day when our great overlords
erase all that your Amazon Kindle you
will still have it in its original
unadulterated form please go out and get
it again Savage spear of the unicorn
stories buy delicious tacos a collection
of shorts that does have a theme and an
arc and you will get a message to take
away from it delicious tacos calm is
that right sir yeah delicious tacos calm
go down there shimmy up the five bucks
or whatever it is to get behind the big
wall is the bay while still up no it's
so well sort of it's not a paywall it's
it's just literally like that could
get me fired I put behind a password so
do it if you if you buy the book and
email me the receipt I'll send you a
bonus book bonus eBook
and I'll send you the password for all
the password predicted posts I mean
there's some good but it's yeah
there's 225 posts that I had to password
protect because they talked about
committing felonies or wanted to have
sex with sixteen-year-old girls or you
know doing cocaine and stuff like that
cool so get the password to get all the
good stuff and hopefully we will
continue these podcasts and your book
releases and have this continuing
ongoing discussion sir it's always an
honor and a pleasure to speak with you
I'm proud of you and I'm happy to see
what's happened what's happening to you
and I want to help in any way that I
can't savage spear of the unicorn my
delicious tacos ladies and gentlemen
thanks man I really appreciate it yeah
my pleasure
all right guys I checked me out Jack
Murphy live.com on twitter at Jack
Murphy live liminal order liminal order
- liminal - order dot-com the
cybersquad er oh yeah I forgot my
Twitter is delicious underscore tacos
come on come and find this is everybody
all right thanks for listening and we'll
talk to you guys - thank you
[Music]
you