recording alright so welcome to the
solutionizing
on history it's just Daniel and I don't
know where else is lost in the cloud
maybe they will be joining us
so Daniel do you want to share currently
what you do for historical information
or what you see the world doing
I know we've briefly talked about
tearing down and statues yeah sure you
know this is not my strongest area of
expertise so you know I'll just sort of
talk off the top of my head
a little bit I think history is such a
huge broad subject I mean I feel like
I've got to sort of whittled down to
well what am I am i interested in the
history of what particular subject kind
of comes to mind and yeah the the
statues coming down you know I saw some
conversations about how well that's like
a racing history or something and I just
I don't really see it that way at all I
don't think like our actual history
knowledge is based on whether there's a
statue up in some Town Square somewhere
and I can only imagine you know if that
particular image statue or would ever
had such a negative connotation why
would you want to walk past that or see
that on a regular basis you know just in
regular everyday life when I go to a
museum you know then I'm gonna see some
things on you know the history of war or
slavery or what-have-you but I'm sort of
like you know going to that would with a
particular open-mindedness and a
particular reason
and to see those things some sort of you
know I don't feel like I have to see
that everywhere I go every every minute
so yeah museums would be one place in
Detroit there's the one that's called
the DIA
Detroit Institute of Arts and it's not
means the art museum but they have areas
with very old
you know Native American pottery and
stuff collected from you know Roman
antiquity and and stuff and I think that
is really cool to see it blows my mind
when I see some of these like artifacts
are something that were like made by
someone 4,000 years ago and it really
makes it real and tangible so like I
think it is cool too and good to have
those artifacts you know well I guess
there's fakes sometimes I think you know
they're rare
but kind of makes history come alive
when you can see artifacts in person I
occasionally I can find a youtube
channel with a professor that you know
has a particular area of expertise and
that's cool I've been very very
interested myself in religious studies
and so that would be a like an area of
kind of focusing in on a particular area
and so finding a youtube channel with
someone who like they've totally
immersed their whole life in on a
particular subject you know they seem
like a subject matter expert it's
helpful when it seems like the person is
kind of like a professional historian in
the sense that they don't seem
have an agenda there like this is what
happens these are the facts I'm not
trying to spin it one way or the other
because I want to make it seem like
these people were better or worse or
whatever just like this happened and
this happened and this happened I you
know that comes to mind I I think it is
it's good to history hasn't been my
favorite subject but if you can if I can
find the background on some subjects it
has been enlightening for instance on
things like evolution we we usually
think of Darwin as I've gotten older and
I found out like Darwin had his initial
ideas and actually some of those things
have been updated and I mean that's
science science is constantly trying to
challenge what has been theorized or
discovered and then you know turns out
like we've advanced since Darwin but the
ability to like read his original
writings and understand his original
ideas like helps you know that that has
been advanced to a certain degree I
don't know like I think it it comes down
to trust like who can I trust on my
sources is it something like Wikipedia a
good place to get history information
you know I just posed that as a question
and I don't know for sure yeah no thank
you for for those thoughts Daniel I
appreciate it
Kerry do you want to share what you do
currently for historical information or
what you see in the world happening
right now and thanks for joining
place and that M well basically
historical information
mostly online stuff I said I have a
tendency if I'm searching for something
I'll run through about 20-30 pages deep
wit I know people just click once and
see a page what to get and then go from
there but me I'm just I'm just very nosy
cuz what you're saying about Darwin I
found out that with to various sources
there is ideas and that would actually
somebody else√≠s you know a so you don't
know what to trust you know there's so
much stuff that gets written by people
but because they've got the means of
being able to do dyes like you know give
them the opportunity to do that whereas
the people with the ideas who may be
poor or don't have all them connections
I'm a tendency to their ideas are merged
with somebody else's and it's put out to
be somebody else's enough but em as it
says I like to dig deep into things and
I just go and sometimes that's bad
because like you find all sorts of stuff
so at the end you don't know who to
believe in the end well in terms of
history
I'd like it so you'd actually be taught
in schools all the history because we
would already taught certain things in
school like we went to talk about slave
trade to rent talked about anything like
that and when we did come to world war
two we would only told bits and pieces
of the information that was in the books
and that and then you find out later no
that wasn't the case you know it leaves
you with oh well who who is right as I
said it's just about to be in write
about things and being truthful rather
than oh no can't say that because she'll
offend so many people and well I'd
rather know what's right and what shoe
rather than sorta like you know you know
these as daniel said who's better who's
this you just want to know the absolute
truth all of that but as I said you
can't really tell and because you were
never there you have to kind of trust
what people are telling you you know I
mean so and that's yes one I also it's
funny I don't carry you're probably the
one who does the most historical
research I
don't it's not my area of expertise it's
not really my area of interest but when
I have had it come alive for me it's
been through art it's been like I knew
the slave trade existed it's not but
watching 12 years of slave there was
something about it that was like
horrific in the right way and there was
this Australian miniseries or maybe it
was just seizing one and they never
continued on with it is actually about
the soldiers and prisoners who first
came to Australia and they never quite
got to interact with the Aboriginal
people but watching them struggle and
starve and like the women were assigned
to to the soldiers as wives or temporary
companions and seeing history through
that through that lens and then there's
a newer Netflix when I don't remember
it's called the great it's about
Catherine the Great
it's set in today it's definitely not
historically accurate but I'm sure
there's a ton of stuff in there that's
historically accurate
I would so the whole time I was watching
I was googling right did this actually
happen is this true is this not true and
so having something that that brought
both know that an event happened and to
then be able to know what media is out
there that has covered it and how
accurate that media is something that is
possibly like a pop-up ad afterwards it
can say ya know
Kathir the great didn't speak English oh
good to know right like this would have
happened in Russian like the things that
are clearly you know you might not even
think about in the time the the dress
and I want history and this is probably
getting us the next part but it's about
time so certain of what the next part
the having history come alive for the
person who's interested being able to
see how it weaves together I want to be
able to track Darwin be able to see
everyone he interacted with in his
lifetime he was born on a day he died on
a day he had his his SS people that he
took to the Galapagos that is fairly
well known but having that in the
timeline of history so I could also see
what was happening with other figures
that were alive at the same time and how
that interwove and how Wallace came up
with the same idea at the same time and
I'm not actually familiar with Darwin's
stole it from someone else whether that
was Wallace or whether that was somebody
somebody else but seen history come
alive organizing what's already there so
that if I want to learn about slavery
here because 12 years of slave is
definitely not the only one you know
what to say okay well you know Gone with
the Wind deals with slavery but is an
accurate depiction of slavery right like
actually grading the history on the
historical context in retrospect right
in I when gone the width wind came out
I'm sure they thought it was accurate
but they didn't actually ask people who
had um people had been alive at the time
but the descendants of people who've
been alive at the time I think there are
tons of artifacts in the world whether
that be people's journals whether the
things that are actually in museums that
can be catalogued and we can all share
in it so if I can't get to the museum
that has it I can still know everything
that is encompassed in that museum we
have an amazing Museum here called the
Museum of Anthropology at UBC and you're
allowed to go there for free is a you
busy student and I didn't go until my
graduation day and all my graduation day
I went there except nothing else to do I
was like why was I not here all day
every day like the amount of First
Nations culture especially but also just
all the different international people
who have come to Canada and and some of
their artifacts and their you can't
touch them but they're behind glass but
you can still get that somebody touched
this 200 years ago and so to be able to
have what I would love to see is to be
able to have a website like Wikipedia
but that comes alive that I can track I
can zoom in and out from pengie at a
current in Thai and time right so when
the continents were all together out to
currently and be able to track people
places and things be able to see where
inventions happen and where they spread
to be able to see Darwin in his life and
who he interacted with and be able to
see the artifacts and to the best of our
current knowledge right this artifact
might have been made 10,000 BC to 12,000
BC that's not going to be an accurate
date but it's accurate enough probably
for that time period and to be able to
see how confident are we in this and I
want the history from oh sure every way
I want the history from everyone I want
to know my actual
I don't freaking care about King George
and Queen Elizabeth they weren't my
people I want to know what my ancestors
went through what were they eating
what were their jobs what did they
actually go through what is the history
of all of them I want access to all of
the grandmothers interviews like I want
to know the people who are alive today
how they experienced the Vietnam War I'd
love to people have all of that but that
is not something we can do
I would love to hear what you guys would
like to see her for history well in the
future as I said like that dad started
an idea one of the groups that involved
in after seeing somebody say you know we
went we had this many people back then
but she was going back research in the
lives of ordinary people and I think
through ordinary people I think history
does come alive because what you'd only
see is people of note you know I mean
you don't get to see sort of like how
they lived and what of you and what went
on and how they felt about a certain
thing and a lot of his foods getting
lost now like take for example my
granddad's I didn't know me granddad Sam
was in the rate in support regiments
which is the precursor to the SAS and my
mum only found out when somebody came to
do an interview with him you know with
her about me granddad's and my mom had
no idea and then I got contacted by
somebody from and who's a researcher
from there saying I think I might some
details of your granddad's which you
just cried you know I mean so as I said
hey Steve getting lost like a nobody
talks to the older people about what
it's like in the time sure maybe
interviews with with older people and
what he can recall about things and I
think as I said if you hear what the
saying it does come alive like if you
can go and read stuff but it doesn't
sink in but if you've got somebody there
talking about it you can listen and see
them and well even if you can't see the
movie if you can just listen and that's
it and a great way of doing things so I
think I'd like more people the people's
history rather than sort like using
politics at the time who said Wow
because it say like 3040 years from the
future
a lot of people are just gonna be left
with saucer-like influences on YouTube
to look back and say oh is this what
everybody was like you know I mean and
you know the show that that is so
yeah so I would like sup I was also like
choose for history as well and people
going oh well you're a conspiracy
theorist if you believe this when some
of the things I've come true as you find
out over time with that label still
sticks but yeah so true true proper
history does not just come from one
textbook and not just won't come from
whoever's paying for that project at the
time and what they their the agenda is
and that we're just just truthfulness I
think in history that's why I'd like to
see going forwards and as I said if it
adds a load of people doing the people's
history you know and research in
whatever interest they're into then as
daniel said and you know it's somebody's
research in it well into it you have a
tendency to believe they're more than
what you have in some text book that's
been put out with loads of advertising
sponsorship and everything else you know
I mean so that's what I'd like to see
for the future Daniel you want to show
your aversion yeah I I guess I can I
kind of resonate with what Kerry said I
mean one of the things that comes to
mind on this is that old saying that the
winners write history and so we need
these experts nowadays to go back be
like well the win the winners wrote
history but we may have found out some
new information now and so that's a good
thing
you know what comes to mind unlike the
peoples history or mine see if almost
like a police investigation you have a
lot of times so you're going to
interview a few different people and
they're gonna have all their own version
and it's through the grouping of all of
their perceptions that like the real
truth comes out so I do know a community
that was
doing they and so technology is gonna
help they what they were doing is they
were doing recorded interviews with all
their oldest members like their 80 up
and 90 90 year old members and they
basically just said like a one-hour
interview like of hey tell us the story
of your life and it was really
fascinating the details that people told
and so that type of you know recorded a
lot of people aren't gonna write a
memoir but the idea that even if you
don't think you're like this important
person to do like a 1-hour recorded
memoir of like hey these were some
interesting things that happened during
my time you know like what was said it's
great to like dig up and find people's
Diaries and stuff like that but I'm not
even sure they were written with that
you know memoir thing on purpose so if
yes a lot of people could do of audio
memoir of their life and then be able to
put those into a database with tags for
like themes regional you know maybe
regional tags you know where they grew
up places they've moved places they've
worked I don't know whatever you could
other interests that could be a really
good thing because then we're getting
like that really like individual view
which gives us some more clear broader
view that would be cool and you know
what comes to mind I don't know totally
how museums work but also on the museum
thing I thought well there's multiple
museums that have the same theme but
like artifacts and certain items can
only be in one physical location at once
what if there was like a way to network
them all together so you're like enemies
and then there's like a console that's
like here's all the other related
artifacts that are across the world in
all these other museums and you could
like flip through a catalog because like
hey we can only have 40 of these things
but actually there's 4,000 of them and
like you can flip through them because
they're all related in this topic from
one location the evolution of let's say
art or music but also the evolution
throughout space right that is coming up
in different places at different times
like here are the fertility statues that
were coming out of as part of Africa and
the fertility Scotchies are recorded as
part of Asia at the same time period
even though they weren't necessarily
attracting each other so we can switch
on to the other part which is because I
think there was sparking ideas why I was
in tears talking is I think there's
something very very powerful here they
could be done absolutely with 10,000
people and $100,000 but I would like to
hear from you guys why do you think we
can do with 10,000 people and $100,000
because I told the likes of donkeys what
does it get going all three of us do you
know since I'm no expert I do I mean I
guess I just go from the low-hanging
fruit of this conversation I mean you
know what if you had a way for you know
you had 10,000 people that said I will
interview 10 people in my community and
like put that all in a database and like
you pay them you give them a thousand
dollars to do it and then you know each
interview they paid the interviewee 50
bucks from that and so like there would
be this exchange the person doing the
work of doing all the interviews and
then the person being interviewed
benefited and you could kind of like
spread that all out and then you'd have
a hundred thousand you know interview
from all across wherever people were
I'll put in this large database I don't
know if that math works out but I like
the idea - the one effort because if you
only have a hundred thousand dollars and
you have ten thousand interviews in fact
you gave us a hundred thousand
interviews right ten thousand people
doing times ten we only have a hundred
thousand dollars that means everyone
gets one dollar for their interview
right both both the person interviewing
and the persona okay yeah I actually
don't think we need to pay people to
interview or be interviewed
I would absolutely in fact this is why I
was crying because I can't but my
grandmother had this amazing memory and
all of these stories she told constantly
and I didn't luckily record some not
nearly enough of them but to be able to
sit down with my grandma and ask her the
stories right the family ones but also
her experience World War two right her
experience with the cream or whatever it
happened to be hearing like my best
friend's parents talk about the Korean
War if they're willing to since they
lived through it having people interview
their grandparents going to because the
other thing is with Co mid-nineteen
we're losing these people rapidly even
more so than we were before
and so being able to go to the places
they congregate old folks homes you know
retirement homes and interview them for
their stories right whatever that looks
like whether they're whoever wants to
and having a a data base maybe of what
we do want collected right like I want
to hear your story on World War two I
want to hear your story about these big
events but I also want to hear how you
fell in love with the love of your life
your heart great right like I want like
the big life stories what would you tell
your grandchildren what would you it was
like a hundred people could come
together and brainstorm that impact
fewer people and then put it out there
so there's those common tanks right if
we're not paying the interviewers and
we're not paying the interviewees the
hundred thousand dollars can be used to
create that database
okay create your like how do we actually
get it doesn't matter where you record
it right whether it's on your phone
isn't you don't need great equipment you
just like all of us runs you
with our grandparents anyway just hit
record and ask these questions and then
break it up like no there's something
right here
okay we could actually do it so
important when the community I'm a part
of did a little bit of this and two
things came to mind
so they mostly interviewed yeah folks
that were very elderly like yeah they
did oh how I met you know the love of my
life how that happened stories of
raising children and there was one a
woman went back to school to get her
degree when she was like 45 and like you
know that was just a cool story in is
like wow like you did that and then
someone else ran their first marathon at
57 years old she was just like yeah I
just felt like starting to do that and
like wow like you know to hear that and
she was from you know very different
generation as well and it was just you
know these personal stories are so
important because I think it's so easy
to make assumptions you know about
people from different generations or
whatever and it's like wow you lived
like this full amazing life and all I
see of you now cuz I just met you is
this 90 year old woman and there's so
much there but I can't see it like oh
you ran a marathon when you were 57 like
amazing and that you know that's that
and I think Carrie but the UM if we are
allowed to fall in love with in mine
year-old person right and hear their
story we also realize our own humanity
right when we watch Gandhi or Mother
Teresa or any of like the big names in
history we assume that their humanity
and beauty is like unique to them but
when we showcased no it's not every
grandmother every grandfather every
person who's been here for any amount of
time has something to give something to
tell we give ourselves permission right
to be like oh yeah I don't need to be
Mother Teresa I just
how about you Carrie what is this
stirring in you other sides out this
idea so do kind of like a personal
history of like just up in a chat in a
podcast sense of ordinary people
day-to-day you know because as I said
sort of these ordinary people live
extraordinary lives but nobody ever is
about it nobody ever knows them and with
my own family just loads of stuff that's
just gone now because everybody's died
off my auntie who died and she had loads
of stories like I've even got I got
flowers I said my great granddad Jamaica
stow away in a wanna boats I'd realize
he was a legal immigrants and so my mom
said oh he's not on any of them censuses
or whatever he's not as living there but
me now it was me great love I was and
I've got photos of him and at the time
it would have been you know at the time
in brain it would have been frowned upon
a black black mom marrying a white woman
you know I mean boy II never seem to
have any problems with that but some of
the rest of the family did um and I've
got you know him there's just a nice is
just silly examples like I posted
something about a doll's hospital and
then my mom sent me this photograph this
old photograph of me on TV wedding with
me nan and said oh we're poppy was
married to a guy who had a doll's
hospital but way back then and you know
you got me none stood there look at all
dapper smoking a at this wedding
and as I said it's just an interview in
sorta like a burner and just having a
conversational chat
um I think yeah because I as I said that
loads of history just gets lost you know
I mean and it's just you know cuz like
one of the stories my mom told me about
after the award and that and although
she wasn't in it that there's a factory
that had a near side and where she left
and she she said every time it went off
think it went off at one o'clock every
day every time she used to dive onto the
bed bite all her fingernails because she
thought they were coming to bomb the
place you know I mean so see if it just
little stories
you know and yes I think so like
interviewing people because then you see
who they are you know I mean and as a
surgery to a tendency to forget this is
all down to relationships the whole a
life is down to relationship with others
and a lot of people don't get that they
just kind of look at your assume you die
the commoners mark you've got nothing of
value to it to them you've got nothing
to offer and then they just dismiss you
and I think that's so partly or they've
got no time for you that's that's
basically it so as I said create the
project where people could be having a
chart interview and just record it and I
think that would start and they would be
able to collect these and showcase them
of where they are and what what they
wear you know I mean so and I think that
would be really great I think also what
you talked about in the previous section
of the influencer culture that's all
things gonna be left don't get me
started on a beautiful emergence that
can happen that isn't influencer culture
right isn't one person with a million
fans it's a million of us who have
stories to tell right like we all have
the story of the first love of our life
or we don't you know all of the story
about you know our first job we all have
these these common these common pieces
that if we tell if we keep that story to
five minutes we you know and you can
listen to thirty of them because if you
want to write but having it so it's not
it Oh jennamarbles with 20 million
followers it's it's 20 million people
telling their story right you don't need
the best equipment you can just tell
your story whether that's your life in
five minutes
which is hard to do but and it's
different every time because I or yeah
you just interview someone for an hour
and then someone else can break it up so
that it is more because I don't think
anyone most people are going to watch
hours of random people on repeat right
but I would watch their story I'm
interested in right there 9/11 story or
their JFK beam assassinated story or the
moon landing story or whatever it was
that there were these big events as well
as the commonality between us like birth
of your first child your wedding your
you know all those
type of things that we're gonna see
other and having a timeline for like my
grandmother's life to see where she was
born and follow and anyone can submit
pictures and say yes this is her this
time and so because my family would want
that but then all of those things put
together mm-hmm be an amazing the
amazing and then anyway but the
influencer culture it shifts it when it
isn't one person and we all are enamored
with them because it's not just a person
everyone has stories to tell like it's
not the only thing is that they were
slightly better at telling the story or
editing the video I was gonna call it
him every day tapestries of life you
know I mean I love it like you know as I
said you could get sorts like video
chats or audio chats and photographs and
you could have it like an online photo
album you know I mean like a collection
so what would that story was pictures
and different things from different
areas what maybe they're you know cuz
like some of the relatives cuz obviously
they may pass away and some of the
relatives would be you know they could
send pictures in and and they'd be so
they trust posterity for some like even
though a lot of people might not listen
to the story but the people who were
related to them it would always be
something they could actually cherish
with them you know not just the
photographs book hidden the stories and
be able to go and hear the voice again
you know I mean and I thought that you
know you could have a like a memoir
there people's families could actually
come and listen to and contribute and
stuff like that so you'd have all sorts
of family trees going along you know I
mean so yeah I'd like to see some yeah I
think I think we have no idea how
hearing a huge variety of stories can be
really encouraging the people you know
people might feel stuck in life for all
sorts of different ways and hearing like
well here's what I did and this is you
know how I got to where I am or here's
how I solved that problem like we just
we don't get too much of that
I don't think and so
it can be tremendously encouraging the
people I'm also reminded about like how
this could help society in a general way
as well in the one sense you know in one
sense mainly all we get to do is vote
but there's problems that go on that we
don't hear about I'm reminded of you
know I'm not going to get this exactly
right but I remember watching Michael
Moore's movie called sicko that was on
health insurance and American Health
System and you know there were stories
of hey I've been paying health insurance
my whole life and then as soon as I
needed it you know they didn't even help
me out I'm like they're you know there's
awesome positive parts of our stories
and then there's things like that like I
had a vague sense and like so these are
anecdotal but they all add up I had a
vague sense that there was something
amiss in the health care system but you
know a documentarian goes in and Mike
gets a very personal account this is
what happened you know then in that case
there's lots of times like here's the
paperwork here's the emails like this is
how insane it was unlike you know I'm
sure there's many people you know many
people haven't been heard that even have
problems like that so it could do some
things in like awareness of you know
systemic problems by collecting all
these stories as well we you know we
would definitely need an awesome way to
have categories and tags and like this
story contains these 17 different topics
or something and maybe even timestamp
them and there's probably ways to like
click and like jump to that topic you
know here's what I was doing when 9/11
happened like you know people have that
part of their story you know etc I we do
make
so many assumptions it's easy to do you
know you hear someone had a military
background and like I'm haven't been
that big of a fan of the military but I
know when I talk to some of these folks
and I find out the story behind here's
why I went into the military I had no
other option or I've always been a
patriot or I thought it was gonna be
like this and it turned out different
like and we just don't know and all if
all I know is you were in the military
like that doesn't tell me too much else
about your motivations and other stuff
that happened just thinking that if we
have the story from all of the Trump
supporters it's harder to do from the
other side but why they voted for Trump
yeah sure that's which is like I think
that because my vision is like cuz
you're autistic nobody voted for that
reason right they might have been so my
family feels safe oh I can get on board
with that right even if we don't agree
with what makes your family safe but to
actually ask that I love to think for
the military as well what made you join
me well why did you want to join the
military because it both shows the
beauty and a thing that I do not see
much beauty in but also possibly the
other piece right what you talked about
with the Menace yeah I know it's like
hey I was born I wanted to go to
university very difficult home life and
she saw joining the Air Force as her
only way out of that abusive situation
and like that like it was a move of
desperation a kind of thing yeah the
political thing yeah what it's it goes
in the category of you know we always
win when we seek to understand and and I
still like the motivational thing when I
feel stuck in life and I hear how
someone you know made a decision that I
would have never
and thought of like hey I moved across
the country and this is what it was like
I sold everything and it worked out I'm
like you know if someone's like I'm not
sure if I could do that what would it
look like to quit my job and like just
go with a thousand dollars I'm like well
it worked out for you know these number
of people like maybe it could work for
me I don't know you know yeah I'm going
back to the influencer thing I think
yeah we're mostly hearing interviews
just of people that we think of as
famous or important for some reason we
need to realize that like everybody has
a valuable story everybody is important
and I'm thinking back to like the on the
history topic like even like my middle
school textbook like we did a minute you
know US history but it was basically
filled with like you know Thomas
Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin and like
these names that are familiar to many
people but were there any paragraphs
about here's some person you know that
here's you know a specific story about
so-and-so unknown person that like this
is what their life was like you know
they didn't change the world but this is
their actual specific story if we
started collecting those what would that
look like like you say like a hundred
years from now are people gonna look
back and only see you know the big
YouTube influencers and be like that's
what life was like are they also going
to be like here's a collection of a
bunch of regular folks that we're just
day-to-day doing their job and raising
their family and like I actually have an
inkling that influencer culture is
exactly happening because people want
this and this is the closest thing they
have to it that like there's something
about when reality TV started happening
and influencer culture started happening
of like I can see your humanity and then
fall in love with them and like give
all of our attention instead of because
we can see that spark in them but the
truth is it's in everyone and so
showcasing that showcasing the actual
what connects us all is the key to
connection one person can't have 20
million friends you just can't but 20
million people can have 20 million
friends like we can maybe it's like
convincing people this is valuable even
if your story in the next 10 years only
got like 200 views that that was still
valuable to those 200 people even if you
didn't get 2 million views that it's
still valuable yeah especially I mean
it's someone with the YouTube channel
with 200 subscribers I can tell you it's
more important than the 20 million ones
because they're the people I know
they're Carrie right like there are
people who have found me through through
it and they're like yes this is what I
want and there's part of me that's like
oh if only I could edit that I wouldn't
have found then I'd be finding the
people who are looking for influencers
not the people who are ready to be the
interconnection right like there's a
beauty like 200 people watching your
story is amazing especially if those 200
people are your family right like your
grandkids who you don't get to eat so
there are lists of like 10 to 12
questions and I think that who like what
did we want from our grandparents
whether they're alive or not
what are those 12 stories like what are
the what are the ones that we want our
grandkids to be able to have like the
truth is we don't know what's happening
with covet right we don't know who is it
you're gonna die who's not gonna die we
don't know like how can we create
something beautiful out of the not
knowing
oh no the the stories that are intermix
like I would actually love to hear
everyone's Kovach 19 story right well
they're living it like how is this last
three four months been for you all over
the world what is your story um it's
just because that's what we're going
through right now
so I want to know that story but I also
want to know you know the love of your
life your biggest heartbreak and your
biggest mistake and what you learned
from it and all of these things that I
do think and truly bus I think the
questions are actually in the 36
questions like there's some of them are
powerful right and seeing people the 36
questions Daniel if you don't know is
this New York Times article it's also
was a study an actual scientific study
they 36 questions to fall in love I
recently held one and only my friend my
friend Daniel who was not you showed up
and and Kerry of course because she was
helping me co-host and anyway in this 36
questions there's things like what is
your relationship with your mother are
you close to your family are you having
people answer things that are similar to
that and then sitting through and
watching you don't I mean 10 people tell
you what their biggest their worst
memory is and their best memory and it's
something that you would only offer to
the world if it's something you're
willing to share like what is your worst
memory you're willing to share and you
know on that one of the things that
comes to mind and this is just something
I've learned from talking to folks is
that it appears that like my parents
were baby boomer generation and then
their parents the Silent Generation
it appears that especially the men they
were told something like my dad has even
said this that vulnerability is a sign
of weakness and so like I think we get a
lot out of these stories when people are
able to talk about what didn't go well
what you know they're failures I do
think that we have some malicious code
in there basically that says we've got a
whole huge part of the generation that
has basically been running the software
that says don't ever talk about your
weaknesses and that was seen as a
weakness especially as a man
and I'll only talk about your successes
and it's like we're missing a whole part
of this of the story because that was a
meme that has been going on I think we
started we've definitely started to
change that in our generation it's hard
for me to think of my own father talking
about that stuff whatever he views as
negative because that's what me was told
that's the number one thing you don't do
don't talk about your failures just
that's why like as I said everybody
talks about the success so you go
through life thinking that you've got to
attain this success or you know nothing
you you know you're seen as a failure
and if you look at the suicide rates
it's mostly men young men do you think
that that's why a lot of yeah I didn't
make this up there's a book there's a
book called I don't know if I'm gonna
remember the author right now
Terrence somebody it's the book is
called I don't want to talk about it and
the subtext is a history of underlying
depression and Men and like yeah I think
about that going through your whole life
never being able to talk about what that
is going on that will start you won't be
a soft human you will be a hardened
person because you're always trying to
put up this protective thing it's called
I don't want to talk about it
fitting title I think and it's entirely
on I didn't make this stuff up then the
flip side of that for women in a very
heterosexual culture is that all of the
emotional labor is put on us right like
if you're gonna talk about the what I
don't want to talk about its to your
sister your mother your wife right like
it's like but only that one person and
only gonna be vulnerable with them and
then we are taught not to love
vulnerability necessarily in that space
so then it looks like your enemy like
it's it's a yes yet show that I really
do want mul nur ability
you want to see each other we want to
connect but then we also repulsed by it
right like it's also like we were not
that much vulnerability oh but not that
much and it's it's very much on the
individual to be like how much am I
willing to share and it's not up to me
whether you accept it or not it really
is it like it's that's on you to some
degree and giving people the safety to
to experience that and part of that is
allowing your story to be out there and
allowing people to see it even if it
only gets 200 views like that doesn't
mean you're a failure it means that you
were a success to 200 people it means
that like 200 people heard your story
and yes it they're gonna carry it
forward it's gonna be a piece of their
story ya know that author talks about
relationships marriages and exactly what
you said Jubilee about what is going on
is all of that entire pressure is but I
mean you know is typically put on the
wife in those situations and the author
talks about the need for these men to
have other relationships other male
relationships he's talking about but in
general where you're not dumping all
this on one person and it's just and
it's as fractions these marriages so
badly and he's a he's a psychotherapist
or whatever so like knows about marriage
counseling and whatever and I don't
think it has to be in a you know a
heterosexual sense but just in generally
speaking whatever I mean the topic of
history but we've had a fascination
leave together it was like a powerful
thing that could be done to get like the
current verbal stories and video stories
of who's alive today and then from that
I think we see such richness that we go
back in time right and we're like what
we have these journals we have these
photos how do we connect them how do we
actually put them together but well I
think we've got a history
longer-term of countries tribes they're
all competing with one another and so if
you're competing you have to put up this
essential propaganda that you always win
and why do the winners write history
with them oh you know never losing a
battle or whatever because if you're
competing and you need to look strong
compared to the people across the way
like you maybe you have to do that yeah
I think there's something right you know
you're Orion writing the history of your
group or whatever and you know the the
king or something royalty is like hey
leave out the old battle we lost don't
write that and that won't look good
mm-hmm that's one of the things that
happens in the great where Alexander not
the great his dad was Alexander the
Great is um they have a battle with
someone on the border of Russia and he's
like well yeah I think it's one of the
Scandinavian countries and he's like
well yeah when we start winning I can I
can let go of that but it's like I need
to be as good as my father and I need to
it's like that I think that drive has
been been the case for most of history
it's like they're dying they're losing
the war at the same time it's like right
but when we start winning that I can
stop okay what we're losing and we're
losing on a massive front like I think
that allowing those stories to emerge
where if we were able to hear the
Vietnam stories in the Korean stories
from the people who were there winners
and losers not like the the was the word
like romanticization of war falls away
when you hear real stories but if you're
only allowed to talk about your
successes then your war stories
automatically are oh yeah my buddies and
me and we're in the trenches and you
know like they're not and then we came
home in our lives fell apart and then
you know like this is the worst moment
of this is the best and worst time of my
life here's here's those stories
you're getting up to the hour I would
love to hear everyone's I think I know
most powerful thing that we came up with
together or came up with in the moment
right now what do you think is the most
powerful thing we do for history with
10,000 people and $100,000
I just think history codes and of
stories dirty cold ends I think that's
that's where you start
I mean you don't even need to have to
10,000 people for that you know so that
could be done straightaway you know yes
I agree but recording people's stories
and having it done in some kind of way
that it's organized a bowl right whether
that's the hour-long that you have tags
in or whether that's asking the person
your interview to answer this question
and recording it for five minutes doing
both of those and figuring out how to
amalgamate them how to bring them
together that like you said you can just
start I plan on just starting like I
don't have any living grandparents but
my kid does so intervene both of my
parents interviewing her living
grandmother on her her who isn't gonna
be living much longer on her father's
side finding out like what are these
stories you want to know and then
finding them out from her grandparents
before it's too late
yeah I I would agree what did you say
the weaving the tapestry of everyday
tapestries of life okay well sounds like
we got a name for it
okay I also I wrote here our stories
that's kind of know there's like
herstory history like know our stories
like all of us have stories as a member
who who in what your tapestry phone and
we were back in the days of the internet
tapestry could be a URL we could buy but
I guarantee you it's already taken it
spell it differently that's really good
top it has top of studies at the stories
it's also like an appetizer it's like
you only like an
appetizer because it's also like once
you start being able to do the the
organization then it's also like I can
you know I mean if I watch one of
Daniels and I really like Daniel I can
watch bunch of Daniels stuff and or I
can watch a bunch of like oh I really
want to hear a coming-out story so I'm
gonna watch all the coming up stories
right like there's different sayings
that that are gonna bring it like the
one person or to see the timeline of
like oh he was talking about he was
you're too young for this but alive in
Berlin when the wall came down
I want to hear other stories about who
was there when the wall came down I
would hear the stories from other places
in the world like to see and you can
even put a call out right instead of
hashtag everyone jumps on board be like
ooh there's one story can more people do
this one story because we actually
really want more of this one oh
topic-based
yeah well yeah like if someone like if
for some reason no one thought about
sharing their coming-out story right and
then someone was like hey here's Mike um
you know we want more of that right like
put the call out people know what it is
that people weren't because then they if
you don't have a company don't stir
you're not gonna do that right but if
you do you're gonna you're like oh I
couldn't you know it sparks our brains
to know what to talk about and to just
hit record and record for five minutes
right record our parents for five
minutes record our siblings record other
people as long as we have their consent
information yeah I I wonder if there is
a need for you know I know the hours
almost up you know we didn't really do
any like what are there any downsides to
this that that we couldn't foresee you
know I'm sure it'll come up as we do it
I knew it would come up because if you
think about all the downside and then
it's like oh then let's not - yeah I
mean they're like how could you protect
for those because we've got examples
where people's history have come out and
then they're you know whole reputation
is ruined and sometimes that might be
okay and sometimes it's like we all have
to realize we all have this sloppy life
sometimes and
how do you protect for that type of
thing oh you're asking people to be
vulnerable you know depending on who it
is and say I have big dreams of you know
wanting to make impact in the world but
gosh of my stories out there that could
work against me somehow how could you
know just how could you protect against
that what you could do right because I
know like when you're having
conversations with people and they get
recorded you could actually actually ask
them to listen to it back and if there's
anything kin there may be edited some of
the stuff that they don't want in there
but actually give it back to them cuz I
know through you doing filmmaking and
radio and everything sort of stuff
through college and that you've got to
get people's consent well once you've
got their consent
a lot of companies you don't have to
have anything to do with them after that
once you've got the consent and I think
this is where they go wrong in most
places they don't they don't show the
pace and what we've done you don't so
they get you know say is this or a field
the more just interested in the content
for the documentary or whatever they
don't actually go back and ask them and
say look this is what do you have any
problems with this because it's all
about budget it's all about getting it
you know at me so they've got no
interest in the person that they've
actually took the stories from which I
think it's quite wrong really you know I
mean and as I said you could say right
listen to that bass is there anything
there that you don't want us to to you
know I mean and then we'll take it out
and we'll edit it so yeah yeah having
the person who's interviewed give the
consent is huge yeah I think also
there's a certain width with council
culture and influencer culture how it is
one person has 20 million views five of
them don't like them they could be
cancelled because it feels yeah thank
you
but there's the flip side of that where
it's like share like someone says
something racist right and so we're
gonna pull that out and we're gonna
shame them for it and we're gonna or how
will we all share stories or we were
racist right because that's actually
going to help move racism
further then shaving people for their
moment of racism right like hey when my
Korean friend got married and they had
live fish at the wedding shark fin soup
I was not most magnanimous friend right
like that's real story then I would get
into if I needed to write for the like
the idea that revenge porn happens and
then you as a woman because it happens
to women
no one cares man has then they can't be
President and they can't be CEO well if
everyone is then actually it doesn't
matter right if everyone has naked
pictures of their body out there that's
actually be an immunization for it
rather than like no no no no your body's
sacred nobody Sheraton picture the
actual solution is everybody share it
who wants to no shame in it right and so
I think there is I'm not saying that
that's necessarily what would happen and
or what should happen but there's a
certain amount of how we protect each
other is doing what they did like not go
out and yell at the black guy in Central
Park
no that was over-the-top and wrong but
yes here's the story of me when I was
racist I can only imagine if someone had
a camera on me
right here's my worst moment for
homophobia here's my weirdest moment for
this and when there's tens of thousands
of them you can see okay and then how
did you grow beyond that how have you
learned from that right is a bigger
story forward well you could do with
that you could have they didn't want to
if they wanted to share something but he
didn't want to but you could have it as
anonymous maybe just of the location
every way
and maybe I will the way you just have
it as anonymous and the guy you know I
think that hurts the other part though
cuz then it's like well the nonnamous
porn and I think a lot of it happens in
retrospect right it's like you told a
story what's happening with the tearing
down of the statues right the people at
the time thought they were fine right
having slaves is normal having like this
is normal and then now that history is
happening well weren't currently alive
right this is history 200 years from now
we can see what happens to slave owners
who are our current slave owners right
Birds her current you don't get to be
the white guy hero from history and how
your sad
you up there if you were a
asshole so maybe don't be a
asshole right like I think there is but
how do you know you don't know what it
is to be a asshole 200 years
from now you can think maybe right like
maybe you need to be vegan maybe you
need to be I'm not going vegan so my
great-grandkids can think that I'm a
good person they can be vegan
anyway so what I'm hearing is one
potential way to do this is probably not
live in order to help someone be safe
and be very candid you say when I can do
this live we're gonna record this
because I want you to be very candid and
open and you say when we're done we're
gonna go back through and we'll talk
about if there's anything you you don't
want in the final thing you know we're
open to omitting things but for the
initial recording just talk off the top
of your head and then anyways that's one
of that's what I'm hearing that sounds
pretty good yeah I think so I like that
idea
I also think starting if we were
actually gonna start this project
starting with like the top five
questions to talk to any questions so
that they were similar between who
wanted to have them some of interviewing
my dad I know what stories I want to ask
him right but they're gonna be different
than what I'm going to ask my mom or
what I'm gonna ask other grandmother um
but there's gonna be commonality and I'm
picking what is common so that we know
to do that and then you can also ask
anything else you want right and self
but have these ten so we have those ten
as the broad broad topic so mm-hmm
we don't have time to come up with those
ten but I would just want to say that I
think that would be a powerful does
anyone have any closing thoughts before
I stop recording okay before I stop
going live no all right