[Music]
how can we even begin to solve our
problems when our conversations about
them keep breaking down to new solutions
firstly a book with expert level
techniques for having impossible
conversations I believe it is an
existential issue yes I believe it's an
issues for our democracy I believe it's
an issue for our environment I believe
it's in this you're literally any
problem that you want to solve but if
you want to solve those problems look in
the mirror it starts with you listening
to somebody first and understanding so
conversation is the core element it's
the building block for all of this stuff
and a competition to actually have them
on a social media site designed around
long-form good-faith dialogue the best
conversations that I was having was
around the dinner table with my friends
and family and then I'd go online and it
was just so much less valuable we just
wondered out loud about what a platform
might look like if we try to replicate
some of those more interesting
conversations that we have around the
dinner table or with friends and family
space but it's not so easy when even the
concept of free speech has been
weaponized and in some places is
considered a cover for reprehensible
ideas so how do we have these
conversations in an environment where
the whole idea of it is starting to
become suspicious I think the way that
we can do this is by the people who
aren't absolutely committed to defending
their their own side and showing the
problems on the others those who will
concede that they have extremists of
their own and who want to find common
ground with people just over the bridge
I think that is who is going to have the
best kind of conversations and I think
there's a lot more of them than we think
there are and it's one thing to talk
about how to have good faith positive
conversations and to treat each other
with respect how easy is it to actually
do it I think everybody is capable of
saying you should listen to other people
and have polite conversations the
difficult part is how to do that and it
seems at least from my experience and
from some of those that I've talked to
that he is about as bad at that as
anybody I guess I should
be some kind of an avatar for for the
message of my book but again anybody who
wants to deal with that it can reach out
to me privately Twitter is a performance
[Music]
I am past the point of concern and I'm
actually worried now I'm worried because
we're not talking to each other I'm
worried for large-scale macro issues
Democratic issues I'm worried that I'm
worried in my own life that I've lost
friends because they've disagreed with
things that I've said people I was
extremely close to someone who came out
to help me move out of my dad's house
when when my dad died and were no longer
friends from of all the silly things
from a political disagreement I've lost
friendships over you that I've had for
literally decades and those things have
all been very recently and I think it's
a it's a kind of cultural toxin that we
have now that's destroying us if you are
an enemy state you couldn't possibly
have manufactured a better ideology to
do that and it's taken hold and
germinated in our culture and if we want
to start making changes to that we have
to change ourselves first so we have to
be the ones willing to listen we have to
be one thing you know what I never
thought of that that's right it's not
gonna change on its own global climate
change if we don't do anything about you
cannot talk about all you want or you
can push bogus solutions like
Recycling's because you don't want hurt
people's feelings but if if you if
you're worried about hurting people's
feelings by talking about recycling when
it comes to anthropogenic climate change
you just wait to see how their feelings
are gonna be hurt once global sea la see
you once the catastrophe startings but
the larger point is that what we need to
do is we need to speak openly and
honestly about things and if we don't
those problems the earth doesn't give a
 about you or me those problems are
gonna solve themselves so those problems
it might not be the solution that we
want the root of this whole thing is
conversation its discourse its dialogue
it's listening it's understanding it
doesn't matter if it's an ecological
problem or any other problem that's the
first place that we have to start the
most important thing is conversation
listening and having having an ability
to know how to have those conversations
I've read the book earlier on today and
there's a lot of really interesting
stuff in it
you liked it yeah I really liked it I
thought I think it's a really good book
I think it's really sort of pithy
concise and very clear I'd like to pick
up on a couple of things from near the
beginning where you talked about the
need for psychological safety and that's
something we've talked a lot about on
the channel this sort of need for
psychological safety which is kind of
paradoxical because a lot of your your
targets with grievant studies and a lot
of that your work you'd assume that the
idea of safe spaces is something that
you that you would target and and would
say is is overdone but actually
psychological safety is is a safe space
required for these kind of conversations
yeah people the literature is very clear
it's crystal clear people only change
their views from a point of
psychological safety the difference with
grievance studies is that's not a
one-on-one conversation with anybody
that was again penetration testing like
when you try to bring a bomb through
airport security or white pack white hat
hacking when you try to hack into a
system we were testing systems we
weren't testing individuals in those
systems and how to have impossible
conversations isn't about how to
converse with an institution or a system
it's about how to converse with
individuals within that institution and
system and could you unpack that a
little bit what what is a safe space in
this invited psychological safety in
this environment and how is it created
psychological safety the key point is
that you don't invoke a defensive
posture and somebody else so the moment
somebody feels defensive the likelihood
of belief revision plummets I'm not
necessarily saying that has to be a goal
to have a conversation with belief
revision but one of my goals in the
Ghoulia's Plato says that it's it's
better to be refuted than it is to
refute and the idea there is if you can
have that conversation and revise your
own beliefs that's the pinnacle that's
the goal that's the highest so there are
multiple types of conversations there's
conversations that deal with truth this
is the basic binary and then there's
conversations in which one engages to
revise somebody's belief or perhaps
their own belief
even on both of those conditions
psychological safety is paramount
because that's when people's defensive
postures go down when they when they
invent when they evoke a defensive
posture
they won't revise their beliefs it
doesn't mean that if they don't have a
defensive posture they will it just
means that it's a probability continuum
it just means they're more likely to do
that mmm
and I don't know if I don't know if
you're familiar with the idea of like
polyvagal theory yes
I watched her episode yeah yeah it's
something that we've been we did a whole
piece around the science and psychology
of I think we called it the science and
psychology of polarization but you could
also have called it the science and
psychology of difficult conversations
and it's I was struck reading your book
how how much what you'd written mirrored
what we talked about
especially the value of curiosity
because it from the from polyvagal
theory curiosity and defensiveness
cannot coexist if you're curious you're
not defense and if you're defensive
you're not curious and you mentioned you
use the word curious quite a lot in your
book yeah and there's a ancient
philosophical adage wisdom begins in
wonder so when people start wondering
about things and I just I just want say
I think that's the tragedy of our age
right now is that people don't wonder
they don't wonder aloud they certainly
don't wonder on social media I had a lot
of thoughts that I'd like to just tweet
out and put on social media because I'm
wondering but then I'd get another word
I was I don't know the word to use
beside gang bang but don't piled dogpile
would be a better word yeah I would be
dog piled by people moron grifter idiot
should have known that and do I really
want to look through 50 examples of
people calling me a moron an idiot and a
grifter in a Nazi because I was curious
about something and I wanted somebody's
feedback so one of the things we do
we've done in our current culture is
that we've robbed ourselves of the
ability to wonder and particularly we've
robbed ourselves of the ability to
wonder out loud and wonder out loud in
an academic environment
so we don't weed we actively discourage
wandering and when people think that
they have the answers to questions they
don't wonder anymore why would you
wonder if you thought you had the answer
to a question there's nothing to wonder
about can you tell me a little bit about
the competition that you're running on
what you hope to achieve through it yeah
so impossible conversations was
initially brought to us through Peter
Boghossian and James Lindsay's book idea
we talked to Pete and Jim were friends
of theirs and and it just seemed as
though there was a real strong alignment
between what they were trying to achieve
with the book and what letter is trying
to achieve so we lost the competition
with the view to bring people together
from different parts of the ideological
spectrum to have long form thoughtful
meaningful good-faith conversations
across the divide the judging panel
consists of some relatively big names in
the public intellectual space and
they'll be assessing the conversations
as they come in and selecting someone
else in addition to the prize pool that
the winning conversation astray and
they'll also appear on a number of
podcasts and be publicized on area
magazine so we're pretty excited about
the next couple months the conversation
run between now and just to get a sense
have you said that a lot of your best
conversations around the dinner table
what were those topics of conversation
what were you guys talking about that
you felt were not being replicated
online I suppose it wasn't that the
topics weren't being replicated it was
more the style of the conversation I
think one of the things that we've
realized particularly as we've been
building letters is that do a style of
communication amongst our family is
quite unique aggressive yeah yeah I
think it may be it's part of this
African culture but I guess the goal is
to put a proposition on the table and
then have everyone else destroy it and
then your confidence and it was always
seen as a non personal impersonal thing
where it was what matters here is what's
true regardless of
the I guess the the intention so what
people were trying to do around the
dinner table was actually establish why
it is that something's true or why it
isn't true and but Dunham is so in a
good faith way and I think that elements
a good faith is fundamental to the best
quality and conversations it doesn't
matter how much two people disagree but
if they come to the table respecting one
another
playing by I guess a rules of engagement
that include being openly changing your
mind
being genuinely curious about the
person's position that you're debating
those are the kinds of things that we
experienced growing up and to don't you
don't see that very often I don't
believe on the internet it's it's very
tribal and combative and it seems to
create echo chambers yeah I've actually
noticed in speaking to other people that
we can be quite abrasive or at least
apparently so to others because we we
play a different game and conversation I
think then then most other people where
it's it's kind of merciless in that you
you can attack the person as hard as you
like but it's it's it's attacking ideas
and most people my experience outside of
our small you know cult of family and
friends you know they take that as an
attack on them and that's never been
it's always been about discovering
what's true so you know as Claude said
it's not that we were engaging in a
specific topic it's that there's a
curiosity amongst us in our friends
about figuring out what's true and
realizing that we're all you know pretty
ignorant on virtually every topic and
and using one another to to get closer
to the truth yeah it kind of reminds me
I've heard Eric and Brett Weinstein talk
about how it was for them growing up and
how they used to they used to have
certain rules or certain formulations
that are very similar to that about
interrogating people's perspectives and
in
arrogating our own perspectives like
almost yeah really ruthlessly I don't
know if you've heard them talking about
that before and wonder if there's any
similarities I haven't but we'll take
any similarities that comparison to the
the Weinstein brothers if you forget
cool I don't think either of you've got
the hair for it
give us some good time I mean the main
reason that we're sitting down or that
the particular thing that's happening at
the moment is this competition on letter
which is about impossible conversations
which also coincides with the book by
Peter Bogosian and James Lindsay who I
know you
so you're one of the judges on the
letter competition and also you're you
you were working with James and Peter on
the grievant studies piece I just love
you to to talk a little bit about that
background and what you think what
you're hoping to get from this the the
competition on letter well our our
project it was of course about shoving a
problem that we saw to be happening in
the academic lift and I love that does
come down to not being able to talk
about it straightforwardly
so we had been we we came from this New
Atheists background so we were
criticizing and liberal ideas and
unsubstantiated truth claims but mostly
from religion and mostly because of
where we are geographically from
Christianity but when this rise of
postmodern ideas in the form of social
justice scholarship and activism really
started escalating around 2015 it became
harder and harder for us to avoid this
so we have been addressing that's we've
written a lot of essays saying what we
thought the problems were a lot of
people responded that we were not
picking that there wasn't an in depth
problem that had always some crazy
papers so yeah we decided to go into it
spend a year within the system really
work out how it worked
get some things published for if nothing
else people would then not be able to
say you don't know what you're talking
about and that that was how that project
came about but as it comes up for for
having those difficult conversations
a recap people who might not know so
then you you managed to get I think was
it seven pieces published in different
journals yet in a product we we wrote 20
papers which were either really
methodologically awful or absurd or
unethical and it is they sort of made
claims that weren't warranted by what we
were showing so that they were
theoretical interpretations we had seven
of them accepted six of them we retired
but seven of them were still in play and
we had great hopes of five of those but
we had to stop because we got found not
by other journals but by journalists so
that that was our project had we been
able to continue for another sort of six
months or so I think yet we would have
got 10 12 even 15 in we were out their
success rate was increasing to near a
hundred so it was it is really very easy
to churn out this stuff if you just make
the right claims and quote the right
people and that isn't scholarship and so
yeah just to talk about the impossible
conversations on on letter what are your
hopes for the platform what do you hope
for the competition I'm a big fan of
letter because I think it has got the
ability to get people talking to each
other as human beings which doesn't
really happen when you're on Twitter or
something like that being you've got
you've got people just sort of sniping
at you from all angles and it's so such
a short space it really is just good for
sort of throwing daggers at each other
but if you get people willing to have an
in-depth thoughtful conversation and
they're writing back and forth in their
own time they can consider what they're
saying they can consider what the other
person is saying then it's much more
like you're speaking to another human
it's much more like you have a
responsibility to be thoughtful and I
think good things can result from that I
feel like the book is very timely
because there's a lot of focus now on
why conversations break down and the
sense that we can't really move forward
until we start from this kind of almost
like the foundations of n
kind of solution to many of the problems
we're seeing involve having these
generative conversations so I'd like to
ask you first why do you think do you
agree that it's very timely and why do
you think it's really timely yeah I do
actually I think it it tapped right into
a vein of what's going on by some luck
because I feel like it was very timely
when we wrote it and then a period went
by where it would have been less and now
there seems to be something of a
renaissance of people wanting to reach
across aisles and talk to people and
understand one another better try to
figure out where people are coming from
so I do think that the book is timely
because it's geared toward the idea of
having conversations with people with
whom you don't agree and I think kind of
the cultural moment we find ourselves in
is one in which there's been a lot of
polarization of course I'm speaking
primarily in the u.s. context I don't
know quite how bad it is anywhere else
but in the United States obviously
there's very little social or political
capital to be had by crossing the
political aisle if you're on the left
you have to spend time with people on
the left and only criticize people on
the right if you do talk to somebody on
the right you have to stick their feet
to the fire and everything else and vice
versa the same thing you know I hear
people I live in the southeastern United
States which is very conservative and I
hear people you know blaming the
Liberals and liberals for everything in
the left the left bubble and it's just
as very divisive I mean social identity
theory gone mad
kind of environment in which people
aren't speaking to people who have
different views very much and so oh this
has gone on for long enough where I feel
like there's this real hunger from
people who are tired of all of the the
so-called politically exhausted people
who are tired of all of this division
and fighting to be able to just start
being friends again that understand what
people think and say and where they're
coming from well most importantly to
start generating relationships and
communities again where every
doesn't have to be a political battle to
the death and just you know people
unfriending each other and bailing out
and I think there's just this moment now
where people are hungry to be able to
know how to talk to people again there
is a sense that there are new sort of
political dividing lines and certainly
the issue of social justice has become
one of those kind of real sort of fault
lines probably more and more over the
last few years and I guess from loop
from the grievant studies papers that
you've put out you will be seen as
falling definitely on one side of those
battle line and I'd love to hear your
your your thoughts on that and do you
think there's a new political
configuration going on yeah and no it's
complicated I don't think that the that
the liberal or I guess left and right
dichotomy has actually broken down I
think it's kind of been it's starting to
be suspended but I believe it's kind of
a temporary arrangement
I don't think that the the battle
between kind of a progressive liberal
open idea of society versus like
conservative one is I mean it's just too
fundamentally it's the it's the gas
pedal and the brake pedal it's of
society and you're gonna have people who
fall on each side of that there is
certainly I feel like what we've
actually run into is a situation where
you have politics is usual on one level
and then there's like this meta
political issue where you have forces
both on the far right and on the far
left that are kind of against the
overarching liberal project in their own
ways it's really that they're doing the
same thing but pointed in opposite
directions and because the kind of meta
political issue has to be settled before
we can get back to politics ugly as it
is as usual there's an old there's an
agreement that's kind of taking place to
set aside the small battle in order to
fight the bigger battle so I don't think
there's quite a realignment going on
like a lot of people are suggesting I
think it's slightly more complicated
than that it's more like a temporary
truce the way I've characterized it in
the past by
metaphor is you can imagine you know on
a football pitch you've got you've got
two teams maybe the red team in the blue
team and obviously they're at
metaphorical war with one another in the
game and right now there are people
coming in from the outside whether they
represent one side or the other or some
of both
doesn't matter who are essentially
telling them no no this game won't be
played anymore and the red team and the
blue team are like screw you are all
footballers and we're gonna play the
game and we'll go back to being against
each other when we can play the game
again and so I feel like that's sort of
the mood of the moment is that the peter
has Freddy's it that the aliens have
come down and you put your own political
squabbles aside to deal with the aliens
when the aliens have come down and I
think that that's actually not a bad way
to look at it and I mean what I'm really
interested in I want to explore in the
piece that I'm doing at the moment about
letter and about the kind of the broader
topic of impossible conversations is it
feels like whatever the dividing lines
are now in society it's very easy for
that even that requests for
conversations across the divide to be
itself like for some people it's seen as
suspicious it's seen as you saw what
happened to the idea of the intellectual
dark web it was almost immediately seen
as a sort of Trojan horse for
reprehensible ideas so even the idea of
free speech and even the idea of
dialogue itself is now in certain areas
considered part of is considered
suspicious so how do we have these
conversations in an environment where
the whole idea of it is starting to
become suspicious I think this sort of
breaks down into a lot of different
things I think what people are doing
when what they're reacting against is
the extremes on the other side so if yet
we can see that's something like the
intellectual dark web or even sort of
centrism or liberalism some of the
identitarian leftist can see this as
part of a far-right may be a gateway
carrying water for a you know a drug
- what all of this this kind of nonsense
so we've got to try and break those down
yeah but I think the way that we can do
this is by the people who aren't
absolutely committed to defending their
their own side and showing the problems
on the others those who will concede
that they have extremists of their own
and who want to find common ground with
people just over the bridge
I think that is who is going to have the
best kind of conversations and I think
there's a lot more of them than we think
there are I think very few people are
completely lost to either a far right or
a far left ideology so it's looking for
the people who are sympathetic to those
perspectives but are open to dialogue
yeah and they don't have to be I I could
have a conversation with a libertarian
even though my economics are close to
socialist because I could understand
that he is actually someone who wants
things he wants good things for the
world in the in in possible
conversations but they say they point
out that nearly everyone wants good
things nobody who has a political
position thinks what is going to screw
society at most let's go for that so
having that kind of conversation I could
talk to a libertarian I could talk to a
social justice activist or even a racist
or a homophobe
if I assume that they're not just evil
but that we disagree and perhaps I can
bring them around to seeing my point of
view and understand where they're coming
from better even if I'll never agree
with them because there's a lot of
argument there's a lot of accusations of
bad faith being lobbed around and almost
seems like the the accusations of bad
faith especially from the center and the
center right are often used in a similar
way to the sort of no platforming
tactics on the left but here are a lot
of people refusing to engage by saying
well these are these are bad faith
people my sense is whether that's true
or not surely those if it's true than
those arguments need to be exposed as
such what do you think do you get the
sense of that phrase bad faith is
overused I do
certain things it gets apply to me and
that that really isn't the case but I
think as well that we're in a situation
in which bad faith is rewarded the kind
of conversations that we're having at
the moment when they're politically
charged it is much more about finding a
way to interpret what the other person
is saying least charitable way possible
most problematic and people on both
sides will will do that they'll see
straight on that opportunity as a chance
to strike a blow and that's how
conversations are happening so or also
to signal to your own tribe that your
yeah that it's more about signaling to
your own tribe than it is trying to
enter into dialogue the other person for
example yes I mean it's trying it's
trying to to just completely demonize
the other side and and signal your own
loyalty to your own side and that I
think can legitimately be called bad
faith so I think we need to try to
restore if we ever had it I think we did
an expectation of charity of
reasonableness of really trying to
understand what the other person is
saying of steel Manning as you birth so
I think that's something that we need to
do at the moment when it comes to bed
faith you can either be wrong or right
with that if you're accusing somebody of
speaking in bad faith and they in fact
or not and it's your prejudice that no
one can actually believe what they're
saying genuinely then they have to think
about whether they themselves are acting
in bad faith and you mentioned steel
Manning could you steel man
post-modernism yes yes the what the post
modernists were concerned about was and
over-simplistic
adherence to sets of ideas they weren't
being criticized modernists were quite
naive and idealistic they thought that
everything was just getting better that
science had the answer to everything
and so post-modernism wanted to
deconstruct these ideas wanted to show
that they had floors wanting people to
trust less in beat overarching
explanations and to think about how
power can be affecting these stories and
how it can work in the service
power so that is the benefits of
post-modernism the reason that I still
don't think it has worth anyway is that
there are other ways to do this there is
liberalism and there is science science
itself is self-correcting its skeptical
so as long as the institutions of
science allow people to challenge
certain ideas require replication
require falsification that's the best
skeptical system we've got post
modernists didn't invent skepticism and
if we look at history the recent history
before post-modernism arose it is a
history of grand narratives being
challenged and overcome feudalism went
patriarchy imperialism slavery they were
all overcome before post-modernism so
while the post modernists do have a good
good good intense and I know what
they're about there's just not the best
way to do it a lot of people say well
this is either a straw man or these are
just limited to university campuses very
few people actually believe these how do
you respond to that as a as a criticism
well that's chapter 9 of the book I've
just finished writing and we're looking
at the ways this has come out into
society the public shaming --zz the
coffer for firing in various sort of
different departments of you see what's
happening in ya young adult books at the
moment people are withdrawing their
books it's a really kind of toxic
enclosed environment we saw one of those
at Evergreen college as well where that
got completely and in thrall to the
ideas of Robyn D'Angelo so we see these
hotspots of it and we see ideas where
we're you know celebrities are accused
of cultural appropriation or in sin or
not representing that there's either a
lack of representation of minority
groups or there's cultural appropriation
of them and it's very difficult for
anyone to navigate through that so I
think a lot of people can still go
through their lives knowing nothing
about
these social justice ideas until they do
because it's quite arbitrary if you are
in a situation where you say the wrong
thing and it is picked up by the wrong
person that could be your introduction
to to social justice ideas but your book
is about how you bridge those bridge
across divides how do you decontaminate
the because it always almost feels like
in in some areas the whole idea of free
speech is being seen as a kind of
stalking horse for the right offer for
Dangerous Ideas how do you decontaminate
that and how do you kind of unpick it
because it seems a very complex picture
right now oh that's easy I would ask
them why they believe that I know that
sounds silly but and then I would truly
listen to what they had to say
yeah now keep in mind that sounds simple
and it is but there are some people
again who don't want to have a
conversation are you familiar with Daryl
Davis no I don't know the name issued
absolutely and I would urge every single
person watching the listening to this to
Google
Gerald Davis Daryl Davis is a black man
he's also a musician who is fairly I
don't know anything about jazz but
evidently he's a fairly accomplished
jazz musician but he goes in to talk to
Ku Klux Klan members he's an actual he
literally physically walks into round
not online he's not be hiding behind his
keyboard he physically walks in he
befriends them and he has a closet full
of 20 AB negated hoods to prove how
effective he is recently he was at a
conference when he was called a racist
and the conference was boycott Darrell
Davis the man with an impeccable
pedigree credentials the the ideal
credentials for being an anti-racist who
himself possesses an oppression variable
an intersectional characteristic he is
was framed by as a racist and called a
racist by an Tifa and his statement on
facebook is utterly fascinating
he's been called every n-word every word
in the book but never a racist until
recently so we have to come to a
realization of two things
one there are some people with whom
conversation is simply impossible it's
somebody Darrell Davis invited an T for
folks to have a conversation with him
they refused that's the first thing the
second thing is if we really want to be
effective in conversations and having
conversations ideally what would have to
change is the bedrock of the value so
the older I get the more I realized that
this is all about values and so if we
can help people value free exchange
open ideas communication but the way to
do that is to start with listening
you have to listen first if you want to
be listened to you have to listen to
others first that's the key one one more
quick thing if I may i I was just on a
writing retreat with some friends and
somebody came to that writing retreat
who I'd never met it was a stranger I
really liked him really smart guy and he
was also to say the least an auntie
facin
and we started having these
conversations and I said to him in the
course of these conversations I would
love for you to get some of your buddies
and have a conversation he said well
what would you want to have a
conversation with them about and I said
he said what's the one thing you want to
have a conversation with them about and
I said I would want to know why they
think physical violence is justified
so one thing he said well you can't do
that you have to work up to that that
takes you know a lot of talking and
getting to know them etc and I thought
to myself okay I'm willing to do that
but you shouldn't have to do that the
problem is the dad value the value
system that those folks have is so
tainted and so corrupted that being
willing to talk about why you would
physically injure someone and perpetrate
violence in them should be the first
thing you talk about it shouldn't have
to be something you work up to I wonder
if you've considered this as well as the
even in certain air
for example you have Helen pluck rose
and Heather hate hiring and a couple of
other judges and in certain circles
they're already quite and I know I know
Helen finds it quite difficult to
imagine that she has enemies but she's a
controversial figure now on Twitter
because of the grievous stand scant
grievance scandal papers and a few other
kind of culture war dynamics that are
going on in the States
how how do how do you avoid how do you
avoid looking like you're taking sides
in the culture war when for some parts
of the culture war even the whole idea
of good-faith dialogue has been
contaminated the idea of free speech
they see is almost like this right-wing
plot for hiding bigoted perspectives you
must be aware of that dynamic and what
what do you what do you make of it how
do you how do you how do you work in an
area where even those those values are
now politicized yeah I mean I think at
some at some point you have to decide
which values matter the most and for
people who think that good faith
engagement is somehow radioactive that
it probably isn't the platform for them
although we would welcome them and we
would encourage them to to come on and
share their ideas if if the idea of a
good faith conversation is political I
don't know that you can even get to the
starting line so I think from from that
perspective free speech is paramount and
regardless of what your ideas are if you
can't even get to the starting point
there's nowhere to go and there's no
progress to be made and I think if that
costs us a cohort of users that's fine
I think you have to worry about it but I
think you have to push ahead regardless
I think I think you can mitigate a lot
of this through a genuine conversation I
think what collect does is remarkable
but they are standalone blogs and
standalone standalone pieces all the
exchanges unless genuine conversation
at feature two people from the outset so
I think that does mitigate that to some
extent is that right at the beginning of
the piece you're getting two very
different perspectives from people from
often totally different parts of the
ideological or political spectrum I
think that offsets it's not some extent
but I think we're going to have to wade
through this minefield as carefully as
we can but we have to we have to forge
ahead because I think it's the the
consequences of not having these
conversations are actually increasing
polarization echo chambers which
manifest in real world consequences I
don't if you describe yourself as kind
of IDW adjacent there was the sort of
the idea of the intellectual dark web
being based around kind of good faith
dialog and that that kind of first kind
of broke through maybe about just over a
year ago and we're in a culture now
where even the idea or even the the the
concept of free speech seems to have
been weaponized itself or there seems to
be a lot of skepticism about it from
certain parts of the political spectrum
I'm thinking kind of mainly from the
left but how can you have how can you
have a book or a movement or a concept
of a free speech and a possible dialogue
when some people see even that concept
as a kind of stalking horse for
represent for reprehensible ideas yeah
how do you communicate across a divide
when even the idea in some places is
that trying to communicate across the
divide and have difficult conversations
about difficult topics is itself
considered a suspect position right so
it depends obviously if you're trying to
have that conversation and it's not
moving forward because the person that
you're speaking with for example on an
individual one-to-one level
is shutting it down and saying well you
know dialogue itself is complicity with
some evil or whatever and they refuse to
have a conversation
then that's what it
the book does define impossible
conversation by starting with saying
that there has to be a conversation if
there's no conversation you're talking
are talking but you're not in the realm
of a conversation at all if that's not
what what's there so that becomes a
difficulty but then if you're talking
about that idea and trying to get to
that idea so okay let's look at this
is talking about certain ideas your is
free speech itself you know a stalking
stalking horse for bigotry or some evil
or supremacy or whatever that itself is
a conversation topic you know is is that
something you really believe why do you
believe it let's how did you arrive at
that conclusion can you give me some
examples of why you you know where that
goes awry and you know you can start to
try to ask questions and dig into
somebody's epistemology you can start
asking them questions to help yourself
understand their perspective better at
the end of the day one of the last
things is if somebody won't have a
dialogue with you it's it's otherwise
productive you can always default to
just trying to learn why they believe
what they believe it doesn't have to
turn into some you know some set of
agreement or even to say something like
what we agreed to disagree you don't
even have to go there you can just I
okay I don't understand your perspective
instead of saying I disagree with that
that you I don't even understand that
can you just I just want to hear all you
have to say about that and help me
understand it and let them do a lot of
the talking maybe all that happens as
you listen and you learn maybe you're
actually going to have been open-minded
can be convinced that there's a point
there but you didn't understand like for
example when I spoke the Christians and
like well I don't like their point and I
don't agree with the point but at least
I see there is a point they're not
maniacs and maybe it is one of these
situations where we talked about a
couple of different examples in the book
of well-known cognitive effects where
people speak into their own ignorance
realize their own ignorance and end up
moderating their own beliefs just by
talking too much
um not in the sense you know that you
might say with a interviewer giving
someone enough rope for them to hang
themselves but rather just confronting
that the things that the reality is a
lot of the things that we speak about
many people heard of the dunning-kruger
effect a lot of the things that we speak
about we don't know as well as we think
we know there's a cognitive and
cognitive sciences that there's an
effect that's been described called the
illusion of explanatory depth that we
discuss in the book and in that people
tend to think they know some things
better than they do because they know
that other people know them and they're
kind of leaning on the fact that it is
known to to extend their own expertise
and so if you actually have them just
keep describing you know how will that
work okay so you know you see free
speech is a stalking horse for for for
suppressed supremacy but how does it
work in practice so if we limit hate
speech and then somebody comes along and
defines you know what what minority
group is trying to say is hate speech
what happens then and you just let them
talk a lot of times they'll they'll find
that there are holes in the end the
logic that they hadn't previously
examined and will go away with moderated
beliefs a couple of cognitive scientists
showed this with with mundane things and
a couple more showed it that it happens
with political beliefs as well so that
itself becomes a discussion topic but if
it is in a situation where and hopefully
people can change their mind on that one
but if it comes to the point where
you're actually trying to have dialogue
with somebody who doesn't want to all
you can do is shake their hand and thank
them for their time and can't go away
sometimes that's the limit and or you
can switch goals like you know what
screw it let's just talk about frisbee
you know we both we both like tacos
let's go there and just change the
subject and do something different
sometimes but it's just how it is you
talk later in the book about how
difficult the most difficult
conversations are when you're dealing at
the level of values yes why do we feel
that
oh there's been neuroscience on this
that shows that when our values are
contradicted or when people if that it's
as if people are threatening our self
our physical person why is that why do
you think that's the case
well let's unpack that before we talk
about why that's the case if it's an
identity issue if it is identity level
salience that's when those beliefs are
very difficult to revise so moral
beliefs in general but beliefs that
relate to identity in particular that's
why when you have conversations with
people and we're kind of jumping into
the end of the book you know you're
listening and etc etc which are violent
shouldn't be over glossed but that's why
when you have conversations with folks
the conversations about moral issues are
very difficult because it relates to
their sense of personal identity good
people believe this I am a good person
therefore I believe this it's
interesting I do an exercise in class
when I ask people what percentage of
their beliefs they think are true and
sometimes people find that jarring and I
write the numbers 90 you know 100 90 80
and and then after a couple of questions
I all right up you know five people
believe it's 94 people believe
occasional actually I get some people
around the 30s which is I don't know how
they navigate reality but then I'll give
another scale and say what percentage of
your moral beliefs do you think are true
or your religious beliefs and then those
numbers are far higher but the exact
opposite should be the case right that
that the beliefs for which you have less
evidence you should hold them in less
confidence for those ballistas they
should be commensurate so we've
miscalibrated our beliefs in it and our
belief calibration unit should be higher
for the UH neva dense beliefs that are
moral but it but in fact it's not the
case and was the last time that you
changed your mind about something
significant in what domain of thought
any just a significant significant
change almost every day
specifically almost every day with
regard to something my daughter tells me
on
I'll give you these quick examples about
I change my mind about diets I've
changed my mind about something I've
been told my whole life by intermittent
fast now my whole life I heard breakfast
is the most important meal of the day
but significantly I heard that from
people I loved and who loved me and
cared about me so it gave that belief an
emotional valence that it wouldn't
otherwise have had
and what about politically or
philosophically oh I've changed my my
beliefs very widely
it always I've changed my beliefs about
I've always been very socially liberal
and economically I find myself all over
the spectrum but I'm now thinking and
some kind of a crisis of capitalism
thinking that capitalism has got us into
our ecological mess and it's really the
Achilles heel of the whole system so I'm
now questioning some basic capitalistic
values with the huge data point of the
species threatening events that we see
in front of us so I've changed my mind
about that I've changed my mind about
torturing people of the extract
information in times of war they call it
the ticking bomb philosophy and scenario
scenario I've changed my mind about a
wide range of things and at the same
time is your book is coming out there's
the letter wiki project which is about
bringing people in dialogue with each
other who do you think should be in
dialogue with each other who would you
really like to see thrash it out in that
format I would like to see the only
people who would never do it I would
like to see Robyn D'Angelo in her work
on white fragility have a conversation
with Heather with with Helen pluck rose
I would like to see people advocate I'd
like to see Judith Butler in
conversation maybe with James Lindsay or
with Camille Paglia maybe or with
Camille Paglia that would be fine maybe
they would opposed to him being a male
Camille Paglia would be great or maybe
with christina hoff sommers
I'd like to see specifically
so so I think Ricky
I think the wiki project and the
Rathbones are fantastic I think this is
exactly what we need at this point in
our culture we need to have
conversations we need to be talking
across divides and I also think see I
just use a technique from the book I
used and instead of but and I also think
that excuse me I think that part of the
problem is that it's like in the
presidential debates when you're winning
you want fewer debates and when you I
don't know how I'm setting about in
American context I can't speak and I
don't have know it yes the same in the
UK yeah okay so so when you're winning
in the polls you want no debates and the
the loser person is currently losing
wants a lot of debates so currently
intersectionality is dominating the
cultural landscape so they don't really
want to have those conversations because
they're winning the cultural war at this
point so the question is how do we get
back to helping people value the right
things and part of what it means to
value the right things is discourse
dialogue and open conversation so once
you leave the good news that's the bad
news
the good news is that once you leave
that sliver of a space of
intersectionality virtually everybody is
willing to talk to you about virtually
anything people love to have an
opportunity to air their beliefs in fact
in the episode in the Pali polyvagal
theory one of the things that your guest
talked about and he's absolutely correct
from the research literature is that
people want to be listened to they don't
mind being disagreed with in fact
sometimes people love it but they want
to be listened to and the the wiki
platform gives people opportunity not
only to be listened to but to have other
people listened to in a very polite and
conservative way what they're doing the
good news is once you're out of that
thin sliver of society intersectionality
the vast majority of people are willing
to talk to you about the problems with
plastic in the oceans the ecological
crises homelessness immigration
those conversations are all very very
possible they might be difficult but
they're very possible because so here's
here's the thing about the the
ecological problem here's the thing with
our ecological problems our homeless
problems etc the moment someone believes
there's a moral reason attached to a
belief our whole to hold on to a belief
that problem is so much more difficult
to solve
so the moment someone believes that
they're a better person because of their
faith the instant that happens they're
less likely to revise their faith-based
beliefs nobody believes I don't think
you could find literally anybody who
believes we're all better off for having
more plastic in the ocean we're all
better off for having more co2 now
you'll have people disagree about the
solution to that but that's great that's
what we do in democracies and we need to
recover that ability to have a
conversation and I would argue that the
more morally relevant a topic is the
more important it is to have an open
discussion about that topic so we're not
having those topics in the university
system right now to be sure so the wiki
platform is a fantastic way to have
those difficult if not impossible
conversations with people across deep
divides who do you think who do you
think would be really beneficial to
engage in the letter project I did I'd
like to get to get all of them in there
all of the the critical theorists but I
don't see that it could work with with
their mentality what we need really I
think of people who aren't quite there
yet I think the the average person the
average academic legal involved well and
imagining a conversation with Robyn
D'Angelo wish if she were to speak to me
because I am also white she would just
tell me that it is impossible for me not
to be racist and I must understand that
she is correct she's given talks on how
to speak to white people who believe
it's possible not to be racist and the
this it's really just ways of telling
them they're wrong however if a black or
Asian person were to have a conversation
with her and disagree with her then she
wouldn't be able to say that precisely
she'd have to just apologize and take on
the criticism so I was I was talking to
a bade OMA recently and he's a self
South Asian I think or Arabic and he was
saying that he'd like to say to her stop
infantilizing me stop making me seem as
though i am a victim and i don't
understand what is happening I don't
have views of my own and I said to me if
you said that to her she would just have
to apologize for seeming patronizing
seeming to know your experience she
couldn't actually engage that idea so
it's just really impossible to talk to
somebody who is that deeply entrenched
in the beliefs but most of us aren't I
think the best we can do with those who
are really entrenched is to marginalize
them get them more widely recognized as
extremists making unsubstantiated claims
so who would be your ideal which people
would you love to see in dialog with
each other that's something you really
need to give me a bit more time to think
about I'm afraid so I don't know I mean
I've seen Richard Dawkins and Brett
Weinstein having a conversation I don't
quite like them to continue that Jordan
Peterson and Noam Chomsky would be would
be good I think I always think they've
talked a lot there with sam Harris and
and drawing Peterson they tend to break
they tend to come up against each other
in ways that are interesting to me from
someone who shows the epistemology of
Sam Harris but otherwise politically I
don't know no it was good there's some
really good names I think a lot of
people would be very interested to see
those those dialogues yeah I have
thought of two people that I would
actually like to have a conversation
with now great so there's Jose
deena now here's the writer of
epistemologies of resistance and i've
used his work a lot my think his work is
brilliant the way that he is looking at
epistemological vices and
epistemological thirties but he argues
that people who have the virtues are
it's it's related to identity so if you
have a privileged identity your your
discourses your understanding society
are dominant and so you can't see
anything else whereas if you're a
marginalized person you can see the
dominant system and you also have your
own so you have a greater wider
knowledge and you can see outside your
own system now I think his analysis
would be really rigorous and good if it
wasn't related to identity if it didn't
assume that all women thought the same
way I can black people thought the same
way but if he applied it to echo
chambers ideological groups so I would
really like to have a conversation with
him about that
and Christy Dotson leading black
feminist epistemologists she's somebody
else I I really would like to talk to
because I read her work and you can just
tell how clear she is trying to be and
she really is she actually that she's
introducing really complex things but
she's taking the reader long she's
reminding about she's very sincere and
rigorous but again she's starting from
the problem of epistemological sort of
identity so again knowledge depends on
what race she well what sexual so I
think she goes very wrong but and she
also talks about a culture of
justification and so she's against the
idea that we need evidence for things
but when I read her I can't help but
think if you just started from a premise
of of evidence-based reason and
individuality your work would be so
valuable on how we understand knowledge
so I would like to talk to both of them
and actually yet suggest to them ask
them how they would like how they could
could how I could apply their work
differently and if they thought there
was any value in that or if I completely
missed the point you talk in the book
out you said almost like ninja level
techniques coming from hostage hostage
negotiation and cult deprogramming so
there's all the gaps or the
conversational techniques I mean the
suspicion is I'd love to hear a couple
of those first before you kind of get
into get into it what what do you think
is the most useful techniques that you
are in the book well for me the most
useful technique is certainly not one of
the ninja ones it is actually let
friends be wrong and I have a very
expensive definition of friends if
you're having a conversation with
somebody if for all intents and purposes
I think that you should treat them as
though your that your friends so the
most important technique for me is that
if if you have some ludicrous belief and
you're really entrenched in it
I don't have to change your mind we can
focus on other aspects of a relationship
we can I can let you be wrong and become
curious about what you believe in why
you believe it and ask questions to
understand it better and that may or may
not lead you to change your mind but it
will at least generate trust between us
it will engender better understanding
you will feel heard I will understand
better where you're coming from even if
I think you're absolutely insane as a
result and so letting people be wrong is
I think something we've really lost
another not a ninja level technique in
the early in the book the first one
mentioned is defining conversational
goals and so everything in a
conversation really depends upon knowing
why you're having the conversation so if
you and I are having a conversation to
achieve some workplace and you know and
I start making it about football I've
gone off the track right or if I start
talking about my fight with my wife or
something like that I've gone I'm no
longer attending the goal of that
conversation and I would insist that one
of the goals that you should always have
or nearly always have in most
conversations is to have a goal of
maintaining a positive relationship with
that person and so that starts to
delimit how far
you should be willing to go when you
argue or whatever maybe the situation is
you're sitting down in to your family
dinner and you have that uncle or cousin
or brother who just won't leave it alone
how do you navigate that you know that
kind of thing understanding the goal
there is to try to have a positive a net
positive experience at the dinner table
rather than turning it into a family
fight it is really important if you want
to look at kind of the ninja level stuff
or talk about the hostage negotiation
there are a few techniques that I really
like from a hostage negotiation I mean
I'm not one of these kind of like
conversational mastermind type people
but one that I find has a lot of value
from hostage negotiation is to repeat
back it's a kind of conversational
mirroring is to repeat back a few words
of what the person just said almost as a
question it nearly always will get the
person to continue talking and to say
more hostage negotiators are often
trying to get the criminal there
speaking with to admit some piece of
information that they can then use as
leverage to end the crisis and so they
very frequently will try to a lot of
their techniques are meant to keep the
person as calm as possible while keeping
them talking as much as possible because
when there's silence there's no
possibility of progress so for example
somebody might come in and say to you
just as a very kind of banal example
yeah so I just got back from the grocery
store and you say got back from the
grocery store that's it and then they're
very likely say yah yah yah yah I went
to the grocery store to get chicken and
he say yeah to get chicken in if it's
silly is I mean it sounds these people
off if you say it with the right tone
and that you're actually engaging with
them I'm not doing it well and
hypothetical but in a real
conversational environment it works a
little better let's say yeah I was
thinking about making chicken parmesan
for dinner tonight you know you say well
yeah chicken parmesan and then now
they're talking about you know I really
love Italian food and it actually is a
technique that is not just used in
hostage negotiation it's actually used
by clinical psychologists as well to get
people to open up and talk
more so if you're trying to get people
to open up about their beliefs and
understand where they're coming from in
a better level that's actually a
technique derived spring from hostage
negotiation or clinical psychology that
anybody can apply with a little bit of
familiarity in practice you can do it in
a natural way I've been doing it to my
daughter for months and she had no idea
I was doing it until he finally had an
open conversation about it the other day
when I told her I was doing it and she's
like I didn't even notice and I know
that technique because she had been
studying to be a psychologist herself
and she had no idea I was doing it to
her it's just to keeps a person
open-ended and talking more so that
that's that's more of a kind of ninja
level technique to keep somebody opening
up and providing information that you
can then you know ask other questions
about or connect over or whatever the
goal of the conversation is I just
wanted to pick up on you mentioning the
sort of the friends things you do have
quite a cognitive reputation on online
and on Twitter oh yeah
I don't count I don't this people will
consider this deeply hypocritical I
don't consider I don't consider Twitter
conversation if you want to have a
conversation with me and I think a
surprising number of people would be
able to attest to this send me a private
message see how it goes it's a very
different environment the public
environment on Twitter is not conducive
to conversation every social media
platform every conversational
environment in fact has a certain
infrastructure to it and the
infrastructure ultimately defines how
people will work or play or do or act
you can think of it like my favorite
metaphor is is to think of like a
schoolyard playground or a park having a
playground depends on what people put
you know is there a slide is there a
merry-go-round or their swings is there
you know amazed is there a balance beam
is there a trampoline what did they put
in that environment so that's physical
infrastructure and that physical
infrastructure will dictate how the
children play now they might get quite
creative they may be using the
merry-go-round or something to do
something no one would have thought of
or they might be using the seesaw to
like you know launch the other kid
halfway across the yard and rolling
around and break their arm or something
knows but the infrastructure itself
defines ultimately a great deal of how
that play will will unfold so Twitter
the platform is ultimately designed as
though each person in some sense is a
stand-up comedian on stage and has a
huge audience that sometimes yells back
and there's a kind of interaction it is
possible to have a positive interaction
but in some sense to get into
long-winded conversations in public on
Twitter becomes kind of a you can
imagine you like you're the you're the
guy on stage and somebody says having a
conversation with you and now you've
diverted the show if you will and you're
doing this thing and other people in the
audience are getting ornery and they're
jumping in and you're on stage in the
other person's being loud in front of
the whole group so they want to be heard
and they they they're trying to make a
spectacle of it as well it's just not
the kind of infrastructure that's
conducive to having a positive
conversation so I've decided that
there's a lot of fun to be had if you
don't worry about that and just use the
platform as it's actually designed and
lean into it but if you want to have a
conversation take it somewhere more
private we actually have a section in
the book talking about social media and
the different platforms to some degree
and why they are even even private
message text message type communication
is sorely limited and so while there are
some advantages to it I would say that
that which is taking place in the public
forum of whether it's messages like like
on Twitter I mean or on Facebook or like
in discussion forums is something like
that it's a very different environment
you're not actually having a
conversation at that point and when
you're ready to have a real conversation
send some what they note and engage you
know in a more direct and human way
rather than this weird performance way I
mean I'm thinking about the interaction
you have with Nicholas Grossman and the
article that you wrote for arc digital
um I mean is it not even I hear what
you're saying about it Twitter's not the
right platform but do you regret that do
you regret having kind of articles out
there saying don't don't preach
constructive disagreements if you're not
modeling it no I actually don't I'm a
very odd bird in this way I don't
actually think the hypocrisy means very
much I don't I don't really care if
somebody's they Fikret
if somebody's sitting there with the
needle sticking out of their arm telling
me not to use heroin I might think of
that being like more insight rather than
a reason to not believe them maybe they
know something I don't
but again the Twitter environment I
don't really regret any of the public
behavior that I have on Twitter almost
ever because it's just not conducive so
I get stuff sent to me all the time and
so Nicholas rehearse man for example I
don't mean to be rude but this messages
came to me I don't know who this guy is
he's nobody he doesn't I have no context
into which he's inserted himself he said
some stuff about being an expert about a
topic but the things that he said seem
to both be combative and to stand on on
their on the head of things that I
seemed I think that I know about the
topic and so he's kind of doing this
whole like you know let's smack let
smack this guy down attitude which is
fine I do that on Twitter all the time
okay right hypocrisy but if you want to
try to create a conversation out of it
that's literally exactly the wrong way
to go I didn't reach out to him first at
all lol that's all I had to say about
his view it he could have followed up
with me in a more private way I guess I
could have as well but I wasn't
particularly interested in getting into
what for me was a tangential issue on
the matter I don't actually care that
much about the nitty gritties about that
topic happened to be terrorism I don't
I'm not an expert in that I don't care I
guess the end i'm asking is because it's
quite easy
like the actual habit I think if you
asked anyone to say how do you have a
constructive conversation they'd be able
to say well you've got to respect what
your opponent saying you've got to take
them seriously you've got to not be
dismissive like we can all list those
things but the doing of it seems to be
but we all get into
we all know this and we yet we get into
arguments all the time though I think
there is something about whether we're
actually modeling that behave yourselves
that does that is relevant to the to the
conversation sure sure um and again it's
it's contextual I don't feel like that I
mean I'm not trying to defend myself if
people don't like me because of this but
think I'm wrong I'm fine with that too
it doesn't bother me one way or the
other I don't think that the public
facing Twitter context is one that
people should be trying to have
conversation via at all in fact I think
that that's a mistake direct messages
are there for a reason my direct
messages are open I'm not I don't hide
that fact my email is listed on my
Twitter bio if you want to have a more
forthright conversation with me there
are pathways and I don't have time or
energy to be serious on Twitter I just
don't I mean I'd say serious things but
I'm not there engaging in conversation
I've make no pretenses that I'm there to
engage in conversation you had a an
encounter with James on Twitter that you
then wrote about in an article and I
think it points to it's one thing to
talk about impossible conversations in
theory it's quite another one to have
them in in reality can you talk about
that interaction and what you why you
wrote that piece on our digital sure so
the the way it started was I started the
conversation and as I think sometimes
you know goes with Twitter culture I
maybe came in a little hot but what
started it was there were a lot of
attention being paid to demonstrations
and kind of street violence in Portland
with antiphon and proud boys and some
other groups left-wing right-wing groups
and there have been some rumors about
people throwing milkshakes mixed with
concrete that were seriously injuring
people and James wrote something about
how even if the rumors aren't true that
accounts that this is terrorism that
merely spreading the rumor is terrorism
and I am a professor who teaches about
terror
book about it and a something that is
important to me is using the word using
it in a useful way that I think in many
ways people have overused the word
terrorism to just apply it to things
that they don't like and that that
muddies the understanding of the term it
makes it harder to counter it I mean so
I wrote something that amounted to
that's not terrorism petulant terrorism
isn't a thing and you know threats
aren't especially like a rumor that
turns out not to be true by a group you
don't like is not terrorism doesn't mean
it's good you know that's not a value
judgments a classification and his
response was to be extremely dismissive
of this and sort of mocking and to then
go about putting a lot of words in my
mouth that are basically the opposite of
what I think about it about how that I'm
saying that US drone strikes or
terrorism and I wrote a book called
drones and terrorism in which I say the
opposite and I'm where and I'm a few
others like this are just basically this
sort of the very sort of things I would
criticize and um and this went back and
forth for a while and where I didn't
really think anything of it and you know
uh Twitter conversations often go that
way and I had started this one and like
I said you know I was more I quote
tweeted him and broadcast it out so my
father was I didn't say hi let's have a
conversation you know about it I just
criticized him without him knowing and
so I didn't think anything of it until I
saw a op-ed in the LA Times um by
Lindsey and because in about I guess
previewing their book about how you
should talk to people and I was just
amazed at the foot spa of it I I kind of
couldn't believe that somebody who and
this could be when things are adjusted
with me but many people I know have had
similar Encounters of where Lindsey is
very rude or dismissive condescending um
very much not practicing anything that
was in the op-ed and so I wrote in
response to that
I didn't really think about it a
conversation originally and I just
couldn't believe that somebody who
practiced the exact opposite of that
would tell everybody that that's how
they should behave what's your sense of
why that conversation broke down and
what do you think could could have been
different I mean the conversation never
had a chance to break down because I
because I kind of don't know what polite
way to put it because James acted like a
dick and he acted like a dick
immediately and I mean really without
hesitation and then probably the worst
part about it was as he continued
mischaracterizing what I believe in
really just the almost exact opposite of
things that I've written many times I
mean then when some reader who's
following conversation said why aren't
you responding to any of his points and
he responded James meaning responded oh
I muted him awhile ago so the
combination of um here let me sort of
mock you and put words in your mouth and
again mockery on Twitter is you know
whatever perfectly I think normal part
about it and you know people make fun of
me or criticize me or whatever and I
think that's totally that that's just
part of the medium but the combination
of misrepresenting me on my particular
area of expertise no less and then not
even being willing to listen using a
feature of the application to make sure
that he wouldn't even see my responses
struck me is basically the worst
possible way that you could have this
conversation and also I gotta say if he
dropped it that would have been totally
within his rights if he ignored me I
think that would have been totally fine
it was the combination of engaging in a
very dismissive and accurate way mixed
with the the muting of not even hearing
the responses and so I was just really
surprised to see somebody say it's
really important that you have to have
these conversations you have to really
listen to people and you know in my
article I had a few direct quotes from
it but how important it was to listen to
people and try to consider their point
of view and consider this and where as I
spoke to a few people about it
this
interaction was what some of them told
me a pretty mild version of saying how
he commonly behaves and it's nearly it's
not the worst person on Twitter there
it's like some really terrible people on
the Internet of course but the I think
very much that you have to in a sense
practice what you preach if it comes to
engaging people that you disagree with
or politely engaging because the
difficult part about it is not what to
do I think everybody is capable of
saying you should listen to other people
and have polite conversations the
difficult part is how to do that and you
know how exactly do you deal with say
some you know some professor criticizing
you when as he had you know said was
emotional because a friend of his had
been attacked in those demonstrations um
and how do you in that situation in a
public forum still act in a way that has
that sort of difficult conversation
that's the hard part and it seems at
least from my experience and from some
of those that I've talked to that he is
about as bad at that as anybody and
therefore it makes me somewhat skeptical
of the advice that you should do it if
he is incapable of doing it because what
people need to know is a lesson of how
to do it is to be able to see models of
people who act in a way that they should
act and see I don't give you a good
example of somebody I don't know if you
ever spoken to her where I'm on Twitter
but someone who I've you know criticized
a fairly harshly at times but named a
Winegard who gets a lot of criticism and
both with me and with others I've seen
him then just respond to why do you
think that or you know oh what do you
think I got wrong what evidence do you
have that I was wrong and actually
engages on it and he wanted me over
because I still think that though is
fundamentally wrong about a bunch of
things but I've had a lot of pleasant
conversations with him about it or more
intellectualized conversations with him
about it because he reacted to criticism
with oh let me hear about it more
you know let's hear that the details of
it let's get the evidence for it as
opposed to look at this moron
and I bet he thinks all these things and
you know you can see why that's
different in so I think bow models that
behavior change doesn't and acting
walking the walk is the hard part I have
spoken to Nikolas and asked if he would
he be willing to have a conversation
with him on zoom' about about this topic
well I mean would I be that see that's a
matter that's a matter of interest in
principle of course I would the the
problem is I don't give a about the
topic I don't care whether milkshakes
constitute error prison or not I
literally could not possibly care less
about whether that's the case I made a
flippant comment about milkshakes being
terrorist in the wake of a friend of
mine being pummeled in the street and
some terrorism expert wants to come in
and talk about the legal and practical
matters of terrorism with me because I
made a couple of tweets about terrorism
I don't care that much it's like I moved
on if he wants to come and talk to me
about terrorism he's gonna be talking
with a non expert he can show off and
look intelligent or whatever he can
school me or we can disagree or I don't
care it's fine but the the topic has no
relevance to me so I also want to ask
questions about whether whether it does
matter how we act on Twitter as well
because that's another that's another
topic that he would he would mean he can
we could we could talk about that too
and quite comfortable defending that it
does not really matter how we act on
Twitter and people who take Twitter
seriously are doing it wrong well we
could I mean if it doesn't work them
then I just think it's quite nice to
have it seems to be the obvious way of
modeling the thing that we're talking
about the impossible conversations a
conversation broken down on Twitter that
could be better on right I just don't
actually feel like there was a
conversation had on Twitter at all it's
a you know I conceded almost immediately
afterwards that okay he has a point and
I don't care I you know work 7 billion
hours a week and so do I want to set
aside two hours of my time to talk to a
guy about terrorism and how
on Twitter uh whatever mmm if if it's
such a must that you know it's likely to
generate something positive in the world
it's maybe worth doing but the topic of
the book I think that's that's the only
reason that I bring it up is that I do
think it's relevant to the how to have
impossible conversations or kinda mean
debts I guess so sure if you want to try
to arrange it and we have time we can we
can discuss it rebel wisdom is a new
sense making platform bringing together
the most rebellious and inspiring
thinkers from around the world if you're
enjoying our content then you can help
us make more by becoming a subscriber
which will give you access to a load of
exclusive films also you can then join
our group zoom calls to discuss the
ideas in the films and you can send us
ideas for questions for upcoming
interviews we're also looking for
talented people to help us out with
editing graphics music that kind of
thing and if you're a regular viewer
you'll know we talked a lot about the
value of embodying or actually living
out the ideas that we talked about so
that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon
you