howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show com
that's Jim rut show com today's guest is
Daniel wall nice to be here thank you
for inviting me
Daniel's a leader in thought and action
in catalyzing transformative innovation
cultural co-creation whole systems
design and bioregional regeneration he's
the author of designing regenerative
cultures which I read in preparation for
today's episode and he lives in Majorca
Spain
Daniel is also a member of the game B
community on Facebook game B is a new
social change phenomena that's been
springing up on Twitter and Facebook and
if you want to know more about game B
which will reference from time to time
here I suspect check it out on game B
all one word on Facebook so let's start
with catalysis what does that mean when
you describe yourself as a catalyst you
know and this goes back to the early
game B days when we talked about and
still do constantly thinking about how
to lower the activation energy to make
something occur is that essentially or
your your meaning your sense of
describing yourself as a catalyst yeah
you could say so I mean it kind of comes
from this deep belief that I hope that
we all participate in nested dynamic
wholeness or scaling complex dynamic
systems and that these systems are
fundamentally unpredictable and
uncontrollable so I can't really design
cultures I can't really be sure how my
agency will lead to something or other
emerging but I can catalyze positive
change by connecting the right people
with each other
paying attention to the quality of the
relationships paying attention to the
quality of information that flows
between agents in the system and so it's
it's kind of a paradoxical dance with
emergence that we embark on when we try
to catalyze anything in terms of change
and transformation the other thing I
like about the catalyst idea is that in
a chemical reaction sometimes it takes
not a lot of catalyst to cause something
big to happen all right you can swing a
large system with a relatively small
amount of catalyst because typically the
catalyst is not used up absolutely and
and I mean it's that kind of sort of
systemic acupuncture or homeopathy that
that I really love doing sometimes it's
that sense of knowing what will happen
if you just put two people in touch with
each other or two organizations in touch
with each other sometimes that can be as
little as that literally just saying
please meet so-and-so you guys need to
talk sometimes you need to sort of hold
their hands a little bit longer and make
them understand why they should choose
to invest time into working with each
other but it's it's very little effort
compared to the massive amount of
transformation you can can achieve by
introducing just the right two people to
each other I hundred percent agree a
good introduction is gold absolutely
another key kind of foundational theme
in your work frankly also the game we
world is that we are at or have exceeded
the carrying capacity of the earth I
think in your book you said that by your
calculation in the 1970s humanity
started drawing more from living systems
each year then we can effectively
regenerate what you say are the most
imminently dangerous cliffs that were
approaching well I think that with sort
of at a point now where we've left
responding to the climate crisis for so
long that we don't have really
guarantees anymore whether we can gently
stir the global planetary life-support
system back into a relatively stable
amount of co2 of parts per million of
co2 in the atmosphere and and re
stabilize the climate like it has been
for the last ten thousand years but I
we still have a chance so there's
there's a certain amount of urgency to
engage in carbon drawdown in a kind of
geo therapy rather than the
geoengineering way I would like to
stress and at the same time with 2019
being the year we're finally the world
seems to have woken up to the climate
issue in a whole new way there's a huge
danger of getting carbon myopic and
seeing climate changes the thing that we
need to go to war with and battle and
win or win over which is all the
metaphors that people already starting
to use I actually think that climate
change in class Kading ecosystems
collapse and even the the generative
economic system we still live in are all
symptoms they're not causes and upstream
from those symptoms is a mistaken
worldview and Mis mistaken value systems
mistaken stories that we tell about who
we are and why we're here ah well said
and we'll come back to these stories in
a minute another line that I don't
really liked in the book was that you
described what humanity is doing as
drawing upon the natural capital stores
of the earth I think you said that let's
just talk about energy that we're
currently depleting about a million
years worth of stored solar energy per
year that's you know solar energy stored
in the form of fossil fuels you want to
say a little bit about that well in
general it wasn't that great of an idea
to start living off ancient sunlight and
Tom Hartman wrote this book economy
makes you remember the title of the book
but in it he analyzed it was called
ancient sunlight that's well what it was
called basically this idea that our
entire fossil fuel blip in the history
of humanity the last 250 years that the
age of fossil fuels has has just been a
way of digging into energy that has been
stored up in the Earth's crust for over
million millennia and millions of years
and Buckminster Fuller said that fossil
fuel was put there on purpose it was
like the starter engine of a
regenerative perpetually ongoing
regenerative way of humanity living on
Spaceship Earth
and instead of it we've just used it as
such without understanding that there's
a big hint in the word non-renewable
resource it's non-renewable and
therefore it will run out sooner or
later
and yeah that that figure that you just
quoted is is roughly how much time it
takes to lay down from the composting of
biomass capturing sunlight the coal and
the the crude oil that that we just dig
up and burn as if there's plenty more of
it ah good quote from Bucky Bucky fuller
but maybe we have been a little bit
better than we might think about using
our you know a few hundred years worth
of fossil fuel because we think about it
we're using a video chat here not doing
airline travel or something like that
we've reached the point where we can
create solar cells and we've reached the
point where we can do space travel so
that we're not constrained by one of the
another one of the ones you mentioned in
your book was rare earth elements like
indium which are indeed pretty rare on
earth but not rare at all in iron
asteroids so perhaps we have not by plan
maybe more by luck spend at least part
of our fossil fuel patrimony getting
ready for what comes next
yeah I would agree with some of what you
just said for me the the whole issue of
asteroid mining or going off planet is
something that I currently still have
sort of mixed feelings about I I have a
sense that we haven't really proven to
be good stewards on this planet and if
we use our fledgling capabilities of
going off planet and we might just
convert ourselves into the locus of the
known universe rather than develop
technologies that don't need those grain
minerals and maybe even develop ways of
doing but less technology choose more
wisely what technology we use when and
where that would be an interesting
conversation for the two of us to have
because I know you've quite a
technological past yes and I have a
quite specific view on and I think we'll
defer that conversation till we get to
the question about why which
it will be a very interesting and
pivotal conversation now the other thing
of course that we have done with our
patrimony of fossil fuel as we've grown
the world's population from 1 billion to
probably 10 or 11 billion by the time it
stabilizes around 2100 and of course
that is what is really crushing us you
know we could have a billion people
living like Americans without depleting
the ecosystem take a little bit more
care but not much it would be easy but
with 10 or 11 billion it makes
everything extraordinarily difficult
when people start thinking about the
scale and what has to be done that's the
number that really has to be kept in
mind is that whatever we are talking
about here it has to work at the scale
of 10 billion people or we have to say
well there's gonna be a big old die back
until we get to 1 or 2 billion people
how important do you think the
population explosion over the last 250
years has been I mean it's there's no
way of denying that you can somewhat
superimpose the hockey stick curve of
climate like co2 co2 in the atmosphere
with the population curve with the
resource depletion curve I mean you've
probably seen that the great
acceleration graph that the stock on
resilient centers put out there's even a
website called the great acceleration
for those who want to have a look at it
everything is shooting up exponentially
and and it's the exponential be rising
fossil fuel use that has enabled the
exponential increase in population and
yes it is a problem but I I don't know I
I sit with a certain amount of
discomfort with this increasing voice of
we need to talk about population for me
that's a mean ceding of the kind of
notice that you've currently elected
into into office in your country to then
create a sort of argument for well we
just need less of us then and how are we
going to do that and and then the people
that make lots of money with autonomous
weapons and and and warfare say oh
here's one we prepared earlier
and I think that's quite dangerous I do
actually feel that we need to have a
deeper conversation as humanity of how
we can live in shared abundance with ten
billion people and how actually when you
look at all the statistics in countries
where girls are educated where education
is more universally accessible for
people the amount of children go down
drastically because you don't have to
have that sort of primitive medieval
insurance policy any longer to have lots
of children in case because some of them
will die because you poor and the ones
that survive have to take care of you
and your old age so I yeah I'd be a
little bit I don't know I might be wrong
but but I I have a sense that we're
actually barking a little bit up the
wrong tree with population numbers it's
about consumption and it's about
consumption of that small percentage
that you and I actually probably belong
to of the 10 15 percent that are at the
top of the global pyramid that are just
consuming a lot more than everybody else
and then of course then in that 10
percent there's another fraction that
it's just obscenely unequal and over
consuming yeah people fly around in
private jets that kind of thing
I'm with you that I think from
humanitarian perspective if no other we
have to use as our starting gate that
we've got to build a world that can
support 10 or 11 billion people by 2100
and as you do point out fortunately it
doesn't get worse than that because it
appears that as economic well-being
increases and education increases
particularly among women family sizes
are starting to reach replacement level
or even below in a lot of the world so
other than sub-saharan Africa which
still remains problematic so looks like
we can count on 10 or 11 billion which
is a lot better than trying to deal with
20 billion which would be what number
would be talking about if it wasn't for
the fact that birth rates are coming
down very rapidly another foundational
question before we get into some of the
more details is a lot of us have heard
and talked about sustainability
you make a fairly careful distinction
between sustainable and regenerative
could you perhaps make that distinction
for our audience here yeah I'm a little
bit concerned that lately over the last
three or four years the word
regenerative has become the new buzzword
that is sort of consultants all over the
world are jumping onto I must create an
offer to my clients with the word
regenerative in it like they have done
previously with the word smart and the
word circular in it and so I don't I
really want to be very clear that
sustainability or being sustainable is a
bridge that we haven't crossed yet and
it's still a very important milestone in
the journey and I also want to point out
that this framing is not mine but is I'm
building on the work of of people like
John wile and Carol Sanford and the
Regenesis group and particularly an
article that the way I came first across
this is by Bill read called shifting our
mental models if you if you put that
into a search engine I think it's from
2006 and there's this wonderful graphic
where he puts everything onto one line
and a journey from business-as-usual to
green to sustainable to restorative then
he has this little imperious step which
is called reconciliatory and then to
regenerative and what I like about it is
is that it acknowledges that this is a
developmental process and that even the
step from business-as-usual to green
doing a little less bad is already
better than not making that step and and
in there is this issue that in that
particular framework sustainability is
defined in a particular way that is
maybe unfair to some of the people
who've been working in the field of
sustainability in a really deep way they
might have been thinking of it in
regenerative terms but in this framing
that you're asking me to open up
sustainability is basically understood
as the point where we don't add any more
damage to the system where our actions
don't make things worse but the point
about needing to go beyond that to
restore
and regenerative is that we have been
degenerating the planetary life-support
system and the fabric of life on earth
for at least five to eight thousand
years with bad agricultural practices
and then intensely soul since the
beginning of the Industrial Revolution
and the era of fossil fuels so doing no
damage being one hundred percent less
bad as the McDonough puts it is simply
not enough anymore and we really need to
go beyond that and restore ecosystems
function and create pay attention to the
processes and the world views and the
the organizing ideas that would allow us
to actually be regenerative in place and
that's that's both an internal and an
external shift yeah and I really
resonate with that I it's some of the
work that I personally have been doing
for life my wife and my wife I must give
her more credit than myself on our farm
we bought a farm deep in Appalachia very
rural America that had been horribly
depleted the soils were completely shot
by over grazing they burned off the
understory in the woods to let sheep
graze in them they had bad timbering
practices they would either clear-cut or
just let woods run rampant until they
were rotting and falling apart and over
the last 30 years we have focused on two
things one returning our pastures to
health and I think we've added an inch
and a half two inches five centimeters
of soil by very carefully managing our
pastures and our hay fields and secondly
by managing our timber very carefully no
longer doing clearcuts are then to get
rid of monoculture or pine that we had
and instead doing selective cuts where
we upgrade the quality of the timber
over time and absolutely don't use fire
as a method of you know killing off the
understory and so our farm is now a
thing of relatively good beauty very
high productivity here's the amazing
thing our hay fields produce
three-and-a-half times as much hay per
acre as they did before well
not using any artificial fertilizer so I
you know I have a very strong sense that
regenerative care of our earth is the
way to go absolutely I think it's it's
the way that we have managed to get to
this point I think most of our species
history has been placed based and by
original for those who will know Matic
within bioregional territory and we have
known how to carefully garden the
ecosystems that we've been living in but
also like these indigenous people
understand themselves as belonging to
the land rather than the land belonging
to them and they've been like for
example there's now clear studies that
most of Colombian Amazonia is actually a
human created forest garden where the
black soil the Terra Preta in that
region has clearly has bits of clay and
bits of vegetable carbon in it that can
only come from people digging basically
activated biochar into the forest floor
and selecting which which trees a bit
like you're doing on your land selecting
which trees a part of that ecosystem and
the same as is in the prairies of the US
there are clear indications that that
some Native American tribes have been
managing the bison herds in a way that
actually increased the abundance of
those ecosystems so we can have a
healing and positive influence on the
ecosystems that we're keystone species
in we don't have to destroy them yeah
where our farm is in fact my wife has
been pretty involved with the
archaeological community there and you
know the general sense of the
archaeologists in the region is the
Indians used fire to keep substantial
open pastures in an area that would
normally be climax forest for hundreds
of miles
particularly along the river valleys for
bison because we actually had bison in
the eastern United States until
historical times when the white man with
his guns wiped him out on the other hand
I always like to warn people that it may
not have been that the prehistoric
people were better hearted got to keep
in mind they also had a heck of a
less capability you know I think what
would the Aztecs have done if they had
bulldozers and nuclear weapons I suspect
they would have done the same bad stuff
or worse than we've done so I always try
to encourage people to not be you know
in generally wishful thinking about the
past and so-called indigenous people and
it's just like nature you know say
alright you know nature keeps a balance
well yes and no one of the strongest
data signals that came out of
evolutionary ecology was the famous Lynx
snowshoe hare oscillation where the Lynx
eats the hares until there aren't any or
hardly any a very smaller population
then the Lynx died out almost not quite
and then the snowshoe hares rebound and
then the Lynx rebounds so you know mr.
Lynx and mr. hare kind of go at it in a
fairly extreme battle and it's you know
frankly just the fact that the Lynx
isn't quite capable of wiping out the
snowshoe hares it allows the system to
persevere well two things that the first
bit I completely agree with that we need
to be absolutely careful of not
idealizing indigenous cultures or
painting some sort of picture of going
back to some golden past that wasn't as
golden as some people are now talking
about it and there is value in the story
of interbeing that these cultures have
told from it from many years that has
enabled them to live differently within
their landscapes and with regard to the
snowshoe and hare example I'm not so
sure
I mean evolutionary biology biology
originally by training in these I mean
you part of the Santa Fe Institute
community if if you just build a model
on just snow like like two species
and then you do the classic predator
prey model and you get these kind of
results but that's
Heisenberg told us over 100 years ago
that what we see is not nature but
nature exposed to our method of
questioning that's a extreme abstraction
of the complexity of the ecosystems that
those predator and prey species apart
and the dynamics that really go on are
much more complex and they Optim
is the overall system for health and
increase in bio productivity it's when
we get species stand we tunnel down into
individual species or individuals that
we get these seemingly corroborating
data of how competitive and red in tooth
and claw nature really is and yes those
things exist in nature but they're the
fine-tuning on the surface of an ocean
of symbiosis and cooperation nature is
far more cooperative and symbiotic then
then we understand because we have this
tendency to just look at things by
abstracting tiny little sections of the
complexity out of the living hole the
dynamic transformation that were part of
I think there's a definitely some truth
to that and that's of course why that
the links and the hair examples so
interesting because it's an ecosystem
where there isn't other side branches
while in reality in mode because it's a
very extremely environment the far north
etc and most of our ecosystems have much
more across dependencies and dynamism
and in fact our Santa Fe Institute
researcher Jennifer Dunne is not a lot
of really good work on the dynamics of
food networks in ecosystems including
arctic ones and one of the things she
finds which surprises some people well
she's not the only one and I will say
she's not decisive on this is that there
seems to be something like a moderate
level of diversity that is that is best
you know that very high diversity food
webs become less stable and at very low
diversity they become even more unstable
so there's some kind of homeostatic
level of diversity that any given
ecosystem seems to evolutionary seek out
mm-hmm yeah yeah she's done some very
very interesting work on that which
actually is a good bridge to the next
topic which is you know your work is
full of systems thinking and a
complexity perspective which is
unfortunately particularly the
complexity perspective not as common as
I would like in people thinking about
these issues
you come to those tools and and how
important are they in your ideas around
regenerative design um really the the
people who I or a huge debt of gratitude
to for having been important mentors of
mine in that yeah people like Brian
Goodwin my guy in 2001 after a short
stint of trying to kind of fools rush in
where angels fear to tread em I spent
1999-2000 in southern Spain trying to
set up an environmental education center
and kind of model eco village community
yes I did have long hair and I did have
a VW van and all the paraphernalia that
go along with it and then I realized
that I still needed to learn a lot more
and so in 2001 signed up for the Masters
in holistic science at Omaha college in
Devon and Brian Goodwin who's a
mathematical biologists and evolutionary
biologist who also was very close with
Stewart Kaufman and involved in the
setting up of the Santa Fe Institute he
was one of the people that had set up
that master's and so a lot of my
insights into complexity theory come
from him and then at that very same
place from AHA College it's it's one of
those places where you just get fed on
an incredibly rich diet of inspiring
people like John Todd and David Orr and
Fritjof Capra and so I've had the
blessing the the privilege of learning
from some of the leading systems people
in the world and and so it's critical to
how I think about things and that insert
that I mentioned in the very beginning
of our conversation that that we really
like Brian go to and put it in a
nutshell
in terms of insights from complexity
theory it's it's a slightly of a
simplifying statement but he said any
system that is more than three
interacting variables is a complex
dynamic system so this goes back to
Ponca raised three body problem and the
asteroid sand and the moon and so
basically they're every sister has more
than three interacting barrels a complex
dynamic system then every cell
your body every organ you yourself your
family your community the ecosystem Li
11 and the biosphere a complex dynamic
systems and there's a characteristic
when you look at the mathematics behind
these systems is that they are beyond a
very limited spatial temporal temporal
frame so we can abstract part of their
story within time and look at it a sub
system within this larger system and
then we can do a little bit of
prediction and control but ultimately
the lesson from nonlinear mathematics
and complexity dynamicists that they are
fundamentally unpredictable and
uncontrollable and unfortunately that
insight that Brian was very keen on on
stressing a lot of the current
complexity community has somewhat
overlooked because being in love and
finding the funding with the big
computing guys and the and and big data
and AI and what we're now doing is
trying to wrestle predictability and
controllability from complex dynamic
systems by throwing ever more computing
power at it rather than really
understanding that this is a fundamental
characteristic that we will never have
total knowledge of the system and
ability to control so Brian made this
key point is that the shift that this
insight produces in science is that we
have to shift from prediction and
control to the aim of appropriate
participation in the system and that for
me is what what regenerative practice is
all about trying to participate
appropriately in the complex dynamic
nested wholeness that we are part of
emergent properties of and at the same
time have co-creative agency in I think
those are good thoughts but this is also
I think the first time I'm gonna push
back just a little bit which is that yes
I don't know if the word is fundamental
because the idea of deterministic chaos
isn't exactly fundamental it's a
mathematical artifact of reality that
yes complex systems are in the limit
case unpredictable and uncontrollable
however and you did I will say you
alluded to it here in the verbal
communication with in time and space
there is some
predictability and that's important not
to throw that out I say this as the
person the game be world who is
constantly warning people that complex
systems are way less predictable than we
think
I say that's people you know just think
it's a rubber-stamp
right I say I don't know how many times
a week but on the other hand there is
some predictability and some
controllability and we have to be
careful not to throw up her hands you
know for instance planetary orbits you
know the elaboration of the three-body
problem we have you know eight planets
and you know a couple hundred moons and
you know various comments running around
all that stuff nonetheless you know the
orbits of the planets a earth or Mars
are highly predictable for five million
years and we think they're predictable
for 50 million years but they're
probably not predictable for a billion
years right so we we can have some level
of your sub substantial level in this
case ability to predict a system and
let's look at the human body I mean the
human body with all of its component
parts may well be the most complex thing
in the universe right tickley if we
consider the brain and digestion and
this hierarchy of other beings that live
within us etc and yet we can make some
pretty good statements about the nature
of this complex system called a human
you know we know our body temperature is
not likely to vary between more like 85
Fahrenheit and 110 Fahrenheit if it does
you will die right and we know that if
you take aspirin if you have a headache
most likely it'll cure it if you drink a
cup of coffee you'll see some
predictable physiological changes so
while I'm a great rubber Stamper saying
hey when you meddle with complex systems
you may have whole bunch of
unanticipated consequences and you may
get it entirely wrong on the other hand
I don't think it's helpful either
practically or philosophically
emotionally to throw up our hands and
say we have no ability to predict or
control either yeah
well said you're absolutely right and I
know exactly the feeling of observing
oneself being normally saying one thing
and then finding finding yourself in the
other community and saying the like
trying
but when you bridge built between camps
or polar opposites then sometimes you
it's normal to be in that role of
depending on who you talk to and if
offer the voice that's underrepresented
and yeah you're right there is some
predictability and some controllability
but what the reason why I tend to stress
this quite a lot is that I actually
think we really need more humility in
order to get out of this current
conundrum and if we come at it with too
much gung-ho science and technology were
right over the hill and save us I think
we're not gonna ask the deeper questions
that we need to ask in order to apply
science and technology in a wise way so
they will contribute to saving us but
not by themselves yeah I agree with that
that's just getting that tuning right
other words I use is epistemic modesty
right nice when we're playing with
complex systems we do have some
knowledge so we're not epistemic idiots
but we are not naive 14-year old
Newtonian right I remember when I was a
14 year old nerdy guy right I thought
Laplace was right tell me the position
and motions of all the particles in the
universe and I could predict history
forever right we know that's on
multiple levels right if only because it
deterministic chaos but probably for
lots of deeper reasons around
fundamental uncertainty on you know the
ground state of being so I try to have
Nuge people towards this concept of
epistemic modesty we don't know nothing
but we don't know as much as we used to
think we did and so let's let's try to
tune that correctly and it varies by
situation and frankly by how hard you're
probing a system you know a human body
is relatively stable if it's in a 75
degree temperature and has pointed to
eat but if you fire that human out into
space suddenly it's much more vulnerable
to very far trajectories away from its
homeostasis so we have to worry about
things you wouldn't have to worry about
on earth so again what experiment are
you running will tell you how much
epistemic modesty you have and the more
strongly you are manipulating a complex
system the
more epistemic modesty you should have
yeah I'd love to elect that term at the
stomach modesty also I think pairs well
with if you have a systemic modesty then
you can more you're more likely to also
entertain epistemic plurality in the
sense of multiple ways of knowing being
pathways to meaningful insights which
doesn't necessarily mean that we don't
need to rent them against each other but
I find it it's it's a really fascinating
thing that I wrestle with a lot of how
do you on the one hand sound a voice
that we shouldn't get trapped too much
in a entirely analytic rational mainly
quantities focused and mathematically
analyzed scientific mindset and no
matter how fundamentally useful and
necessary that mindset and and epistemic
approach is but we also need to
acknowledge other ways of knowing that
go back to what what Jung describes as
our four ways of knowing and thinking is
just one of them sensing feeling and
intuiting are the other three and in our
species history many of the cultures we
mistakenly have called primitive and
have had really interesting ways of
generating meaningful insights from
active participation in that whole that
we are we will address that question in
some detail when we get to the
discussion of consciousness which is one
of my home areas of expertise I've got
some good questions I think for you
there so let's defer going down that one
for a little while the next thing I'd
like to chat about is I would say that
your book designing regenerative
cultures is very much worth reading in
general but especially useful for the
many lists of questions that you put in
this book in fact I was thinking
yesterday I was I was finishing up
reading it that you know it would kind
of be fun to publish a spinoff of that
book calling it the list of many
important questions or something like
that which was mostly just the questions
with a little bit of introduction before
and after I mean he's questioned these
list of questions are amazing what
caused you to focus on
Qin's rather Lemoore in this book at
least than answers epistemic humility so
so basically I had this moment of
sitting there in the seaside cafe where
I wrote the good part of the book and
looking out at the horizon and just
suddenly having this sort of really
strong rush of what could have turned
into a severe writer's block saying like
what is it that I can write in these
pages that would make this book a work
that works this is a kind of almost
alchemical notion that it actually would
change the person who's reading it that
they wouldn't be the same afterwards
anymore that's a notion that I got from
Henry port oft and also what can I write
in this book that has some kind of
longevity beyond just five ten fifteen
twenty years and something that that
could continuously be meaningful to
readers in the future and I began to
realize that if you look at the history
of humanity a lot of the problems we
faced along the way were the results of
solutions that other people thought were
a good idea previous to that and that
means that there's a sort of general
pattern that today's solutions turn into
tomorrow's problems and it would be
epistemic hubris or arrogance to think
that even no matter how studied you are
in terms of how to building a
sustainable regenerative future for
Humanity that you could sit down and
give a long catalogue of answers and
solutions that will last forever and
that will not have unforeseen side
effects so at that point I was reminded
of this wonderful Einstein quote where
he says if I had a problem that my life
depended upon and I only had one hour to
solve it I would take fifty five minutes
to get the question right because then I
could solve it in five minutes so I
think that there is something mistaken
in thinking that questions are
transitory means to get to better
solutions I think maybe solutions and
answers are transitory means to ask
better questions and so I play with that
throughout the entire book
because I don't pretend to have the
answers I mean the books full of some
people trying to offer potential answers
and and I I loved referencing people
because I I love giving people the
opportunity to to follow upstream to
whether where I've got the information
from so it's not that I'm against
answers and solutions there there lots
of ideas in the book that that could be
called answers and solutions but I think
that the more powerful compass that we
can hand from one generation to the next
to steer our way into an uncertain
future with where we acknowledge the
limit to what is knowable is probably a
set of questions rather than a set of
answers that's very good as I said I
point to the book especially for its
questions it's really in a remarkable a
useful set of questions and you know I
work with working scientists all the
time one of things I've found is that
the very best scientists are the ones
who form their their scientific program
around the best questions getting the
answers is sometimes a matter of super
technique etc but frankly a lot of times
it's just brute force but asking the
right questions in science is key let me
just briefly go back to one other thing
that he said because you use it I said
it would be interesting to write a
sequel to the book we're just taking the
questions I just want to share with you
that when I first wrote it I am like
after why the book was with the
publisher I embarked on this idea of
creating a set of playing cards that
would engage people around the questions
in the book and have a sort of
additional sort of set of cards that
people could order along with the book
to engage with these questions and then
around the same time a colleague of mine
from guy education asked me to develop a
like a workshop one-day workshop in a
set of materials that we could offer
through guy education to engage people
with the sustainable development goals
and in the end I decided to sort of
merge those two projects and I've
developed through Gaia education a set
of flashcards that engage local
communities in the conversation around
what are the STDs how are they useful to
us in this place how are they meaningful
and these cards are all based on
questions and many of the questions that
are in my book as somehow reframed and
worked into this set of flashcards in
the over 200 my book there 250 questions
and in the flash cards on the SDGs there
are over 200 questions so that kind of
thing does exist and it exists using
again that bridge that I say see like
not dissing sustainability not dissing
the sustainable development goals
apart from goal number eight which I
have a big issue with but to use the
platform that has now been agreed on by
the international community with these
17 goals as an entry point to take them
people into the deeper conversation
about what would buy a regional
regeneration look like in your place
using the SDGs as a stepping stone we
will get the link from Daniel will put
it up on the episode page and as we have
in the pre-roll just go to our episode
page and we'll get a link to those cards
assuming such a link exists yes I can't
let you off without telling me what is
goal 8 and why do you disapprove of it
goal 8 is good work and economic growth
and and framed in that particular way I
would call it the spanner and the works
of the SDGs is the Trojan horse that
will make the implementation of all the
other STDs impossible until we have a
conversation of what kind of growth we
want and how we may measure growth and
that GDP isn't desperately inadequate
measure of success or progress and so we
really need to reframe goal number eight
at the very least to something like good
work and qualitative growth because that
would then at least invite people to say
what do they mean by qualitative growth
but if we just call it economic growth
then it basically means let's continue
with the structure of dysfunctionality
that underlies the system that has set
up the system we're playing in as a
winner and loser game that is that
necessitates losers in order to create
winners there's a fundamental design
flaw in
our economic system structure drives
behavior in complex systems and unless
we change the structure we can try to be
world saving as long as we want but we
won't turn this Titanic around before it
hits the iceberg yeah absolutely we'll
talk about that a little later when we
talk about signaling systems but I like
this framing of growth I also kind of
push back whenever I hear people say no
growth I say well it depends write
growth into the microcosm is not
necessarily disruptive of our ecosystem
our home here on earth right now I like
your framing at is quality it's again
always good to get at the reference I'll
send you the link there is a wonderful
paper that I highly recommend people
should read and it's mentioned in my
book there's a chapter on it in my book
it's by Fritjof Capra and Hazel
Henderson and it is called shifting from
quantitative to qualitative growth comes
highly recommended because I think that
is the frame I completely agree with we
this D growth and anti growth is is not
the way to dance with this as a
biologist
we certainly want a hell of a lot of
growth in terms of growing top soils
growing forests growing healthy
ecosystem functions and there's there's
a lot of qualitative growth that we we
want to engage in yeah just a simple
thing wouldn't it be nice to take the
same ingredients that you get at a
fast-food restaurant and turn them into
a beautiful and healthful meal right you
know this requires a completely
different way of thinking about how you
process the food and frankly how you
grow it and a bunch of other things that
you could have great beauty and a
wonderful experience rather than just
being a feeding trough for Humanity
absolutely but probably the same or
lower load on the ecosystem now back to
questions you correctly in my view call
out the prime question as why and you
even mention my friend simon Sinek
Simon advised the earliest days of game
be when we were talking about why but
one of the things that I couldn't find
in your book I even went back this
morning and tried to have you know leaf
through it rapidly and find it is what
is your why why should humanity strive
to exist
so yeah this I asked this question based
on a conversation that I had with
another one of my mentors David all just
after I finished my PhD I visited him in
Oberlin in Ohio at the college that she
taught at and I asked him a question
which is actually about the dimension of
spirituality and the sacred in the
transition that we now needed to may
make in order to redesign the human
presence on earth within the lifetime of
the generations of life today and he
started his answer by saying that before
we can meaningfully answer the question
what we have to do and how we might do
it in order to sustain our species we
need to ask a much more difficult
question and that's the question of why
are we worth sustaining and I kind of on
purpose leave my answer to that question
somewhat vague throughout the book I
eluded many times of why I believe were
worth sustaining and if you ask me
straight out I would say not in any
extremely special way like all life
forms on planet Earth reflect that
transforming dynamic wholeness that were
participants in and emerging properties
off back to itself and they reflect the
experience of participation in that
wholeness from a particular perspective
and but I do feel that the levels of
reflective consciousness that we have
with the capability of learning from the
past and and to some extent possibly
even applying that learning to navigate
our path into the future there is
something beautiful about the way that
we've written poetry and created art to
express our love for other beings human
and not non-human there is there's so
many examples of human beings constantly
stepping out of the the sort of mistaken
neo-darwinian story of only doing stuff
that is in self-interest but actually
risking their own lives to save other
lives because we are biophilic by nature
we we we
have a tendency to to love life and feel
attracted to life so for me you
mentioned but at some point coming to
consciousness this is going to be
interesting but for me part of why we're
worth sustaining is that humanity is a
way that the universe is beginning to
know itself through us as and we are
part of that universe and that in itself
to to not kill that story in its
immature juvenile stage where we're
still apt as a species and to actually
make that jump in our awareness of that
participatory mystique and magic that
we're part of to really become conscious
participants in that process and try to
be of healing and regenerative influence
on it and I think it's it's worth
sticking around for a few more millennia
or even millions of years to see where
that would take us if if we managed to
mature enough to not come to a immature
early end well that's an interesting why
and I can respect it but I'm gonna say
at the gut level it doesn't feel like it
might may be a sufficiently strong
replacement for things like get into
heaven and experience blitz forever you
know reach a Nirvana or whatever the
various traditional hitlers of
metaphysics peddled so I got my own I'd
love to hear your reaction to it my why
why humanity may be of the utmost
importance is when we look out into the
universe as far as we know this
unbelievably huge universe of a hundred
billion galaxies each with a hundred
billion stars is entirely dead there is
no sign so far of any life anywhere in
this amazing universe of ours so I put
forth the why that humanity's mission is
to bring the universe to life and it is
within our ability to do so now first we
have to stabilize our earth and so we
have a hundred-year mission
to stabilize our earth home but then I
would suggest that we do that for the
purpose of then reaching back out again
to bring the universe to life assuming
that we are the only advanced life in
the universe
now regular listeners of the show know
that I am obsessed with the Fermi
paradox and the Fermi paradox asks if
there are all these intelligent beings
out there in the universe where are they
that n Ricky firme asked at Los Alamos
during World War two and when I was a
nerdy 14 year old like every nerdy
14-year old I assumed there were
hundreds of thousands of other
intelligent species in our galaxy and
relatively soon we'd run into him well
the more I've looked into this more I've
studied this the more I've talked to
really smart people I'm much less sure
it could be that being the first species
across the line of general intelligence
may have only happened once and it may
just be us if so the wait upon our
shoulders if we think about it this way
that our mission is to bring the
universe to life is immense if we screw
it up it may be 5 billion years before
somebody has a shot at it again may
never happen again it may have been that
the peculiarities of our particular
trajectory of life got us to this point
and nobody else has ever been there or
may ever be there again and if we blow
it we have blown something way bigger
than just enjoying our consciousness or
whatever on the other hand the other
answer to the Fermi paradox is that
there are other advanced civilizations
out there and we don't know the answer
that question yet though even though we
see nothing so far to indicate that it's
the case then we pivot on our goal pivot
on our Y and say that our role is to fit
into intergalactic civilization to learn
and to add that intergalactic
civilization in the way that's uniquely
human yeah and again you put it
beautifully in response to mine I I
respect that Y as well my response would
be two things come to mind
there's wonderful little coven and hops
cartoon where carbon and hops stand in
front of a bunch of open tins and and
litter in front of a bunch of tree
trunks where obviously somebody is
littered and cut some trees down and
Calvin says to Hobbes I think the most
convincing evidence for the existence of
higher intelligence and outer space is
that they haven't contacted us yes of
course that that is one of the
traditional answers to the Fermi paradox
oh that that is just how they do things
right we're still in in cosmic
quarantine because we're not mature
enough yet to be contacted could be one
way of framing it but also Kurt
Vonnegut's lugia of years sort of we're
the only intelligent species that has
developed that level of self reflective
consciousness and now we take it out to
the will reminded me of Kurt Vonnegut's
statement next time no brain we don't
quite know yet whether our intelligence
is a maladaptive
or an adaptive trait the judges judges
are still out and and if I look at those
figures that you just named of billions
of galaxies and billions of stars and
who knows how many planets revolving
around those star systems the likelihood
that we're completely alone to my mind
is is quite low I know that there's a
sort of sweet spot where our planet is
in our solar system for certain life
forms to evolve but III mean I again I
sit with more questions than answers but
one question that I definitely sit with
is this idea that there's dead matter
out there and then at some point out of
this dead matter even on this planet
boom life emerged Oh wonderful and then
that life complexified and evolved and
then Oh consciousness emerged I think
that we might be in a tram track of an
explanatory model that we've just
repeated for too long that is this sort
of coming out of dead meta it actually
seems to me more parsimonious to say
everything is somewhat conscious and
everything is somewhat alive at
different levels of complexity then to
say suddenly ex nihilo life appears
suddenly ex nihilo consciousness
but I know that that's slightly you and
I don't have lots of scientific sources
to back up that quote it's just for me
it's a it's an exploration that that we
should may be entertained that maybe
consciousness is primary rather than
matter and of course there is that
theory and the others the integrated
information theory of Tononi and caulk
that mathematically would indicate that
everything has a level of consciousness
though the amount of consciousness that
their calculation would ascribe to a
rock or even to a star is vastly less
than that in a single human so I've got
to be very careful when we start
thinking about such things and that
would be we know exactly what we're
saying because it is unfortunately an
attractor for humans humans love kind of
blousy stuff right hence the prevalence
of religions and all that sort of stuff
they learn of a pie in the sky and so I
think we've got to be very careful we
talk about these things to you know put
bounds around them what is actually
known or what theories might support pan
psychism and as I said one of the
leading theories of consciousness in a
creative information theory actually
does bring forth pan psychism as its
output but at a qualitatively lower
level than humans so that's something
very much worth thinking about before we
move on to consciousness and
spirituality moving back a little bit to
you know that's slightly more mundane
another wonderful thing I got out of
your book was your three horizons
approach to thinking about the future in
fact I'm gonna go steal that borrow it
whatever and try to insert it into game
B because I think it is a
extraordinarily useful set of lenses to
think about how you get from here to
there could you lay out for people your
three horizons approach but it's him I
distinguished myself a little bit from
some other people that that a great
synthesizes and great integrators in
terms of putting a lot of interesting
stuff out there some some of them don't
like to reference their sources or their
elders I really think it's it's part of
our learning that we we should name
those sources and so it's not my model
it's it's bill sharps model
but I've had the pleasure of helping him
develop his thinking on it and I've kind
of worked with him in applying it in
different ways and basically bill was a
research leader at Hewlett Packard's
innovation labs and has got long career
of doing futures work and the three
horizons evolved as a way of going
beyond the classic scenario planning
approach and really working with the
different voices that are always in the
room when we look at the future and
there's always that perspective of the
kind of manager type who's responsible
for keeping system a in place and
functioning and that's a valuable role
to some extent because it's the person
who cares about people being in jobs and
kept children being in school and the
lights staying on and all that kind of
stuff and water coming out of the faucet
and then there's the the visionary type
which is the third horizon perspective
that is saying no no no we need to
fundamentally redesign our economic
system and we need a shift in
consciousness and all this kind of stuff
and then very often you find that
arguments get polarized between these
the visionary and the kind of pragmatic
management perspective but by just
introducing the third perspective which
is the entrepreneur innovators
perspective that that builds on what's
already feasible today disruptive of
horizon one and could potentially become
a bridge to getting to horizon three
without the sort of collapse and rebuild
scenario this framework really helps us
to bring these three perspectives into
the room and talk intelligently about
how we think the future of transport or
the future of computing might pan out in
ways that at the very least make us
disagree more intelligently at the end
of it and maybe even make us see because
there's a there's a kind of open mindset
in a closed mindset in each of these
three perspectives on the future and by
working with this three horizon model
you can really fresh out insights from
happens when people have conversations
with an open mindset really listening to
the contributions that each one of these
three perspectives made and then
building future consciousness together
so as we stir our way into the unknown
we can respond quicker yeah that's
wonderful as I said I was very taken
with this and so I will try to inject it
into our game be world now reference
both bill Sharpe and you it's
interesting I had a personal residence
with it which is in the business world
where I spent 25 years I was clearly a
third horizon guy you know I was always
blowing up let's do it entirely
different Greenfield blank sheet of
paper screw all the old right and
it worked it worked great especially as
our world was transitioning between say
1985 and 2005 but yeah when I've now
find myself since 2012 being kind of a
junior member of the social change world
I find myself very much of horizon to
kind of person because I am NOT way out
there on the extreme of blow it all up
build it all from scratch but rather
find my game a skills which were pretty
good to probably be most useful in the
horizon to area where we say all right
it would be really foolish to change the
engines on the jet while it's in motion
so what can we do to make the plane fly
better until somebody else figures out
how to build a rocket ship mm-hmm yeah I
mean that it's interesting because in
that horizon to space of that model
there's another really interesting
question that this framework opens up
which is the horizon to space is the
kind of what are the practical things we
can do today to possibly build a
different future and you can always ask
a question about a horizon to
proposition which is is it horizon 2
plus or horizon - - and that jargon
refers to is it likely to be captured by
the first horizon and therefore actually
perpetuates game a for longer or is it
already a stepping-stone innovation that
actually helps us to buy time
to get to game b or the third horizon so
this this distinguishing but to make it
give a concrete example for example if
in the shift towards renewable energies
if you shift from centralized coal-fired
power plants to vast fields of mega
turbines owned by one power supplier
you've shifted from fossil fuels to
renewables but you still stuck within
the centralized power structure of power
is power and centralized power providers
if you shift to decentralized grid
linked and non-grant linked renewable
energy systems that are maybe smaller
and more diverse then you're really
shifting into a stepping stone towards
horizon 3 so it's it's one in the same
technology depending on what mindset and
what frame its apply it can be horizon 2
plus or horizon 2 minus I like that a
lot and I do remember it from the book
and I should have mentioned it in my own
model of how the world works we have
basins of attraction and game a is the
game we've been in since 1694 at 2
o'clock in the afternoon on March 15
right and we are trying it feels like to
get out of that basin for good or ill
and we could end up in some bad basins
and so I think of 2 pluses as things
that are climbing the wall
to get us closer to escape from the
current basin that may be a useful way
to think about that and I think it's
really important for those of us who are
doing horizon to work to make sure we
think about your concept of horizon 2
plus I'm gonna inject that also into
game because I think you're absolutely
right that that's hugely important gosh
I got so many topics here let's go on to
another one which is very central to
your work and frankly I'm not sure I
understand it as well as I could and
that is the distinction between an
abundance and a scarcity way of doing
things you you call our way of our world
a scarcity mindset or a scarcity formula
and that where we need to go to is an
abundance worldview could you expand on
those two things
hang it comes again from where do we put
the focus of attention
with regard to what is life like I think
we need to hold that bizarre paradox
that while of course if somebody pinches
me it hurts me if somebody pinches you I
don't immediately feel it I can see you
wince and somehow feel some form of
empathy with with that but ultimately
life is a planetary process and it that
planetary process like as Janine Benyus
is beautifully put it from biomimicry
life creates conditions conducive to
life and this this larger planetary
process is abundance generating it
actually has over time increased the
amount of diversity and biomass on the
planet and has made it possible to for
more diverse life-forms to evolve but in
that if you if we like one way of
framing what evolution does is
diversification and subsequent
reintegration of that generated
diversity at higher levels of complexity
and if you go through the history of the
evolution of life on Earth that in
reintegration of generated diversity
tends to be first and foremost through
novel forms of cooperation and whether
it's two non nucleated cells forming
they're kind of in the symbiosis theory
like forming a more complex cell but the
engulfing cell not digesting the
engulfed cell but the two of them
creating a whole that is more than the
sum of its parts
same with the step to multicellular
organisms to the step to more complex
life-forms that didn't even have social
organizations and each of these steps
the most important innovation of life
has been a novel form of cooperation in
sharing the abundance and so it's our
focus that is too much on that is
individualist species nationalist
America first and all that stuff it's
just short-sighted and we're all on
living spaceship earth
if the planetary life-support system
gives we've all had it no matter whether
we've got the kind of money that some of
the planetary escapists like Jeff Bezos
and you know must have but fat chance
that they're going to be happy in their
Elysium of planet as the rest of
humanity thighs is on earth this
functional biosphere so what I'm talking
about with the shift from scarcity
mindset to abundance mindset is very
much linked to the shift from the story
of separation to the story of interbeing
it is a understanding that the most
enlightened way I can work for my
self-interest is to actually optimize
the whole system for everyone and since
I'm part of that that will come back to
me at the same time I mean yes we have
abundance at the ecosystem level and it
is a very interesting fact that once we
had life it has been gradually
increasing its complexity and there's a
lot of argument amongst the complexity
folks whether that's necessary or it's
just something that happened and I'm I'm
not qualified to have an opinion there
well at least not qualified to have a
well-founded opinion I have an opinion
which is yes there is a force that seems
to be pushing us towards more complexity
what that is I don't know on the other
hand in terms of actually evolving or
growing a social operating system the
actual quality of life of the typical
human also has to be taken into
consideration you know if a human has to
go back to what has been the history of
humans since the invention of
agriculture which is back-breaking work
living on the edge of starvation and
have 50% of your kids die before they're
5 years old that's not gonna seem like a
good trade from where we're at even in
the less developed countries today so it
seems to me that if we're really gonna
be selling an idea of abundance we have
to be thinking carefully it was some
precision about what actual quality of
life can we deliver to 10 billion humans
and I do think we have to think about
all 10 billion of them at some point
they're all going to
approximately the same quality of life
and I think that's a really hard part of
this problem how do we build to a level
frankly probably build down from the
Western table consumption but build up
from the very poor country levels of
consumption meet somewhere in the middle
that all 10 billion would agree is a
decent quality of life for Humanity and
that may not be easy
abundance at the level of actually
delivering the goods is hard work I mean
as I said I was a business guy for 25
years held frankly for 40 years when go
back to when I was a kid I had little
small businesses and things like that
building something of quality and with
excellence is hard most teams can't do
it I mean there's a reason most
restaurants fail most general
contractors go out of business
most software service companies go
belly-up within three years we have to
realize that providing a good abundant
quality of life or 10 billion people is
gonna require a bunch of hard work
I agree but we also have to be really
careful to not equate quality of life
with an entirely material the the
material dimension of course there's a
certain level of material needs that
people need to have covered in order for
them to engage in a lot of the other
qualitative aspects of life but really I
mean if you think about your life as a
business person
it's very quickly that the money alone
doesn't really give you the
gratification to keep on doing it it's
it's meaning like I always say I learn
and two economies I am the economy of
money and the economy of meaning and in
the economy of meaning I feel like Bill
Gates because I tend to still work sixty
percent of my time pro bono because I
choose to do things that actually
fulfill me and and I equally think that
that when we create a world from an
abundance mindset it is about the
qualities of human relationships is
about the quality of the environment
we're in the quality of the way we can
spend time learning and evolving and the
idea that agriculture that I mean that's
where I think that the interesting
both/and between some patterns from the
past and some technological innovation
if
actually applied science and technology
wisely we could create a lot of
abundance with a lot less work than was
necessary in those earlier agricultural
societies and I just recently learned
from from a friend something that was
very interesting that if you if you look
at the history of the Roman Empire the
first place that the Romans went out to
invade was the Iberian Peninsula Spain
where I live and it was also the last of
the places that they actually colonized
into the Roman Empire so for a very very
long time the tribes on the Iberian
Peninsula resisted the Roman invasion
and one of the reasons that they so
strongly resisted is that the that Rome
was bringing a wheat based or grain
based agricultural system into a culture
that was actually a tree culture it was
an acorn culture they made their bread
and their basic foodstuffs from
collecting acorns and managing large
open acorn forests and the animals
living within them and so they actually
just like many Native American tribes in
North America didn't have this what you
were just painting this back-breaking
hard slobbery off of work they they
managed to meet basic needs in three or
four months of work and that the rest of
the time they engaged in whatever their
fancy as in some cases was going to
territorial warfare with each other in
other cases it was it was creating
culture and and general merrymaking so I
I think we we can create a wise blend of
appropriate technology in place with
sensitivity to the local ecosystem and
the local culture in such a way that we
can actually create well-being and
meaningful existence within shared
abundance for all of humanity but not
necessarily in the way we're doing it
right now we're being happy means also
having vastly expensive status status
symbols that the minute you have them
they're not contributing to your
happiness any
yeah we call the hedonistic treadmill
right that's one of the root problem get
that on that quickly what I'm gonna
actually just interject something that
happened to know from my reading in
history is that Ben Franklin one of the
most astute founding fathers of America
commented on the fact that to his
knowledge thousands of white men had
gone to live with the Indians but as far
as he know not a single Indian had ever
voluntarily come to live with the white
man yeah that's an interesting yen and I
got shouldn't II know a lot of examples
of first and I don't know any examples
of the form of unless they've been
kidnapped and exported to London exactly
exactly so let's get back to the
hedonistic treadmill and the status
through things game I mean that is a big
part of what turns the game a cycle and
I've become more and more convinced that
and this is something that I couldn't
find in your book I looked I even did a
text search on my Kindle version of your
book one of the things that I'm
personally becoming very strong on is
that perhaps perhaps the replacement for
status through things is conviviality
you know I must say your book is full of
all kinds of great things but it's kind
of grey I don't get a great sense of fun
and excitement and part in right and you
know one of the things we're now
starting to push in all of our game be
thinking is that every scale a game be
conviviality living together in our
bodies as small groups eating and
drinking and dancing and singing and
doing crazy stuff in the moonlight that
may be the super attractor which allows
us to pull people out of the hedonistic
treadmill and their status through
things world you better check your
Kindle because the word conviviality
does appear and it appears in a David
Abram quote from spell of the sensuous
about that we are human in contact and
conviviality with all other life-forms
that our senses have been tuned by the
hood of the owl and the cry of the wolf
and that we are fire the complexity of
the the history of who we actually are
by just echoed
during the human world on to each other
and missing that deeper connection with
the wider community of life that
actually has shaped our ears and our
nose and our the way we the way we sense
and feel and our flesh and our animal
like it's that kind of more embodied
thinner illogical experience of being
alive in Gaia that I think is a lot of
fun and that I speak a lot of and that's
I completely I mean I and a lot of other
people that I've had feedback from but I
find interesting that you perceive my
book is grey because actually what a lot
of people resonate with is that deeper
connection as a there's a chapter on the
importance of solar time in nature and
in that kind of deeper connection of
conviviality with the wider community of
life and in the kind of ethics of Aldo
Leopold of a thing is right if it
contributes to the health and vitality
of the biotic community it is wrong if
it does otherwise and that needs to be
the ethical measurement of the kind of
conviviality that you want to make make
it fun make game be fun and sexy and
sell it in a Hollywood kind of way and
then everybody jumps on game B maybe a
bit too short of a success pathway
actually just did search so I must have
spelled it wrong they did find three
occurrences of conviviality but your use
of conviviality is a bit different than
mine you know you're talking about ways
of interacting with the whole ecosystem
and you know personally the reason I
bought a mountain farm 30 years ago and
that is there is nothing I love more
than being deep in the woods by myself
before sunrise and that still hold
November morning as the woods slowly
comes to life I mean that is my bail you
know that is what I live for
but and as powerful as that is for me
probably more powerful than any other
single experience it's still not the
same as when I say conviviality which is
people together enjoying themselves as
humans in their bodies right yeah we
read that take a look at the question
that the chapter on living the question
together creates community where speak
about my experience of living in
intentional communities and eco villages
because that's exactly where I've lived
the abundance that like living in the
Fenton eco village I didn't own any I
didn't really own the windmills on on
the horizon I didn't own the massive
beautiful area that I walked through and
felt a sense of collective ownership and
responsibility and gratitude for and
basically it's a massive estate that
everybody who walks along it feels to
have a sort of shared ownership with but
it is still divvied up and privately
owned but it's done so in a way that
abundance is shared and I was part of a
electric car pool and and I knew where
my energy came from because it was part
of a community cooperative - from the
wind farm we had our own local currency
so I could keep the economic multiplier
locally em we had so much contact of
five rhythms dancing and and in all
these community offers that just made my
life incredibly rich and meaningful and
beautiful in in many facets and it's
that kind of conviviality that I think
regenerative cultures are all about I
just read you that because again I
separate the two the love of nature and
there's deep fulfilling sense with
people socializing together when I use
conviviality that's what I mean by it I
think we're pretty close to the same
page let's move on one of the things we
talked about earlier was money right is
money necessary or not is there's
currently a very hot discussion in the
game be discussion group about will game
be require money my view on that I love
to hear your view is that money what is
money money is a social signalling
system for coordinating production
distribution savings etc and it doesn't
do a very good job because it's two
single dimensions in fact my own framing
of the deep soul-crushing problem of
game a it's a game a has actually been
captured by a nonhuman actor which is
money on money returned the single
dimension thing called money
strangely was invented by humans and our
current form in 1694 and it is now
captured our system and is making all of
us whether it's you know bill gay
or the welfare mother dance to the tune
of money on money return and what can
the single dimension of money do as you
pointed out others have pointed out it
doesn't speak at all to externalities
like depletion of these things we talked
about the very beginning the ecosystem
functions I by the way like your term
ecosystem functions rather than eco
system services and so when I come
around to it is we need some forms of
social signaling because making thing is
is hard the temptation not to save is
great and we need to appropriately count
and score our non-renewable resources so
we need something that does that but
it's probably not as simple-minded in
single dimensional is what we currently
call money yeah I learned a lot from the
work of Bell maleate ah who died a
couple of years ago sadly and he spent a
large part of his life working on
complementary currency systems and he
was a very big proponent of that one of
the problems is that we we don't have
enough different types of money that we
need much more diversity in these
systems that can help us to either
circulate things more at the local and
by regional economy scale but then also
enable where needed international
exchange so I would agree that that were
most likely gonna have to have some form
of record-keeping in the form of money
or something similar like that but I
know that there's a lot of people that
once people go down that rabbit hole
they get extremely passionate about
their points of view and and I quite
often like with the social media work I
do I get one of these people kind of
latching on to me and just don't you see
you have to look at it this way and this
is the only solution and I yeah I
haven't had time to really drill into
all the proposals that exists therefore
money less world but I'm certainly
finding it a little bit dangerous
this whole proliferation of
cryptocurrencies and the vast data
footprint and energy footprint they then
create and while they're good ones and
not so good ones and I only have 1/2
knowledge of which ones that use less
energy and which ones use more I think
we're still experimenting with
what alternatives we have to the current
money system and yes I completely agree
that this this idea that paying interest
and even differential entrance between
loans and deposits means that there is
this redistribution process that shovels
money from the bottom of the pyramid to
the ever in smaller but ever richer top
of the pyramid has been going on since
whatever that date was that you name 16
in the 1600 and that is structurally
dysfunctional we did we need to redesign
the way money functions in a way that it
actually incentivizes us to be
regenerative rather than degenerative to
not exploit people in planet but to
incentivize behavior where you only get
money for regenerating ecosystems
functions some people that are playing
with this in the regen network of trying
to track improvements in the state of
health of an ecosystem and then somehow
scoring that against the new currency or
against some form of store of value and
that's an idea that I've fought for a
long time I've been playing with it but
I'm not techy enough so I've been been
sharing it with some people that are
techy and that if we could create a way
that primary producers the
agriculturalists of the planet don't
just get paid for the produce that they
produce on the land but actually they
get paid for being stewards of healthy
ecosystems for carbon drawdown or for
increasing the bio productivity of the
land they work on then we we would
reinstate the primary producers of value
in our economies which is the
agricultural production is by a
Productivity get valued again in a way
that doesn't incentivize them to extract
the maximum but to optimize the system
over the long term to be at its maximum
productivity over time
I think we're in radical agreement that
our you know social signalling system
called money is way too low dimensional
and that whatever replaces it's got to
do all the things that you said I
actually do know a fair amount about
blockchain if actually I'll help design
one of the successful crypto currencies
and my view is that in general they're
on the wrong road at least the Bitcoin
class of anything they're backward there
may be worse than our currently monetary
system they're modeled on gold of all
barbaric things on the other hand some
of the some of the newer things going on
like hollow chain is very much worth
thinking about and understanding that it
may provide may provide us way to build
these highly fractal multiple monies for
different purposes so I think the
solution to my mind has not been found
but I am glad there are a lot of people
working on it and I think it'll be part
of the solution
thank you for mentioning bulletin
because basically and also for in in
what you've just said being much more of
an expert in this field than I am has
kind of confirmed the hunch I've had
like just listening to people like alpha
proc Jean Russell Ferran and or Barra
and the folks we've been behind
developing jalapeno before that the meta
currency project I just I know enough of
them personally to know that they're
coming from the right place and that
that they've come into this from a much
more systemic approach than the
blockchain crowd and that they really
want to take a biomimetic approach on
how to enable a collaborative sharing of
the comments like the Commons engine
that they're working on right now and in
like that unfortunately what I find is
that we we just don't like I don't have
the time to tunnel into each rabbit hole
as deeply as I would like to in the solo
so I end up as being somebody who's
trying to weave a larger pattern of
meaning across a very broad range of
disciplines and scales of design you
always run the danger of being the jack
of all trade master of none learning is
spiral I revisit and go deeper every
time I come back to currencies but I
haven't been
fortunate enough to have the time to
take a deep dive into all these models
and even even with that like I've been
from the very GetGo up in promoting the
work of Halle chain on the basis of my
limited understanding of it because it
sounded so much healthier than what I
what I saw coming out of Ethier iam and
all these other cryptocurrencies but ya
think thanks for for corroborating that
that they might be onto something
because I have the same feeling yeah in
fact I do do the occasional deep dive
into something and as I mentioned on
this show before late last year I taught
myself rust which is the computer
programming language that's necessary to
understand and use to operate in holo
chain and the reason I did that was so
that I could actually dabble in a whole
a chain this year and and while I'm 100%
with you on their their philosophy it's
the best I've ever seen I do have some
skepticism on some of the fairly serious
technical details and the only way to
find out if I if my just sort of sense
is right or wrong is actually just jump
in and do it so I'm gonna hack together
some whole chain stuff probably by mid
year and then I'll have a deeper view I
hope it's good I hope it's good or could
be made to be good because
philosophically I've seen nothing better
and give them your feedback I think they
would love it yeah in fact I'd like to
get this brought guy on my podcast
alright now this is one I'm sure my
regular listeners have been waiting for
let's turn to something that I am sort
of well known for which is my skepticism
about the word spirituality in fact my
listeners know that I usually call it
the S word goddammit
we could go on endlessly on this topic
but there was a lot more of that than I
was expecting in your book and I must
confess it makes me uneasy when I see
that much about spirituality but before
I push back why don't you make your case
well again to that I mentioned it
earlier briefly that conversation with
David or in 2006 he said something
really interesting back then to that
question where he also said we need to
figure out why we're worth sustaining
and he said that you can kind of make
like he said it's not a question of
whether we are spiritual beings or not
it is whether we're authentically
spiritual in the sense that you can make
soccer your religion you can make
environmentalism your religion and none
of them are very good ones and this
deeper search for meaning is at the root
of what it means to be human if you look
at the very first cave paintings that
kind of spitting against yaja hand them
leaving the handprint on the wall of
some k40 fifty thousand years ago that
is already asking where do we come from
where are we going why are we here so I
don't think we will ever get away from
answering those questions and in one way
or another and science only offers a
very useful but a limited answer to that
and another way of framing it is one of
my mentors Satish Kumar who found her to
Maha College and he said that you can
take two pathways into this conversation
either you take the pathway of ecology
and if you really understand the
complexity and the the interconnections
and the patterns of which in which the
whole and apart relate through an
ecological understanding a sort of guy
an understanding of the larger cycles
that were part of them even beyond the
the planetary limits the that they were
literally made out of Stardust and I
think that's a deeply spiritual insight
like it's it's what what what Thomas
berry explored with with how can we
retell the universe story using science
in a way that we re enchant the universe
and we don't stick with this this dogma
of the rational
scientists that of that did matter and
in life and consciousness evolving out
of it and that we already addressed
briefly so I for me spirituality I agree
that it it it can get really woolly and
fuzzy and can be an S word that makes
things complicated but the underlying
quest for meaning for exploring our role
and relationship right relationship to
each other
and to the larger being that were taking
experience in is critical to leading a
meaningful life I believe and we cannot
call it spirituality if that makes it
easier people know I've had debates I
even had my producer on the show Jared
Jaynes we had a great episode not long
ago about spirituality is a strong
spirituality guy he produces and edits
all my podcasts and he and I had a good
argument about it was kind of fun but I
guess where I come out on it is you know
put my cards on the table I'm a
scientific realist in fact I go so far
as to say I am a naive realist
I believe the universe is there it's
more or less though certainly we have
lots of errors in our science and it's
highly incomplete and it's not enchanted
there is no fancy not supernatural stuff
at least not within our universe you
know the bigger question why is there
something other than nothing that one
haven't not a clue nor does science it
may someday but this is where I think
this not enchantment scientific realist
perspectives fundamentally different
we're okay with the fact that we don't
know why the universe exists if there's
any point at all and we're okay with the
fact that we can't explain a lot of
things even some things that are seem
fairly straightforward like dark matter
dark energy we don't feel like we have
to have this totalizing system right
this tendency that people want to go to
oh there's a cosmic consciousness of
which we're all apart maybe there is
maybe there isn't there's no damn
evidence that we are at least no
objective reproducible evidence yes we
can have spiritual subjective feelings
that it's true and again as I've said
many times before you know I've used
psychedelics including very powerful
I've done egodeath levels of LSD I can
easily put myself in a non ego state but
I can also interpret those things
through cognitive science as essentially
the confabulate er that part of our
brain that tries to spin a story to make
some sense out of our perceptions being
applied to a non standard set of
networks and rhythms in our brain and no
more than that though also no less and
so that's where I come out on
spirituality and why it bothers me is
that people get so sucked into it and
spend so much of their life energy
Dibble babbling around with their
interior states when they should be
going out to work goddamn it and solving
all these problems we know we have in
fact I recently stumbled upon a term
which I'd never heard before maybe two
months ago called spiritual bypass
apparently it means when people get so
obsessed with the spirituality stuff
that they think that's the answer to
everything
when probably it isn't well I kind of
been there done that just walked the
spiral a couple of times on all that
like I've spent my time sitting on a
cushion and meditating and I've had long
lots of arguments with people who will
get so obsessed with this they say
that's the only thing you can do you can
own like the best way you can contribute
to saving the future of humanity is
working on yourself and sitting on a
sofa I've also done some of the
explorations you just alluded to with
psycho after they suffer the substances
that have given me very inside full
experiences of my deeper connection with
life and the what what senses are
capable of a respect way come from and I
feel that even within like if you if you
take sort of a matter on a Varela
Santiago theory of cognition type
approach we just need that
epistemological pluralism and and part
of that is also that like you can take
the science lens and that explains
things in one way and you can take a
another lens where you feel a deep
connection
with a living conscious universe and I
don't think you need to necessarily
justify that within the parameters of
the scientific story if it's a fully
embodied experience that that is
meaningful to you that helps you
navigate what living a life that creates
conditions conducive to life is all
about its understanding that we need to
serve the whole in order to serve
ourselves whether you need science for
that or spirituality for that I don't I
don't really care you know we'll back
off a little bit in the game be world we
have a concept called psycho
technologies which includes everything
from contemplative practice to
psychotherapy the psychedelic drugs to
neurofeedback etc and you know I think
our established view I mean there people
are all over the continuum but I think
the consensus view is whatever works for
you to be a better player of game be use
it but be aware of the dangers and
whether they're drug addiction or
spiritual bypass or being becoming a
cynical nihilist that doesn't believe in
anything
all those are risks and we should have
our eyes wide open and use those psycho
technologies with help us play game be
better and that's where I finally now
let me just pick you up a month one
thing that you said earlier that it's
this and again I'm sitting with a
question I'm not not trying to lecture
anybody here it's the framing of theory
and practice or even spirituality and
practice like you said like don't sit on
the cushion and and and go into that in
a journey and go out there in the world
and do something and well if even using
a Sun at a scientific entry point here
if everything is fundamentally
interconnected through non-local
connections and then every state change
in me is also a state change in the
known universe and therefore we in this
conversation that we are having right
now this conversation has causal agency
in and of itself whether somebody
listens to it or not right now in the
because your universe and I'm universe
and therefore we need to pay more
attention to the power of the word and
the power of thought and the power of
our state of being so this dualism
between being and doing like actually is
maybe a false dualism or the dualism
between theory and practice if we if we
find new organizing ideas new frameworks
that help us understand this
participation in complexity then we
already shift the very thing we are part
of like it's like in Medrano and very
less
terms is we are bringing forth a world
together and taking the rationalist
scientific frame brings forth one one
world and taking a indigenous wisdom
frame brings forth another world and I
think both of them have something to
learn from each other yeah I would agree
well not as Polly as I've gotten deeper
into this world I am more tolerant and
understand why it helps people to use
these subjective tools but I just I'm
always careful to say subjectively and I
think you said fully embodied people's
subjective sense is there's no one can
ever no one should ever second-guess
someones subjective experience right
where I get my back up a little bit is
when they then start making claims about
the world that are objectively
verifiable or not and you've heard these
woowoo people says sleeping under a pier
mineral cure diabetes or something right
actually no a hippie chick that tried
that guess what she went she went blind
right so when one wants to say that one
has a subjective life and it's more real
than anything else to us right and this
is something we're Hansie fry enact I've
really gotten a lot out of his books
makes the point again and again that you
know our subjective well-being is more
real to us than anything else and that's
well and good but then don't feel the
need to then go from that to claims
about objective reality which can be
verified because I like to point out to
people
in the contest between metaphysical
speculation and objective reality the
meta physicians have always had it wrong
Thor does not cause thunder no the Sun
doesn't go around the earth you know no
the earth isn't 6,000 years old anytime
the two have come together objective
measurements of reality have always with
one or two minor exceptions that you can
put down to chance defeated metaphysical
speculation so my view is enjoy one
subjective fully embodied being but then
don't leap from there to making
metaphysical speculations about the
physical world
mmm an interesting thing coming back to
bran guru and Bryan always pointed out
that science isn't about objectivity
it's about into subjective consensus
making and that it's basically a bunch
of people are agreeing to a certain
methodology a certain epistemology and
then working within that to reproduce
certain outcomes to certain experiments
and and that's verifiable and that's
what I think you're referring to as
objective but that there is actually a
participatory agency of consciousness in
everything that we bring forth that
perception isn't a process of opening
the eyes and the world just comes in and
the worlds out there but it is every act
of perception has an act of conception
in it and if we pay attention to the
seer the role of the seer in the way we
access reality then we can allow for
that epistemological pluralism a little
bit more by saying okay maybe there are
other ways of generating insight and and
I quite like that framing that own
Barfield put forward of indigenous
Nations having a form of primary
participation mystique where everything
is meaningful and the dewdrop being hit
by the sunlight is a direct
communication that tells them something
about how to act in that moment then
there's the the kind of enlightenment
separation from that that gives us all
the the
of Science and Technology and and now
part of this kind of evolutionary leap
that that we need to make that that rite
of passage into appropriate
participation is to come to final
participation which which actually
allows us to hold both as paths to
wisdom and right action
yeah it's good that we have some
diversity and you know again one of the
game be things that we talk about a fair
amount is coherent pluralism we need to
agree to some things and we have to
agree to disagree about other things and
I suspect this is going to be the one of
the ones that you and I are right this
conversations been good I can see more
overlap but I think that we're gonna
fight we will just have some things we
disagree about here and that's okay
that's a good thing I love love the
spirit you take it and I think if we all
could take our disagreements a bit more
in that spirit we would so so much more
easily learn from each other because I
mean you're making me think and reflect
with with you perspective and it's not
just me voicing a different one here
it's like this will work in me for for a
while that's I heard you yeah not same
with the same with you and also same
with Hansie yeah both of you have said
alright you know I think I'm a smart guy
but you know these guys are smart guys
too
well let me think about this right
alright last topic unfortunately I think
we're gonna have to skip over
consciousness maybe we should have you
back again just talking about
consciousness yeah let's let's have
another conversation on consciousness
sometimes without a doubt the last one I
this is something that is very near and
dear to my heart because I actually made
a mistake here in the early one point oh
version of game be back in 2013 where
there was a dichotomy in the community
between people need to change or evolve
their consciousness first versus we need
to build institutions first and the
lines got drawn very firmly and the
factions went to war and that was one of
a couple of reasons why the original
game be 1.0 exploded into dust at the
end of 2013
fortunately we were smart we said we're
gonna go into spore mode here everyone
just take whatever they're at with game
B go out in the world and do your thing
maybe someday the spores will regenerate
and by odd chance in the spring of 2019
that some of those spores started to
sprout again but since that time you can
probably guess which side I was on and
now and I was definitely an
institution's first person and I screw
all that people changing them
 all that bunch of sissy right
now I realize I was wrong but they were
wrong too and in reality it's a
coevolution between the two how I'm
seeing it I think more and more people
and in our world are seeing it which is
that there are a few people who can
change themselves despite the
institution's they're embedded in but
those few people are small one or two
percent maybe the classic early adopters
are maniac innovators in the technology
space or consumer product space but most
humans really aren't able to make much
of a deep change in themselves unless
they're reinforced by appropriate social
signals so the job is for these early
people to change themselves enough to be
able to build some institutions that
work for them but then emanate signals
such that they start to enable other
people to change you know this is kind
of abstract but you know say somebody
who is living a middle-class suburban
life and their ambition in life is to
trade up from you know see a Mercedes
c-class store Mercedes e-class right
they're getting that signal that
organizes their life there's no real
alternative today and Western society or
at least they're very fringy expose
instead we have a set of signals around
conviviality around spirituality around
experiencing nature and really being one
with it and those are real signals that
actually provide meaning to people it is
possible to seduce a greater proportion
than one or two percent away from the
game a institutions maybe we get to five
or seven percent and then those five or
seven percent but of course this is not
step function this is all continuous
develop new institutions that work for
them which then seduce the next ring of
people until we get to maybe 15% and
there's a lot of reasons to believe from
systems modeling that once you get 15%
of people who've abandoned the legacy
operating system the end is near so
that's my
learning that's come hard one over the
last six years seven years now I miss
people first versus institutions first
thing which is neither they got a
co-evolve
sounds like a wonderful both and
insulate because I would I would agree
and as you were saying that what words
came to my mind was what is the
appropriate scale of organization and
one thing that I've been working with a
lot and my explorations of all of this
is this idea of scale linking design and
the scales of design from kind of
products to the material science what do
we make stuff out of and what energy do
we use but then on to products and and
architecture community planning
industrial ecology urban planning by
regional planning and then the
international networks of collaboration
and knowledge exchange that enable us to
coordinate by a regional Rhian
habitation across the globe in
solidarity for me like if you if you
look at a map of the globe and you look
at the straight lines of many of the
countries borders you can very clearly
see how they were drawn by the rulers of
some normally a colonial power and if we
want to rematch the human presence on
earth to the biophysical reality of life
as a planetary process then we need to
somehow stop taking these relatively
artificial socially constructed
boundaries these borders less seriously
and understand our common family being
part of the human species and the wider
community of life being primary and that
the patterns of rematching might just be
more biophysical patterns like a
watershed like a bio region and that at
that scale we can more easily both
evolve the personal and the
institutional side of this conversation
that you open like we because it's we're
reinventing
like Bucky fuller quote again don't
fight the existing system build an
alternative system that makes the old
system obsolete I think that at the by
regional scale we can begin to explore
that and lots of people have had this
intuition a long time ago you can start
with people like Patrick Geddes at the
turn of the last century and cities in
evolution and and the whole valley
section and you have to plan cities
within the bio region is basically what
he said and then you get the early by
region lists in California with Peter
Burke Raymond Tasman planer drum
foundation Gary Snyder and all those
guys in Mike Hogg and taking that
approach but recently I've seen a lot of
organizations kind of converge on that
the locus of focus for this work is at
the by regional scale and whether it's
the regenerative communities network
that span out of the capital Institute
or whether it's the people working on
the planetary health alliance and they
all seem to agree that if we want to
create game be the place to do the
experimenting and the playing is a local
focus that centers around the bio region
so it's it's deeply community grounded
it's grounded in place it's sourced out
of the bio cultural uniqueness of each
place so we can refit like it's not a
cookie cutter one size fits all here's a
solution how do we get it to scale no
it's a kind of scaling out rather than a
scaling up of patterns that serve of
patterns of Rhian habitation and yeah
that's a hunch but that's why I moved to
Majorca eight years ago because almost
10 years ago actually because I after
spending a good 15 20 years of my life
working with those folks they'd like to
experiment built the alternative system
at the community scale so eco village
intentional community folks
experimenting or transition town folks
trying to turn things around at the
scale of their little transition
community
I realized that the scale at which we
can change the whole systems design and
be
old biomimetic ecosystem cascading
ecosystem inspired ways of using
resources regenerative ly is at the bio
regional scale and that that also is
this dynamic between yes it's a personal
like it's about each individual starting
from what is my essence what is my
unique contribution in this region to
serve life as a planetary process and
through that serve myself and my
community and my region and at the same
time it's it's also a collective
capacity building of how do we meet our
needs how do we build climate resilience
how do we build resilience towards all
the patterns of disruptions that are
going to come hard and fast as we
approach the middle of this century I
see that at that that that vision of bio
regional regeneration is a both/and
pathway of on the one hand maybe taking
us through the eye of the needle through
regenerating healthy ecosystems function
at the scale of the ecosystems we
inhabit and in the process drawing down
enough carbon into healthy soils and
healthy biomass and and and the
biomaterials we need to shift towards in
order to not just slow down global
warming but eventually reverse global
warming to the point that we get back to
more closely to 250 parts per million
like we were before the Industrial
Revolution but even if we don't get that
in re regionalizing our patterns of
production and consumption we also build
the resilience towards a climate
disruptive world or a virally disrupted
world although that the I mean the the
black swans are hard and fast they're
plenty of things that could come our way
that would make things difficult but if
we build the redundance at the bio
regional scale we have a better chance
of navigating that future I would say I
have a hundred percent agree on and
again I think it we both agree that's an
intuition and we need probably be
experimenting on every scale but my
intuition says the same that it's you
know bioregion
that can be self-reliant in certain
areas but not seal itself off from the
world that's a fool's errand and you
very much like the way you you talked
about that so let's make our exit right
there I think that's been in this has
been an incredibly interesting
conversation everything I was hoping it
would be and more thank you so much for
having me on the show it was lots of fun
and yes and at some point let's have
that conversation about consciousness
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at