guess so I have another one that also
come out of the conversation that I had
today and I'd like to try to get that
one shot as well this speaks to a
problematic that has definitely been in
the in the air around the work of Jordan
Peterson and this has to do with this
question of responsibility and so I'd
like to give my my take on it you know
that I've talked a lot about sovereignty
and about what it looks like and what it
means and how it works and that the
proposal that I would make and and I
think this is also the perspective that
Peterson has although you know I haven't
talked to him about it in detail so I
don't really know is there's a stack
there's like a pathing he says you've
got to get you got to clean your room
you've got to get yourself sorted out
before you can try to fix your
relationships with your family and then
before you can try to go out and do
something in the world right and my
proposition is that that's actually more
or less true and I think it's important
which is not to say by any stretch of
the imagination that going out and
addressing things in your community and
going out and addressing things in the
larger world is not simultaneously
needful and doable
it's just that they actually have to be
done in the right in the right order and
here's why I think that's the case I
think it comes down to this notion of
how responsibility cashes out and how we
can find ourselves subtly failing to be
able to take responsibility so the rule
that I would put in place the
proposition that I would make is that
you cannot take responsibility for
someone else until you can actually take
full responsibility for yourself now by
that I don't mean that you've achieved
mastery in self responsibility I don't
mean that your sovereignty as an
individual has become infinite what I
mean is at a minimum you have begun the
process of actually being aware of what
your own personal sovereignty looks and
feels like you've begun the process of
that
strucked in your own individual
sovereignty and you made the choice to
fully take responsibility for yourself
what that means is you get hit by a bus
you lose all your money in a stock
market downturn you're you know a dog
gets hit by lightning you take
responsibility for that
now that sounds maybe a little weird
obviously in some sense you don't have a
causal agency over lightning in stock
market phenomena so what does it mean to
take responsibility for that well at a
minimum it means maintaining the
integrity of your sovereignty in
response to the things the world throws
at you all right you get that that's the
key insight once you've taken a choice
made a choice to take full
responsibility for yourself what that
means is not that you can control the
world what it means is that you're able
to maintain the integrity of your
sovereignty no matter what the world
throws at you and what that means is
that you're able to maintain the
capacity to make the least the best
choices that you can make your showing
up the best that you can show up in
response to the circumstances that you
find yourself in right this sends if I
think being the key quite often people
will go in two distinct bad directions
one direction is they actually
externalize this responsibility and what
they really do is they disempower
themselves so if you blame the world for
shitty things that happen to you what
you're doing actually is disempowering
yourself you're weakening yourself
it isn't that flat out the reality of
the world does stuff over which you have
no agency that doesn't matter what you
have agency over is how you respond to
it and whether you respond to it and by
externalizing that agency about
externalizing your capacity to choose
how you respond which you fundamentally
do own all the way down to existential
base by outsourcing the ability to
choose how you respond then you are no
longer able to maintain the integrity of
your own sovereignty which means by
definition you're now no longer able to
actually make good choices okay well

well now if you're in a circumstance we
were trying to do something awfully
difficult like enter into relationship
with other human beings or modify the
conditions of the complex environment
which you live and you're not making as
good a choice as you can make well
that's a meta bad choice right now
you're setting yourself and the world up
for bad consequences and so that's one
piece then the second piece is even more
problematic you might have like I'm
almost an involution of the first which
is not only do you externalize your own
agency right you blame the world and
again I need to reinforce I don't mean
not being aware of the fact that there's
 going on over which you have no
control that's very different what I
mean is blaming the world externalizing
your own authority over your own choice
making right that's the key all right so
that's probably number one problem
number two is when you go beyond that
and you actually begin constructing
something that can only satisfy itself
by operating in that externalized
environment that's tricky let me see if
I can get make that more clear so
there's a mania that happens when you
begin that second path a mania for
actually identifying agency as external
and therefore only being able to feel a
sense of being agenting by virtue of
exercise and control over that which is
external how's that for a mouthful that
I think is the key insight all right so
the idea is that in the first move you
disempower yourself by externalizing
your agency and the second move you
actually identify the outside as the
essence of the agency and your ability
to control and influence that as the
only mechanism of agency that is
available to you or of course is a
radical disempowerment and very
difficult to recover from and it will
actually show up as a mania which is the
same thing as an addiction right you are
you your ability your your phenomenal
schema is no longer actually responsive
to Numan already and you're gonna start
really feeling anxious you're gonna feel
neurotic you're going to
feel agitated and of course that is
going those those sorts of things are
telling you something fundamentally is
wrong with the way that you're going
about making sense of making choices in
the world but quite often if you're
stuck in that environment it's actually
just going to be degrading your
sovereignty so that's what I think is
the essence of that proposition