welcome to meditating with genre Reiki
we do this every weekday morning at 9:30
a.m. Eastern Time
Mondays alternate between a new Dyson
which we call the Dharma day and a
review of the whole ecology practices
and piety yesterday Monday was a derma
day and I taught chanting I wanted to
mention that normally I recommend doing
the chanting after you've done the
seated Qigong exercises but because
we're in a group because I don't want to
disrupt people people's practice what I
recommend as soon as we sit I'll do the
chanting and then you can find your
Center and your roots and your flow and
you focus as your own pace without me
interrupting or disturbing okay so
that's how we'll handle that going
forward if you're joining us for the
first time don't panic don't worry oh
you're welcome it's a good idea to just
keep coming and meeting with us but I
recommend you check the notes in the
description to this video you'll find
links to previous lessons and since I
recommend doing lesson one right away
and then whatever day you took the week
you have free do another lesson you less
than two to lesson three and you'll very
quickly integrate and catch up with us
please like this stream to its increases
visibility in the YouTube algorithm
you're helping me to help us many people
as possible with this course of practice
at the end of every sit there is QA
sometimes longer sometimes shorter
because we have different MRI on
different schedules for different days
of the week but when we do have those
questions we always have a Q&A it to
some degree please let me hear questions
at that time two questions about this
ecology practice if you come from any
part of the course though but limited to
this course for more general questions
please come to the youth on my YouTube
livestream a general Q&A every third
Friday of the month it'll be this Friday
July sorry this month so not this
product that was a mistake it'll be
this month it'll be July 17th at 3 p.m.
Eastern Time so I think that's
everything we need to do to get ready so
let's get yourself into position set
your phones on do not disturb will begin
and then in a second I will begin with
the chanting and then I will end and
then you wouldn't go into whatever
practice you have set your intention for
so let's begin
[Music]
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
in your SIA practice
you
Shh
slowly come out if you practice trying
as best you can to integrate what you
cultivated in your practice with your
everyday consciousness cognition
character and communicants perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
all right let's do some questions first
one from cure Kruger hi Kara observation
here is doing something that I would
remind everyone to please do
observations sharing moments in their
lives of challenge but also moments in
your life and they experience some
insight connectedness awakening or the
presence of the inner teacher the Buddha
in that sense so as much as we can
let's there's a term that used to be
used within Christianity cook
edification which is like the building
of an edifice building each other up so
thank you Kara I just had some sad
memories come up in my practice this
morning but I can finally look at them
and be with the emotions that arise
skillfully so that's a good thing yes it
is Thank You Kara
all of us are strengthened and
encouraged when somebody shares like
that just had some solid memories come
up in my practice this morning I can
finally look at them and be with the
emotions that arise skillfully so that's
a good thing
most beautifully said Thank You Kara
Kara has a question now what does
communitas mean when coming out of the
meditation so consciousness is
consciousness a pretty self-explanatory
although it's deeply mysterious I'm
having it I'm working on with Greg
enric's on to the tree kiss to bring out
a new series called untangling the world
not of consciousness but we have these
know intuitively what consciousness and
cognition is basically your intelligence
character character is different from
the personality character are the
virtues and the virtual engines that you
have cultivated so as to guide and shape
your development and to compensate for
your idiosyncratic history and your
idiosyncratic personality that's what I
mean by character communitas is you it's
a term that means the the sense of
sharing and participating with others
the sense of yourself that is actualized
and revealed in your connected and your
can active connections with others so
the Sangha has a community us as a
community us and bringing in to how
difficult it mitts on your being with
others the community us bringing what
you're cultivating in yourself into
communitas is an important way of
properly aspiring to wisdom and to
enlightenment the individual and the
truths have asked do you do yoga John so
I'm very fortunate to be with an amazing
woman and her I think it was about four
years we were doing you'll get together
at a particular place and it was very
powerful and I deeply enjoyed that
unfortunately there were two
circumstances of fate that intervened
one my Meniere's caught a lot worse and
so a lot of the postures especially
postures required putting my head sort
of below my center of gravity became
like just not doable for me and so
became the challenge and then also more
recently of course coded as struck so I
miss it I really do and I recommend it
strongly as one of the things to
consider for your ecology practices
Karima
hello crema in Plato's Republic he
categorized harmonics as the last of
five mathematical disciplines which
philosopher Kings need to study was he a
chanter or singer probably some of this
stuff's is very hard to reconstruct but
we know that he was a poet he was
intending to be a poet and poetry it's
it's thought that poetry was largely
chanted or sung not merely spoken and
there was and therefore there was also
deep overlap with music we also know
that Plato's deeply influenced by
Pythagoras and the Pythagorean community
deeply influenced and so the connections
between music and math and speech are
also very salient to him so it's
plausible that he was doing something
like chanting that's the best answer I
can give kara like a soy prema to a very
very good very good historical question
one of the things we can try to bring
out when we do the wisdom of Hypatia and
the Neal and the Neoplatonic aspect this
is called the urge if these ritual
enactments that are designed to in some
sense empower us but they're very very
careful about all of this as we get into
it but chanting was plausibly something
that was happening in the Platonic
community or in the end the Neoplatonic
community mark
hi Park great to see you as always
observation thank you mark the chanting
practice is rather powerful and seems to
be sinking my left and right side
somehow an important way I'm at a loss
to explain it um I think that has to do
with the fact that chanting is bringing
about very powerful integration internet
interhemispheric integration between
left and right you might actually
experience that in an embodied fashion
and then the neural actual neural narrow
axial integration the up-down and
integration and the brain body
integration might also be sort of
magnifying that because it really
magnifies sort of the felt energetic
aspects of the body so it's makes good
sense to me that that would be happening
to you so thank you for sharing that I'm
glad you're finding the chanting
powerful it is very powerful that's why
I don't teach it right away and
overwhelm people and also it is I mean
that's the connection like I mentioned
it in chanting and enchanting the
temptation to want magical powers it is
real around these things and so we have
you know they should be set within right
a course that has gained momentum
towards wisdom and a Sangha that has
started to take root around you Matthew
McCready that's good to hear from you
again Matthew an experience recently
during an altered state where I felt
heat in my stomach area on the in-breath
and emptiness on the other mi tryin I'm
tryin to remember that feeling Jim I
said any thoughts remember it a few
times and then let it go
and then give it a chance to come up
spontaneously brought him up rather than
you seeking it out I was reading from my
lectio a Sufi quote really hit home he
said everything that I'm speaking about
cannot be found by seeking but only
seekers find it so you have to try and
get this thing
you seek and then he let the seeking go
and if it's resonate it will come back
and it will come back with the reality
you cannot give it so that's what I
would recommend going forward so um
thank you everyone for joining today
again thank you Mark and cure for your
observations they are very helpful
I encourage everybody to do those of
course keep the questions up - they're
very important as well but the the the
observations and the sharing are also
important for good practice good upaya
on good Senga i want to thank my dear
friend and techno major mark was always
working his magic my beloved son jason
is always pinch-hitting please subscribe
to the channel to be notified in the
next video you'll also find links to the
lecture series awaking from the mean
crisis the dialogo series voices with
ricky where major themes from this
course are developed along with other
themes and set and situated within a
more encompassing context and worldview
invite others who might benefit by
sharing this video thank you for all you
do everyone you know this please keep it
up you just gotta clean all that - just
keep going
Brett is here please join the discord
server to find a vital and vibrant
community many of them they're doing
these practices exploring Luxio Divina
exploring the chanting just and then
just exploring the wider world view in
context I encourage you strongly to join
a reminder that we are doing this every
week they were more every weekday
morning at 9:30 Eastern Time also
reminder the continuity of practice is
more important than sheer quantity of
practice there is no enemy worse than
your own mind and body no friend no ally
no true companion on the path
better than your own mind advice be
lamps unto yourselves and to each other
take good care everyone I'll see you
tomorrow