and I sense it too in you and your sense
of compassion and what what you walk
with I would imagine in ways that are so
implicit to you you don't even notice it
but it really does stand out and I just
want to let you know I really have
appreciated your your continuous
compassion and like your the courage to
the courage to completely explore in all
these conversations that I think like
would look like would look threatening
to explore I think to many but it seems
like you keep turning towards it and are
open open to it well again thank you
that's that's very kind
you know I it's I mean that we're home
you know and and what else you said the
you know we don't produce history I
think in some ways that I mean both
those concepts swing back into marriage
where we started this conversation
because in in a sense in a sense what we
do when we marry is we express an
aspirational agency towards creating
creating home and you know that is
obviously the context in which in which
children come into this world you want
your you very much want your child to
have a sense of have a sense of home
and and and again you know we we don't
produce history but there's a there's an
interesting relationship between that
and home you know toll Keane obviously
and his you know in the hobbit when you
know Bilbo Tolkien on one hand very much
as the hobbit hole is home yeah and yet
Bilbo must leave home yes no there and
back again yes and and you know
one of the things so you know I I think
a lot about we have this we have
obviously have this longing for home
this is deeply built into a lot of
church church language we have a you
know home is identified with with you
know what comes after death often you
know the the technology as as destroy I
mean that family that invited you to
live with them in order to address a
malady they couldn't name you know they
were they were looking for home yeah and
they had a sense that that you could
help them and he even look at these
spatial metaphors we're using at a sense
that that you could help them find home
even though they're you know clearly
living in their house and and if if
asked to sit down and describe just what
home is while all of us would be
hard-pressed we might be able to offer
up some adjectives that are evocative we
might be able to offer some word
pictures that trigger in us memories and
and visions of home but you know one
that one of the things that that CS
Lewis talks about in the beginning of
mere christianity with his argument
argument from desire is that we all have
a longing and a sense for this this
really I mean and even home I mean again
the being we have a sense for being
because it's all of the it's the whole
thing you know it's in Christian terms
the language is consummation yeah which
is obviously connected to a couple
consummating of
marriage and in the book of Revelation
it's the consummation of Christ and the
bride
it's the consummation of heaven and
earth
it's the consummation and and there's we
don't you know Lois points out we don't
get there here and now yeah we taste it
and and Lois notes that that the the
tasting of it is spread liberally in
that it's the some of the best meals I
ever had were in some of the poorest
most remarkable remote communities you
could imagine where you know usually
women would sit by a charcoal fire and
work on a meal of some fish and some
rice and a few seasonings they could get
together and that meal would be cooked
over the three or four hours we had in
the church service and then you come out
and you know and you think wow so these
people who have so little at least they
get to share in this joy yeah and yeah
and and so that then and this is part of
the reason that I you know will you'll
pry you can try to you know I'm not
giving up my hope of heaven I'm not
giving up my hope of home because you
know even the even just the even the
hoping for it yeah is is a participation
yeah in home and and often be closest I
can get in this space and time where all
of us feel it's um all of us miss it
just oh I'm really appreciating kind of
like as your as you I feel like I just
took a walk with you right so as I was
as the process of understanding what
you're just saying
I felt like on some level I had to
actually recognize what you were saying
in a certain sense I just felt really I
appreciated the way that you just
expressed that and I I noticed that what
comes up for me when you say that is
like he will use the year that the word
yearned for home mmm a yearning is to me
seems to always kind of Connaught ate
that and like a yearning in some sense
is it usually kind of evokes something
that you can't get like an object you
can't possess you yearn for God or you
yearn for something transcendent
therefore in some level the yearning
itself is its announcement right it's
like it so in other words it's like this
very I felt like on one level this it's
a very intimate thing to yearn for
something and it and it announced I
think it probably displays a little bit
of the nature of what home is because
there's something um in Rilke uh in the
first due√±o eulogies um the first one
where he's talking about like he says he
said something like this is like even in
the warm animals gaze mm-hmm right it
knows we are not at home in our
interpreted world and I and I think that
what I just heard him that like that
went through my mind what I heard him
that is like actually so much of home
this for us right is so wedded to this
the that home needs to be something that
we're constantly yearning for but in the
yearning means that there's something
ungettable yet the thing were yearning
for is inherently ungettable so it's
kind of like there is that quality I
know in a conversation
with my friend mark the other day we
were talking about like he's like you
know I think we've been in demeaning
crisis from day one what you're saying
it's like yeah like me
it's and I think what I what I what I
heard and that is a little bit of what
your talk I think but what you're saying
- it has me like the way that your time
having it talk to me I'm recognizing as
a lot like a lot more at my own centre
of this sense of the that - what it is
to be human is to be the being that is
the question right to be alive is to be
in trouble on some level already ready
like it's there is there in on some
level it's not we're not we're not given
home like an object where I think and I
can imagine in an animals kind of way of
being that they're not yearning for a
home right it on some level they're
satiated their instincts are all there
there's there's a it's a very very
different sense for us because we can't
ever attain it right it's what we yearn
for but the yearning for and responding
sensitively to that right seems to be
the enactment of home but implicit is it
is a homelessness um so so there's it's
interesting when I think if I take that
and I I kind of take up your the way
that you talked about you know the best
meals that you ever had like I wanted to
sink into that because I heard I've
heard that thing before and I wanna but
I heard it nearly somehow what is it
what do you think's going on about that
that on some level these people that are
poor have less security yet you you can
go in and have a meal with them and feel
more at home then right when you're in
the city or something yeah yeah yeah
what is that what is yeah like I'm just
curious what is it that what is it
going on there that what's the
difference that makes that difference
you think it's hard it's hard to know
yeah you know I have this with I have
this with the homeless ironically hmm
you know I have ongoing relationships
with a number of people who are homeless
and I I
I will often I will often think about
them when I am on a cold night doesn't
get that cold in Sacramento you know
only in the 30s a cold night and I am in
bed and I am thinking about them and I
don't know I don't know I don't you know
I I think there was just always
something in the meals shared with the
Haitians which because I at least
comparatively so was so much wealthier
than they were that they my father when
you know my father came down to the dr a
few times and he loved going out to the
churches with me and so you know of
course you know there's all here there's
your father and so do you come they keep
the yeah praises on him of just a young
kid and you know they said in front of
us this big plate of rice and my
father's you know digging into eat
though I said dad don't eat the whole
thing was like why I said because you
know what you leave others will eat and
so you know eat enough to eat enough to
demonstrate your gratitude and your
appreciation for the fact that these
people these people who struggle to feed
their children have just placed an
enormous heaping plate of food in front
of you yeah and and and everything that
goes into that yeah and and you know why
huh the another another another thing CS
Lewis writes about that us that has
impressed me
yes this essay which you can find online
about equality and he writes about the
specific pleasure of the inferior hmm
which is something that we is very
unamerican because we don't like to
imagine there is an inferior and if
there is an inferior it must be banished
somehow as if we can do that but the
specific pleasure of an inferior which
is you know the dog feeling the
gratification of of satisfying its
master yeah and you know and and we know
this you know we know this in in
lovemaking and you know lovemaking is is
is a playful exchange of agency of
giving and receiving of you know agency
and reciprocation and yeah and and so
you know I think I think a deep part of
home is is the is the the particular
satisfaction of the inferior that that
we are that we are recipients of costly
grace and but that grace has been given
to us though it has been costly it is
also well given its it's the superiors
good pleasure to to do that for the
inferior and you know we experience this
with our pets we experience this with
our children we experience this in
marriage and it's it's experiencing the
fullness of life as being by being able
to participate and in dwell in in the
various positions within relationality
and and home is I mean again it I think
it gets back it gets back to to that to
the marriage conversation in that
marriage there is a there is a
participation
home like there can't be without the
audacious promises given that none of us
can really live up to and and the other
person knowing it Wow I just it's a
couple of things I have so much going on
with me with you right now like this
conversation so many things are present
I have like tears coming up to my eyes
my heart feels super open like there's
so many things that just moved me and
what you just said like first of all I
felt really impacted like by when you
talked about yea the homeless sometimes
I sometimes when it gets cold out I
think of them I think what I just I I
feel struck by and moved by is that they
resided you on some level yeah right
there in your breath of concern right
like just that way of being is just
really moved to me like what you just
demonstrated there like just by being
you and the way that you live your life
I could feel where that comes from
and I could feel you know what comes up
to me is actually something that he said
to me in our first topic which by the
way I loved their first like when week
not loving this one do but one of the
things that you said to me that um I
learnt like I learned a little bit more
about my own history in our
conversations um what and in through
some of the things that you were you
recognized you put it in a way that like
had it be so much more present to me and
one of the things that you said is yeah
I you you you you really got my
grandparents right whoo-hoo in some ways
kind of saw me and saw my parents kind
of like and the instability and stuff
and they said this one thing and I've
thought about this over and over and
over again they poured their life into
this young man like poured it into it's
like I was like that's exactly what they
did like they really did and you're
right there there was a sense of it
wouldn't have been what it is if there
was a guarantee that that was gonna work
out like on some level I think that
pouring was in the presence of a
recognition of unable to fulfill in any
controlled way whether or not this
pouring of my life and you know it's the
last part of their life right it's like
in in many ways they could probably be
like clever doneness but but they
thought of me when it was cold right
they held me in way in pour and so as
you're talking about that there's an
immediately yeah you're right there's a
there's an inadequacy or an a what was
it that you said in deficiency what was
the thing that you said about what was
inherent is the awareness of is it lack
was CS Lewis I think he the specific
pleasure of the inferior yeah the
pleasure of the inferior it's funny
because
yeah that sense of coring your life into
somebody right with every intention if
you can control that thing you would but
like really realizing like I could just
like pour my life for the last ten years
and I there isn't
I am i it i inherently know that like
that i don't have control over the
outcome of how that happens but i can't
not do it yeah and the spirit that that
evokes city yeah that's so that really
like really oh it's I just feel really
opened like it touches my heart yeah and
and I you know I was thank you Paul no
thank you
I mean it's it's beautiful to be seen
mmm you know I was I was so one of the
homeless guys turned sixty and it was
his birthday and so I facilitated the
phone call between him and his parents
who are in their 90's and just in that
phone call so this particular individual
has a lot of it's always homeless for a
reason but you know and I just just in
that moment seeing the relationships of
these parents who you know the father
especially I think continues to reach
out and pour himself into his 60 year
old son as best he can who this 60 year
old son will likely in my estimation you
know he he'll his mental illness will
not be fixed his addictions will likely
not be fixed he is going to walk around
on the streets for another five or 10
years and something's gonna take him out
it could be a car it could be a bug
could be a crime but that's going to
happen and the you know there's there's
new what why should we care about
something like this image yet we do
deeply and and we have again a yearning
along and we have a sense that that
Shalom that that life the way it should
be has been deeply ruptured and we have
a yearning that it be that it be healed
and restored and we have a yearning that
and that there could be home and home
includes you know the the father and the
mother embracing the Sun now this
six-year-old individual is also divorced
because it's marriage couldn't take the
you know everything a father of four and
who his children I met one of his
children their young adults in their 20s
and and you see this and you you know my
heart longs for restoration my heart
longs for that they can find home and
you know even on the little short phone
call when the the 90 year old parents
and the 60 year old son are trying to
find each other in the conversation yeah
you know you can you just you just yearn
and long you see glimpses of
participation of home and and yet you
you long and you yearn for its for its
consummation yeah we don't know what we
have Inklings of what that would look
like but we don't know how we could make
it so and so you said and you watch and
you respect the holiness of the moment
and and you live you live in hope for
that consummation for him for his
parents for his children
and all along and and we all do that for
ourselves too because every marriage you
know there are moments in marriage of of
bliss yeah but there's they're far more
moments in marriage of longing of
longing for home of longing for
communion of of wishing that that we
could live up to the the needs and
desires of the other and the other could
live up to our needs and desires as well
and and it's it's in that tension I
think that we are pulled
we are pulled into the future and it's
institutions like marriage that actually
form and shape that institutions like
Parenthood that that do this and so you
know to bring it back to wisdom you know
wisdom is knowing how what is a marriage
marriage is you know wisdom plus agency
and and that then you get an institution
and and children hopefully will learn
from that yeah and it's just this oh my
you know you know as I'm thinking right
like I think we talked about
unconditional love like we know what
we're talking about right like what and
I'm really hearing a like it just a
erratic I'm getting a radically
different picture of what you're talking
about because on some level what I'm
hearing is that like with the father
who's been in his in whatever way that
he can at 60 is poring over and it's
almost certainly not gonna work out
right yet he pours right Eve hordes and
it's not like because it's not only not
what's interesting is when I think what
I'm getting I see if I can bring words
to it it's like I think if they walk
with this it's like I but I'm getting is
it's it's not only that he's doing it
knowing it's not gonna work
but even if it did work out that
yearning would still be there it's true
it's radically unconditional like honey
I'm thinking now I'm really thinking
about
[Music]
you know I've I've I've all oh I love
I've always been so intrigued by the two
fingers Michelangelo okay there's a rink
there's a profound reason why that
captured us right yeah it's like what I
my understanding is when I studied
painting it like that scene is always
before that was always very depicted
depicted where it's kind of like the
human being was the meat or one that was
yearning for God and like God was kind
of a you know a distance or an
indifference or sturdiness to it but all
doesn't like you know it's that it's
that painting is considered the
culmination or the peak of humanism of
the Renaissance right and no wonder it's
like because here Michael a Jose like
know God has tendons and guts and like
and it's like eternity actually yearns
for finitude right like that
that sense in the pit and they don't
touch and if they did touch no one would
even look at that painting it's that
they don't touch which is the thing that
touch is so touching about it right the
sense of and I oftentimes have gotten
that picture of like when I've been
really really like with people and like
you really see their hearts I could just
get this sense it's almost like in every
human heart is are those two fingers and
that experience you know and just like
the movie in the book that was written
about Michelangelo they call it the
agony and the ecstasy and there's like
this is this is like whatever this is
right seems to be an experience of
absolute like could be torturous but it
and the very same thing can be ecstatic
and I'm I'm just present to that as
you're talking of that on some level
we're talking about something so
personal
yeah right yet something
at the same time is so transpersonal
like so you know but almost like yeah
yeah it's really just really rich I just
kind of mostly just feel it my heart try
to bring words good ball you just open
my heart
well but that's beautiful and I never
you know I've seen that picture how many
times but I've never thought of yeah the
disc you know the I mean you're exactly
right you're exactly right that it
wouldn't if if there was like this and
you know everybody'd move on to the next
thing
Hey but now CS Lewis talked about that
as as as sense such where it's that's a
you know that's joy and longing and it's
it's this means this it's this ache in
our heart that is you know that we can't
get enough of you noticed algid rise two
tries to get at that but you nostalgia
sort of sells too cheap and no and and I
think that's and for Lewis it was that
that aching joy that drew him you know
you know that that's what that that's
what that's what drew him that's what
and I get that sense we are pulled
we are pulled into the future by the
future we are pulled into the future by
home yeah yeah in that and what I'm
really getting from this conversation in
a very in a very rich way is precisely
are somehow our innate homelessness
allows for the importance of home to be
forever important to us right but yet
never achieved in some kind of
mechanistic finalized way it's funny
like like I think about this picture you
know of course I like like being present
to this and then just looking at you
know housing complexes and suburb
and stuff like that I'm like oh yeah
this this is it really has it you know
show itself yeah yeah
thank you Paul this has been really
great
I unfortunately I have a client that I
have to I have to meet no this is this
is no you you're you're so generous guy
and and yeah now I really appreciate I
appreciate you I appreciate this kind of
really well if you move to Alameda I get
to Alameda semi-regularly yeah yeah yeah
I've got a friend there's a church in
Alameda so made it to Alameda so it
really it's really just send me an email
I'll send you my phone number too if you
want to text me let's go hopefully get
together okay yeah thank you guys thank
you so much huh
take care bye bye bye