welcome to my computer screen like it
seems like I'm I'm yours but I think
from my perspective you're on mine
that's fair enough
that's fair enough so have you talked to
Paul are you gonna be on his show as
I've been arranged yeah I'm in a couple
weeks
excellent and I know that crisp
Christopher master Pietro is going he's
gonna be talking to Paul this week so I
think Tuesday I think so that's really
good that's really cool I'm looking I'm
looking forward to actually live about
an hour and a half away from him from
Paul yeah I'm in Berkeley so since I
think he's in Sacramento so it's like an
hour 15 minutes so drive up there so I
hopefully I'll I'll actually be able to
experience him in 3d yeah III hope I get
to meet him there's a chance I might be
going out to California at some point
and I maybe I can visit a bunch of
people when I'm out there so that'd be
cool so I'm glad to see that your stuff
is catching fire and that's really good
yeah totally it's gonna be interesting
it has been interesting but you know
it's funny I'm getting a little bit of a
taste of more I think on some of our
vanities to this but just this
particular wave of being a public bigger
figure of some kind
yeah real interesting thing player I
know it's very different it's very
different yeah for sure
well just to have people be making
comments about you that don't
necessarily have you in consideration of
it it's just it
whether or not it's positive or negative
or neutral it's it's it's just a strange
experience well that's what I meant what
I said about you know how that triggers
sort of social phobic experiences of you
know exposure or for lack of a better
term it's very much the case I really
liked the rebel wisdom thing I thought
they
you are happy with it because I thought
they captured you and you're thinking
very very well very very clearly yeah I
thought it was handled very very nicely
I I mean I like the way David became
particularly personally involved in that
discussion I thought that was very you
know sort of courageous on his part you
know cuz he's play
capable and good at sort of an
intellectual level entering into you
know dialogue and discourse but he he
clearly wanted to interact with you at a
deeper level and so I could that came
through really really clearly I really
only thought it was very good oh thank
you yeah I really enjoyed him he
actually came out he came out did
another interview live together oh it's
not gonna be part of the series as well
no I think oh that's excellent well done
that's great it was it was good cuz he
came he actually came to one of our
circling events Oh
drop-in events and so he got circles and
he got the experience the whole thing
and we did the interview before that so
it was really good he had just come back
from Burning Man okay
I've never been to Burning Man but I've
I think I've of course talk to people
have come back with really really mind
of zapped by it so yeah I'd be
interested to hear your take on what
Burning Man is it's a phenomena that I
think actually if you experienced it
given all of the the frames that you've
set up right and the distinctions that
you've made especially given the sense
that you know because basically you look
at it what's Burning Man
well first there's nothing literally
where no trees or anything and then for
no any no particular solid reason a
hundred and fifty thousand people show
up and build a city and burn a man right
at the end of that week and really they
have different themes about what the man
means but actually the man part of
what makes it Burning Man is the man
doesn't really mean anything in
particular right in so many ways it
seems to be this full enactment right a
pattern like participatory knowing right
right that doesn't actually have a it
person it's precisely what it is because
it doesn't have any propositional great
right right that's cool all right
there's no no sort of paradigmatic
assertions that people have to adhere to
or anything like that and that's it you
woven into the fabric of it and people
show up in my in my view it's changed I
first went to in 1995 right and the fact
I went to it I didn't even know until I
went back to it four years later that
that's where I was um a long time ago
and I think now it's gotten a quiet
it's gotten pretty commercialized in a
lot of different ways so it's it's some
of its luster for a lot of people if
there's really broken down I haven't
been there since 2012 but I was already
seeing that a little bit right however I
think it really does speak a lot to what
you're highlighting yeah I thought about
that it may it would even be interesting
going there as sort of a participant
observer kind of thing almost
anthropologically to see that maybe but
I mean it like so after I do the after
socrates theory I have another series on
the god beyond God and reinventing the
sacred and so that might be a good
excuse to go there and and and film that
the God beyond God and the reinvention
of the sacred and the reinvention of the
sacred yeah is that are those are those
is that the Socrates series no no the
Socrates series is coming there so that
the morning I mentioned to you the after
Socrates series right so after Socrates
the cultivation of wisdom and meaning
through authentic dialogue that's the
next series so that's just I'm just
nailing down who the crew is going to be
doing a lot of the initial research
right now
so I'm planning on that being sort of a
20 video series 20 you know 20 videos 20
episodes and sort of like I said this
time yeah making it shorter and I what I
want to do is I want to like like I said
I want to zero in on well work like
you're doing and the work I see Peter
doing and this work all this for you the
stuff I even saw it stoic on on Sunday
you know with this there's this whole
authentic discourse movement and I think
it is so Socratic in a lot of the ways
its functioning and in the ways it's
starting to represent itself and what I
want to do is I want to take that and
put it into dialogue with some of the
really really excellent work that's just
coming out now on re understanding
diatonic dialectic we understanding
Socratic and linkus and set up a
dialogue between those and as I
mentioned to you this idea that
originally was sparked for a discussion
I had with Jordan Hall that that's where
that's where I see something like the
meta psycho technology that Shepherds
the ecology of practices for responding
to the meeting crisis and that's what I
want to explore because that's basically
the function that dialectic had and the
whole Neoplatonic the ecology of
practices right dialectic was always
these the sort of meta psycho technology
for coordinating all the other practices
and so it's always talked about it
simultaneously with the highest regard
and the most frustrating lack of clarity
like when you're reading the ancient
literature it's like they're all but of
course dialectic and then what but what
is it how do I do it
and so I'm trying to get very clear on
all of that and then of course put that
all into dialogue with all the emerging
cognitive science about cognition sense
making meaning making distributed
cognition flow states within distributed
cognition you know a lot of the stuff
that you and I have been talking about
that's going to be at the core of the
new series
like I said I really want to focus it in
also on the figure of Socrates because I
want I want to try and tap into up here
hadou talked about how you know the
figure of Socrates serves this symbolic
function that you don't get just with
you know a theoretical representation of
these ideas configuring it around a
figure who you can then interact with at
least within the fictional world of the
dialogues and other like that that that
gives it a kind of presence and power
that a purely theoretical representation
won't do so that's that's exactly why
I'm going to do that and then and then
the third reason is my personal
commitment to Socrates as the hero and
the way I see for example on Sunday his
stoicism is all about internalizing
Socrates as the sage you internalize as
a fundamental way of life and so again
what the way this is taking off as a
movement is again something I want to
bring in so I can also speak to it from
my my own personal you know commitment
and will and what the figure of Socrates
has meant to me so those are sort of the
three things I'm going to bring in so I
mean your work maybe we'll even have you
come in and talk at one point I would if
you're up for that you're right yeah
very much right is gonna is gonna be in
that new series and like I said some of
the stuff I see with the stoic movement
other practices though I hope to talk to
some of the people who are you know
involved with authentic relating and
just yeah
yeah there's a there's a um well couple
things so
one is I've just been enjoying that the
diet Li I'm going kind of text dialogue
that we've been adding me too very much
I mean it's I mean it's it's it's I've
got that last one we had where we were
just huge texts back and forth to each
other
alright that yeah I thought I found that
was so good I was talking to David
Chapman today he's he's doing a lot of
work he he was doing he's doing we did
we sort of discovered each other
he's done a lot of work on the meeting
crisis and what he calls the problem of
meaning this and we're gonna we're gonna
start exchanging Socratic letters to
each other peter lindbergh i set this
all up but i was i was saying i was
saying to him and and i hope for some
charity on the part of people who might
listen to this that does not submit to
be elitist but you know it's a hunger
for peers who I can talk to about this
stuff and you know so being able to talk
to you about this you know just you know
I get a thought like you just text you
and you do the same with me and it's
that sense of erudite company in the
project is it's so nurturing I find it
so beneficial it's it's so good well
precisely I think one of the like the
benefits and the nature of it is really
interesting because there's such a well
I'll put it to you like this
so you made I texted you after one time
and you texted me back and my wife was
sitting there right and and it was about
you it was I think after listening to
the rebel wisdom wrote me and you'd said
oh I love the distinction you're making
between curiosity and wonder in that
distinction that came came out a few
episodes later right I read it I read it
to my my wife Brianne and she started
laughing my god that is like the best
text that you could ever receive some
[Laughter]
ecstatic overjoyed you know because
she's like I thought I'm just glad that
you have a friend yeah well that's too
that for me that is really one of its
super heartfelt and it I want to say
it's a it's a particular kind of love
mm-hmm explosive like it's different
than something like unconditional love
right record love was just that sense of
like no matter how you turn up no matter
what happens I love you plate right it's
not it's not like it's not that but it
has a different quality of like oh my
god I love you for this
yeah no that's exactly that's and that's
gonna be in that's gonna be in the next
series right the five Leah that's at the
core of philosophy a-- and how that how
philosophy is different than far law
finally ikea instead of like the did
that work that shared love right for
wisdom as opposed to the the pursuit of
victory right that yeah and it's it it's
where I'm trying to struggle here it's
it's it's a different kind of thing it's
it I
I know it's often translated as
friendship love and that's a word that
comes to mind but it's not the same
thing as friendship there's something
else you and I were sort of talking
about that and that text conversation I
was trying to say yeah yeah you know I
was trying to say it's it I see what's
going on and circling but when you and I
are talking sometimes it's not just the
circling it's it's the folia that is
also being there's a share
directionality we're pursue we're in Co
pursuit of something right and and and
that's that's that's what I see find
Leah as capturing right and I almost
want a different metaphor for rather
than the circling metaphor I wanna I
wanna this metaphor right that were you
know there's we're caught up in this
dream together that's what Lee said
that's how that's how it seems to me
that's very well said you know what's
interesting for me is there's a quality
to it right
and like what you're saying it's it's
not just you and I yeah
and thoughts and feelings and
experiences of just each other in this
kind of circular
interaction it's not just personal
intimacy that's right there's a way in
which we're sharing the horizon yes but
part of the sharing I think is something
like the experience of the experience of
realizing that we're sharing yes in that
and that in that real realization is
like as if we kind of come to aware that
we're walking together facing the thing
that we can't quite put words to well
that's that's it right there
comes down back and that's where I think
it for me hermetically circles
background because it reveals the ground
and that's exactly I was gonna say I
feel like there's a third partner right
where the space of intelligibility is
also like it's it's playing a vital role
it's disclosing itself and it's
affording right the dialogue in an
important way and right so it's not only
that there's this reciprocal realization
happening between you and I there's a
logos that's happening between you and I
that's in reciprocal relationship with
this sort of field of intelligibility
because it feels it feels more you know
the the there's a great Latin word for
this invent fiora inventio which covers
both invention and discovery it feels
like that it's not something we're
inventing it's we're not just
discovering it the way you discover that
your table is five feet long or
something like that it's more like you
know it's it's hangs between being an
invention and a discovery but at but
that's what I also see in the Platonic
dialogues right the the deal logos
there's the way of the logos by means of
the logos right and so that's that's
that's again what I'm trying to what I
want to I want to get clearer on and
that's why I feel like burdened you last
time I was just sending you these long
long texts because I was struggling to
try and articulate this together
there you go once again I just got I
just wear my plugger bed I'm looking for
we you know and there's something about
where I kind of got something the impact
you know so on one level we're talking
about you know our connection yeah I
think at the same time you can kind of
hear this horizon of where we're also
talking about something that happens a
phenomenon happens right yeah there's a
there's a there's a coming into the
dialogue from I mean the spatial
metaphors can be very misleading so I'm
depending on your charity here but
there's a sense of something coming into
the dialogue from outside the dialogue
right it's coming in right and and
that's why I like the horizon in the
sense that the horizon is also connected
to the affordance of the ground that
suddenly opens up in front of you so
that you can walk forward right and that
reminds me again of course of Plato's
idea if you're coming out of the cave
right you you take a step forward you're
blinded by the light but then your eyes
adjust and then you can see ground that
you couldn't see before so you can move
forward then something that hits you
again and you're blinded again your eyes
accommodate you can now see new ground
again and that's how you do the Anegada
how that's how you move out and I feel
like that's what's what's happening when
we're in this discourse right you know
there's something happens and then
there's a a light comes in right we're
sort of then we accommodate to it and
that accommodation is what I'm trying to
convey by that it's coming from outside
the dialogue and then as we accommodate
we both simultaneously right see how to
go forward how to move forward and I'm
that that's that's a very that's it
that's a very I think central aspect to
the platonic dialogue that we have lost
in the note we've lost in this new more
modern notion of the debate right
especially that the debate and insofar
as the debate has moved into right you
know the the adversarial thing you know
it's important for people to disagree
you watched the video with Paul and I we
disagree on a lot but nevertheless there
was there was still that sense
right that sense of you know it like
he'd have an insight have it an insight
there's a sharing and then things open
up and you move forward and and that
that I this is why I'm so excited right
well first of all it's great to have
formed a relationship with you well I'm
so excited about like getting your work
for lack of a better term your project I
don't know which project is more high
daguerreian so I'll say your project
right so it's getting your project more
into this this this marketplace you know
the the corner of the Internet where
people are really wanting to get beyond
 and I can it means Socrates is
the great master of overcoming
right right right and being for
people who are kind of new to this
conversation you you you have a you have
a technical yeah very technical so the
sense I have and is deeply influenced by
Frankfurt and then some of my own work
so Frankfurt distinguishes distinguishes
between the lawyer and the
artist the liar depends on your
commitment to the truth that you care
about the truth to affect your behavior
so the lawyer gets you to believe
something Susan loves you that isn't
true because if you believe it to be
true that will change your behavior and
very predictable reliable way so that's
how the lie that's why the lie are lies
because it's depending on your your
commitment to the truth the
artist doesn't work that way the
 artist tries to get you
disinterested into whether or not
something is true or false and instead
and this is where I sort of move be I
try and draw what I think was implied by
Frankfurt what I argue is the
artist depends on the salience of the
information how catchy it is how much it
sort of like will earworm and weave its
way in and so the classic example I give
of this is like a commercial right in
which you know you're watching somebody
drinking alcohol and there's all these
attractive people around them and you
know that's not true you know it's not
true you go into a bar you see desolate
people right but but that doesn't matter
in fact they are depending on you smugly
saying to yourself
I know that's not true because that's
where you put aside the question of
truth but then what happens is the
stimuli are still super salient to you
there's all these attractive people
there's a liquid being drunk right the
the lighting is beautiful and so you end
up buying the alcohol precisely because
it was salient and salient in a way that
has been disconnected from the pursuit
of you know your understanding of the
truth and so that and what's really
important for for me guy about that and
what I see how I see that relevant to
the Socratic project is right
constructed ease was involved with the
natural philosophers have cared about
the truth but didn't really get into you
know the transformative aspects of it
and then the Sophists who were really
good at manipulating salience but seem
to were sort of disconnected from the
question of truth I see Socrates is
trying to always keep those together so
that we get transformative truth right
and why that's crucial is because you
well this gets into sort of
philosophical enquiries but you you you
can't lie to yourself we use that
metaphor and I'm kind of very critical
of that metaphor because it's a very
misleading metaphor because first of all
you can't lie to yourself because you
can't know some things not the truth and
secondly beliefs aren't things you do
right if they're not voluntary actions
so you can't lie to yourself you know
what you can do you can
yourself because your attention you
write can be directed by you you can
direct your attention to something and
make it salient but the thing is once
something has been salient it then tends
to catch your attention and so you can
create this loop you can participate in
the self-organizing nature of attention
and how it alter salience so that you
get dragged into right buying that
particular brand of alcohol voting for
this particular politician right all
that kind of stuff and so I see
bullshitting as anathema to what we're
trying to do here and I see Socrates
precisely because he explicitly rejects
both the natural scientists and the
Sophists as wanting to find a way
in which the salient seeking and that
and the truth-seeking are wedded
together and that's what that's what I
see all the authentic discourse they're
trying to provide an on-the-ground
antidote response to the ever increasing
pervasive bullshitting in our society
and in our psyches and authentic
discourse is a Socratic way of trying to
address that sorry that was a bit of a
speech but that's like that this is
really central I think to too much to my
to my understanding appreciation of
what's going on in things like circling
and the other authentic discourse
practices wouldn't you say that you were
in a certain sense and you're just for
even just right now like when you said
forgive my speech yeah you were I think
you were highlighting that hey I just
gave you a lot of salience Yeah right
however the the context in which you
were giving that salines from was to
highlight something in reality that was
true that was important
well yes I mean that's exactly right I'm
trying to get wet the the salience of
the of how I'm presenting the material
to what I think what is an understanding
of an important aspect of the way human
connection
human communication human communing even
because there's there's there's a
fraudulent communing going on between
you and the people in in the alcohol
commercial it's like you're sharing a
world but you're not it's there's no
real world there that you're sharing
together and so I'm trying to get the
salience of our discourse glued back
together towards this sort of Socratic
insight about you know a deeper
understanding of what what dialogue can
be doing for us Frank Wow okay so I'm
really well a couple a couple of things
one is I'm understanding the text even
more the text that you had sent me where
we were talking about are you saying
that
yeah maybe what what circling is
right it's possibly pointing to this
meta this meta psycho technology for
psycho technologies yeah something
essential that that in your
understanding of circling and what I'm
hearing is also that is also very much
similar to your understanding and
experience of Socratic dialogue exactly
exactly
at any any downstream psycho technology
that's developed if it's upstream from
these two things where reality and
salience are me we've fitted towards
each other in a way that reveals more
reality that can be salient to us yes
seems to be the thing that helps one
makes it transformative yes there are
participation so now it's not just
knowing you end result of being for
information that you arrive at but that
the other part of the knowing I think is
something like what it took for you to
have what that information was a dialog
that were in some way changed the one
knowing it totally and this this is this
is an abiding theme of the Socratic and
Linkous the the deal logos is it messed
with know thyself Socrates is motto
right which and this is not you know
know yourself in some sort of
superficial autobiographical fashion
it's this kind of right get to the guts
of the machinery of yourself and you
only get to the guts of something if you
know if you're engaged in right this
project I'm reading a book right now
it's called it's by more on on Socrates
and self-knowledge any argues that you
know this self-knowledge is is
inherently self constructive like you
this is not as it's not a fully formed
self that you're discovering it's a self
that you're actually constructing your
your your bringing to your bringing and
intelligibility to it that and here's
what I'm really gonna really play on
this word that realizes the self you
know makes it more real have an
intelligible structure and that's that's
hallmark of realness for the Greeks and
also makes it more understandable for
you and so that project of self knowing
if we understand it as self-realization
and I want to hear something deeper than
just a Maslow meaning of that right that
that right that's amassed with again
what you and I were talking about about
the deal logos how there's a logos that
forms between us that unpacks the space
of intelligibility because only by
communing with that space of
intelligibility can you internalize it
into the intelligibility of the self
right that that's how the two are bound
so deeply together yes yes and that wind
up win that binding what I'm hearing you
say is that when that binding with
reveals itself is the ground that then
reveals more of what even called the
binding together in the first place yes
very much really appreciated what you
said in our first interview and I've
been noticing myself kind of from the
bottom up using a lot of these
pathologies and then recognizing it
after the fact
which I which I want to talk all about a
little bit because I think that that's
demonstrates the impact of these kinds
of conversations that are more than just
figuring something intellectually out
though that's right
demonstrates a kind of in some way my
term our dialogues together I noticed
that in a pre reflective way I am
putting things in terms that I hadn't
used before without recognizing it until
after the fact well I was keyed on
something you said once and you used you
paused and you and you sort of unpacked
it a bit then and then you moved on and
I can't maybe it was with David or
something I've watched some of your
circling but you pause on the notion of
coming to terms which which carries with
it exactly what you're talking about
like the coming to terms you're bringing
things to terms to intelligible
discourse but there's also the sense of
essential confrontation and you and that
you need to go through a transformation
to like when people say well you need to
come to terms with this means well
you've got to change how you're relating
and responding to this so I really
enjoyed that little thing you did around
May is coming to terms because I thought
oh wow that's really really that's
really that's a really succinct way of
demonstrating in you know in that phrase
what you're talking about I really
appreciate it I like that a lot actually
so glad I what's one of the things I'm
noticing in these and this is where I
get some some interesting things about
open enough about the the conversations
in the medium that they're taking place
in and in how I actually am wondering
about if the way is you say our little
corner of the internet yeah that's
that's the belly king's term which i
think is just wonderful just you oh
that's another person I want you to
eventually talk to because her stuff on
zen and the art of motorcycle
maintenance and all the stuff she's
trying to do around the the metaphysics
of quality she and I had a really really
good discussion yeah yeah I'll put a
link to I'll put a link to that dialogue
that was really great we know but I
think I I think she would get well I
think you wouldn't you would find a
mutually beneficial to talk but go ahead
yeah the little corner of the of the
internet yeah well a couple of things so
my so you know my understanding of what
Heidegger's one of the things that
Heidegger is really profoundly revealed
which it's stunning that it's one of
those things about and I noticed I like
I'm attracted to thinkers that have this
I have this quality but would you which
is they don't stop yielding that horizon
right and one of this the last number of
years that I've I've really come to
appreciate about the way that tight a
girl talked about the age this being an
age of technology
right and what he doesn't what is it
what he's not talking about my
understanding it's kind of to mistreat
Heidegger if you think that he's talking
about technological objects you know
know if you what referring to is that
there that every age has its
understanding of being the being of
beings in other words everything that we
can see thinks a encounter is a being
the one thing that can't become a being
is the sense of beingness it discloses
in its revel in the way that beings show
themselves reveals and conceals it's
being right background just Mulder and
what he said about my understanding is
what he said about the age of technology
is that it's it's it's where it's not
it's not that the cart sense of being as
subjects standing over against objects
that's like you a accounted for the
Industrial Revolution play a mechanician
that kind of thing he's like somewhere
around World War two especially when you
get like well what is it that allowed
for something like the Holocaust
happened right any and I think did that
really struck him and he he's like there
is a different understanding of being
right that's going on there and maybe it
was connected to that and a bunch of
other things and where he started to
realize oh we are in the age of
technique in the age of techne
our understanding of that which is is
being is a standing and reserved yeah
other standing reserve you very much a
waiting awaiting endless calculation and
optimization of of everything that is
and one of the things that he what he
talks about it and this is really it's
really eerie to wake up to this in what
because part of the waking up to it is
to be horrified that you that you
weren't even
sleep - and it was so concealed to you
and so so a lot of our current age you
could say is you know endless shopping
malls Internet's right the kind of the
sense in which the only thing that we
can wage being show themselves to us now
are just things for further optimization
for their own sake right yeah I agree
and this the the the the sense of the
standing reserve is that their
relationship to us is always one of
service right there they're always there
and we get this even on the idea of
things being Natural Resources right
that they're far they're fundamental
ontology is how they stand in service to
us and I think Heidegger was right that
that is part of the UH the the problem
with the Anto theological because the
idea of nature of fuzzers ultimately
being understood in its in its
relationship of being in service to us
the only it exists only insofar as it's
in service to us I think that's also the
fundamental because the degree to which
we see everything that way and that we
like I like Harmons point about this
right why should we think that half of
ontology is us right that's great like
you there that's such an arrogant a sort
of thing right and then until you get
you know you get Heidegger's whole
exploration of foods this is that which
blooms without a purpose without a why
that has no teleological
and we it precisely has its being
because it has no use for us right we
can't find well how is that going to
serve me and his it's precisely
disclosing its being in how it is not
going to serve you and this is why I've
sort of been trying to get to you know I
don't know IIIi want to tread very
lightly here but yet that there is you
know there's not we've got to give up
that but there's got to be a grand
cosmic TD ology that everything is in
some sir in some sense service to us
personal I just think that does not
comport well with the way the cosmos is
clearly laid out with 99.9% of it having
absolutely nothing to do with us both in
time and in space right so I think
that's a ridiculous claim to make
ontological II but also because of what
we've just said the implicit idea that
think that the being of things is their
being in service to us is to lose is to
lose the mystery the depth the way
things withdraw their autonomy from us
right I think that's for me
the crucial message on getting out of
this and so too I'm even I'm even trying
to challenge gently because I respect
the people and I'm in discourse with I
really do but I'm trying to challenge
the idea of understanding meaning as
purpose where purpose is this service
right their service to our t loss our
goal our projects
it's like know if connectedness to being
right and ultimately to the ground of
being to sacredness can't be a
relationship of just how does that sing
serve my goals yes sorry but that I feel
very strongly about this because I think
I think that's a I think that's this for
me that's what I took that's what I take
from heidegger's notion the idea that
the being of something is it's being in
service to me right totally and what I'm
saying about like a couple of things is
like I have a in in the years of
circling and doing it and cultivating it
and trying to figure out how to teach it
which is all of it has been I would say
an experience of the opposite yes very
much
yeah the collapsing of all distances
right which is if you look at like the
more technological something it is the
more collapses distances so one of the
things that Heidegger I think really
points out is this interesting paradox
which that which is most concealed is
that which is most near right so
technology and if you notice it's
literally getting nearer and nearer and
nearer right like was it
you know mascara to the chips yeah you
can kind of understand what made it
possible to disclose have things appear
in such a way that like even my brain
right become something that I can see it
how how can we collapse the distance
between my brain and my brain basically
yeah what's interesting about that is
that what did what that and I think what
you're what you're talking about is that
what that ends up concealing is one is
the notion of concealed miss itself yes
a as we identify with our technology
like if you touch my clothing I get
offended because I'm so identified with
it so please continue yeah totally
well it's kind of like if you just get
another like concrete analogy imagine
imagine tomorrow you woke up and like
imagine it was 1970s right this is 1970
and you woke up and he still thought it
was 1970 and then you went to the BART
station or the bus stop and then you
watched everybody at the bus stop just
look in not looking up and everybody
passing each other and everyone doing it
and then no one having here's that
here's the eerie part is that no one
having a conversation about you probably
have thoughts like oh my god it got us
right yeah there's some totalitarian
regime that is somehow inseminated it's
it's it's wiretapping and it's all
around us and who we we've some we've
succumbed yeah that's very much the case
yeah so I get that I get that so there's
very much to use a plane you term it the
technology is transparent to us we see
through it and beyond and by means of it
and beyond it and we weave law we're
losing the capacity to stand back and
look at it and and and so I mean look
here I am and you know in my apartment
and you know all of the objects around
me are here because they're in service
to
Yeah right and and so uh and I'm not
even if I hadn't but you know reading
Heidegger or in this discourse would I
even notice how much I've lost the sense
right because the only way I tend to
experience things not being in service
and with what to me is frustration this
is why this is why again why Socrates
again philosophy begins in wonder wonder
is the sense of oh wow that that has an
existence above and beyond me and but
I'm not experiencing that as frustration
the things aren't serving me I'm
experienced it is a no-no ultimately I
have to fit into this I have to
resituated I have to hum it to this it
puts a demand on me right yeah and our
demand that it be immediately
intelligible for it to be valid is is I
think is is it starting to define a
whole age I mean we now have we now have
kids that this is really interesting to
think about
we now have like a whole generation it
doesn't have a memory before the
internet yeah I know
and so the the I mean the internet the
internet by every standards of the
ancient world as a god it's omnipresent
it it it gives advice it provides
massive amounts of information it
directs you it gives all these normative
standards because you're judged by the
community of the Internet if you say or
do the wrong thing and yet right
although that's the case that in it is
very much a God for us the potential for
idea for idolatry the potential for
narcissism because that's again when
everything's in if God is ultimately in
service to you that's the ultimate
narcissism right and so all of that is
transparent to us yeah
in a really telling fashion so I I think
you mean if you can see how you know
there's all these feet well not all of
them that's that's too grandiose but
many of the themes were touching upon
now here they're right in that Socratic
milieu right Socrates is bringing them
all up right he's fact he actually
frustrates when he actually like I
thought yeah like he actually frustrates
the people in the dialogue who command
easy or demand or pretend to have you
know readily ready-made intelligibility
so I mean if you look at the dialogues
that are often pitched that way those
often be two people Gonzalez does a
really great job of this in his book
right there's like you know in the
Lyceus where he's talking to the two
generals and so what you get is you get
one person who represents the the
authority of intuition I just know it
Courage's I just know it I can just
speak it right and then and then you get
on the other side you you get the the
the the student of the sophist who's
captured some dialogue so not something
like that's exactly the wrong word who's
captured some slogan or phrase not
within dialogue he's just heard it from
the sophist and now he has the
definition and so Socrates is rejecting
both the intuitive I know I know
and the I've defined it a gothic I've
got the final definition and he's
frustrating both of those claims to an
easy lis accessible intelligibility
right right and that process of enduring
that frustration and returning to that I
know in Socrates is continuing yeah
returning to that to the not knowing the
aporia the aporia I mean that's what
Socrates induces and he's compared to
like he's compared to a stingray or a
magician because you get caught up and
you and you don't know to think about
what holy what we talked about earlier
you don't know how to go forward because
you can't go forward until you're
willing to commit to a transformation
yes and that
that which you can commit to right that
which if you commit to it can be
transformative in the act of committing
to it
I think whatever that is hmm cannot be
optimized by in other words it cannot it
does not reveal itself as as standing in
reserve ah awaiting awaiting my
calculation because and this is one of
the things I think that that that you
are talking about I believe which is and
and it brings us back to the medium that
we're in right now rarely heard of the
Internet
I think it's unique and I think Reverend
was wisdoms doing this I think I think
you're doing this with your series I
think this is an example of this is a
place where actually technology is not
be is not it is offering not something
that leads to further enhance technology
but rather its delivering something
inherently untechnical right called
conversations that are difficult right
that that's conversations that don't
collapse distances and I would add are
viewed as useless by a lot of people
because where's the bottom line what
like where is the conclusion like who
won all of those questions are I mean
they're being so deeply frustrated that
they're even being marginalized and
what's happening between us right now we
I mean there is a joint file eeeh in us
in that they are not going to be the
constraints the t loss under which we
are governed in our discourse right now
and I think that's really important yes
and that's something about that win that
mutual recognition of that we're both
seeing that we're we're both seeing the
the Haley attic relationship mm-hmm
right as we're walking to it that gives
the ground lies we recognize that Oh
without even quite knowing it in some
way we've been oriented to something
beyond the horizon and our conversations
have locked us there for the ground of a
relationship reveals two reveals that
unknowingness that like that sense of
the unknown the the the the more nests
revealed yes that in such a way that it
has us deep in that ground that opens us
up to more novelty of more of that like
infinite source of intelligibility yeah
I try to capture that by making like
talking about how Wonder is picking up
on the qualitative more honest not just
a quantitative more Ness all right so
the quantitative morna's is you know I
gather more information and I think
that's more what curiosity is about
whereas wonder it opens me up to new
kinds of information new kinds of
intelligibility that's why I wonder is
so much more associated with awe and
with insight and so the way I try to do
this because what you're talking about
think about it think about the challenge
of this for somebody who's a scientist
right because so how I try to do this as
I try to make it to stick what can we
have scientific theories about and what
can we not have scientific theories
about and I try to do this very
carefully and so I try to make an
argument I don't know if you've seen the
episode or not that we we cannot have
there is no and I mean this in
Aristotelian sense there is no essence
to relevance there is no final
representations or sometimes I'll use
the very and I mean this phrase to be
shocking there is no final solution to
what is relevant right what cause
relevance is something that exists
inherently as it's evolving and you have
to you have to be careful about how the
language miss you leaves you it's not
there there's this thing that's evolving
it's it is only it
only exists in its evolution like your
biological fitness was the analogy I use
right it's it's an it's only exists as
an ongoing constantly evolving thing so
if you'll allow me that analogy there
there is no essence to other then you
survive long enough to reproduce which
is just a formula right there is nothing
that all the creatures that survive long
enough to reproduce share that makes
them fit some are big some are small
some are fast some are slow right there
is no homogeneous set there is no
essence to fitness so Darwin can't give
you a theory of fitness there can by
analogy there can be no theory of what's
relevant
right but what Darwin does is he gives
you an account of the dynamical system
by which fitted NIST is constantly
evolving that's what I try to do with my
relevance realization theory you have a
theory about how relevance is constantly
evolving
well then explicitly arguing that there
can be no definition no essence no final
key loss no culminating point at which
we say now we have it now it's finished
we've got relevance and this is it and
that's I think also to bring it back
around I think that's also part of the
high daguerreian and critique of Anto
theology there is no Supreme Being in
the sense of the place the entity we're
in right relevance is finalized
completed it comes to an end and I think
that was also part of Heidegger's note
at least that's dreyfuses right part of
dreyfuses right critique reality is
perpetually and irredeemably and forever
and ever
combinatorially explosive to us and we
can never exhaust it with our relevance
realization machinery yes so that's how
I try to put that together because the
issue you're bringing up guy is it's a
challenge I it's a a a a and I don't
want to shy away from that it's a
serious challenge for somebody who's
ultimately a scientist because like how
do you work how do you work in
sorry my phone thinks I'm gay
they're calling you
it yeah the challenge of what can I
bring what can i what is it I'll use a
stronger language what is appropriate
for me to bring the scientific project
of rendering things theoretically
intelligible what sits well what is it
appropriately to bring that to and where
does that very same framework tell me no
this is something that right we have to
talk about as not being capturable like
I I so I I resist a me like I say and
I'm gonna use this phrase again to be
provocative I resist any final solutions
like this this is this is the absence
right there I want to I want to decouple
the notion of sacredness from perfection
where perfection means the final
complete finished PD illogical eco
motive you know end to the whole project
of relevance and say no sacredness is
about the the ongoing inexhaustible
fountain intelligibility the mornin ever
exhaust with our all of our efforts of
meaning making incense making it is the
doubt like it's like the doubt it is a
well that we use but we can never use up
and that never being able to use it up
it's precisely at sacredness right
there's there's an aspect of it that was
always not in service to us but
therefore always affords us to self
transcend
yes it is is it would you say that a
part of what you're choosing out and
elicited eliciting right
is showing how you can discover the
machinery right yeah science right the
propositional understanding and the
corollary sense of truth that you can
reveal how even what science can reveal
is oriented or can point towards and
supports and is even in some way
revealing to that that horizon they
can't never be comported totally I mean
so this is where I am trying to argue
that there is a way of talking about
sacredness by sacredness I mean the
experience and then the sacred is
whatever the ontological ground of that
experience is right so that science of
course can talk about sacredness in
terms of this relevance realization
machinery and but it can also talk it
could tell us right that that ultimately
puts us into a participatory
relationship with the sacred where the
sacred is something that I think is
completely consistent with the
scientific worldview which is again the
combinatorial explosive nature of
reality that look if you understand what
relevant what relevance realization is
dealing with that reality is
combinatorially explosive in terms of
the options for action and the
information available and the levels of
analysis that are perpetually open to us
and accept and then it's not a static
thing out there it's dynamic and all of
those things are dynamic and self
complexify and you know there's other
people doing this work Stuart Copeland's
doing work on reinventing the sacred
where he's trying to get no no let's
let's get this new notion of the sacred
as right as I put it as the
inexhaustible ground that is a perpetual
fount of intelligibility and this is why
I like the Neoplatonic notion of the one
because the one is not itself
intelligible it is the it is the never
failing source of intelligibility but it
itself resists all of our project for
intelligibility price precisely because
it's the ground of an
eligibility right right now so there's
this one I'm really getting this I'm
really getting like now as we're talking
is the the orientation to that which is
worthy of orienting to yes
she looks ultimate concern right the
ultimate concern is can't ever be summed
up and grab the whole love in some final
way but that yet it is the source of
inexhaustible intelligibility right
that's in and that there's something
innately healthy and this is where I
would imagine being human in particular
right this is brought you here what you
think about this there's a way that the
particular way that the human being
opens to reality seems to be inherently
that there's something very healthy
about being oriented to that which you
can't completely grasp I think so like
something about that sense of I know who
is it Maximus the Confessor he said
something I heard this through the
theologian the modern theologian David
Bentley Hart
I think it's just he's really he's
really something um for what anything's
a coated maximus and i've been thinking
about this ever since he says like for
maximus the professor who i think he was
a hero in like the 700 AD sound and i
believe so yeah well maybe a little bit
earlier i'm not sure
jonathan pezzo talks all about maximus
too like very very neat like ground in
Neoplatonism very much so very much he's
deeply influenced by pseudo-dionysius
very very much and so what what he said
is that what
was that the ground of our being or the
being of human being is an is an
existential astonishment at the given
mrs. B mm-hmm other words like how I Wow
how I hear that is its it's not like I'm
a being that then can feel astonished at
things it's more what he's getting at is
that the structure of my being in my
being or you could say even say I would
imagine the openness of consciousness
braylee and it's coupled miss with the
world the ground of that that openness
itself is made of and presupposes the
astonishment at the givenness of being
yeah yes I think so I mean I'm doing I'm
reading a book on Maximus theory of
knowledge and I'm reading a book also on
John scarda Sara Geno's on all of this
partially because I'm trying to deepen
my capacity to enter into a deeper
dialogue with Jonathan Perot so I and I
can't read John SCOTUS makes use of a
notion which I think Maximus uses but my
Gregory unisys definitely uses which is
epic thesis so the idea is not is is not
we don't come to a final resting place
so this is a standard model of sort of
salvation and in heaven and you know and
the vision of God but the notion of epic
thesis is no no God gods gods infinity
to use the scholastic way of putting
what we're talking about but he's but
that doesn't demean a quantitative Morna
slike the infinity of a line it means
the qualitative more nuts right
God's infinity is the perpetual
affordance of our perpetual self
transcendence so we constantly write
more and more of what we are is being
revealed in the self transcendence and
more and more of God is being right but
the but the joy of it is not to have
come to
final resting place 80 loss the joy of
it is in and I'll use well use a cog
site term here the joy of it is the flow
we're in a perpetual ongoing increasing
flow state that's that's what we're
Altima after which I thought was that
that's a really really interesting idea
and I would go and I would go to say
towards your notion of health right and
so this is and I got to talk about this
later when I in the series when I talk
about the divine double in work like
Corbin and young and people like that
until like the relationship between the
essential self and the existential self
right so I just call it has written a
really beautiful book called aspiration
and she talks about aspiration is when
you want to acquire an identity and a
set of values that you currently do not
have which means those values and
identity can't be motivating and driving
you she gives the example of someone who
wants to come to love classical music
who does not currently love classical
music right she uses that as their
thought experiment and so she's not
motivated by a love of classical music
and she's not motivated by an identity
that is bound to classical music
precisely because that is what she lacks
but she wants to become to have that
identity so this is the process of that
of aspiration and you can't sort of
compute your way through it and infer
your way through it but but then she
makes an astonishingly what I think is a
neo platonic point she says notice that
if you say I can't infer my way through
that I can't use you sort of standard
decision metric measures right because
I'm trying to acquire our value I don't
have I'm trying to acquire right an
identity I don't have I'm trying to go
through some kind of transformative
experience right she says if you say
that's not rational precisely because
you can't reason your way through it
right and then I do a little bit of a
riff on her work but here's the riff I
do though I think bring out her argument
if you say that the ass but that
aspiration is not itself a rationally
justifiable process notice what a bind
you're going to get into because you
know one of the things we should aspire
to being more rational and if the
aspiration to rationality is not
something that it is itself can be
rationally justified
then rationality becomes this self
undermining process right it's becomes
the self undermining demand on you
so she says we have to extend the notion
of rationality to include this
aspiration now here's why that comes
back to your point we have to be in
relationship that has a demand on us is
something that currently exceeds our
value and identity in order to afford
aspiration we have this when you can't
get so we have to have a relationship
that has a demand on us yes okay that's
that comes from something that we that
does not fit into our current value
structure and identity precisely because
it can challenge us beyond our current
values and identity to become something
other than what we are it is the only
real affordance of real self
transcendence so there's a way in which
like even just now in athlete ending
that and I notice as you're speaking it
it's interesting I can kind of feel this
sense of I'm right at the tip of
something yes and I am not like that
there's some way in which what we're
speaking to is just to simply get closer
to that which is we can't say in some
final way yes exactly
does have a call like if you look at pop
I said if you just look at this as two
Apes and you watch what they're really
they're really after something and what
I'm hearing is that there is that in
some way my ID is it fair to say that
like what what I how I develop right as
a person as a human as a individual is
is one is it is it's it's an unending
project mm-hmm right and precisely
because because it's the kind of project
that
that that in its project nests in its
project nests is is is to constantly be
open to being called upon by that which
you are not yet ready to be yeah I think
I mean I'm trying to deepen I'm trying
to use color to deepens on Heidegger's
notion of that stasis right standing
beyond yourself and and I think the the
the moments where the ex stasis becomes
really clear to us is when we are going
through while the qualitative
development the pure self transcendence
look when people have when they have
these the awakening experiences when
they experience what I call the when
they talk about like these mystical
transformative experiences and they
encounter they're really real the term
I've picked up the term I've coined for
talking about that is on to normativity
right it's what happens is from known as
this is the opposite notice notice how
it's the opposite of everything normally
this is what we do all of this is
intelligible to me and I have an altered
state of consciousness like a dream and
I say oh that's not real because it
doesn't fit into all this
intelligibility
but notice what these experienced
exactly the opposite happens they have
this experience and they come back and
say that was real and all of this that's
real and I have to there's a demand on
me because of the really real I have to
transform myself my world my
relationship so that I can come form I
can conform to that really real more
than I am conforming right now yes
that's what happens and you know what 30
to 40 percent of the population have
these experiences and we do not have the
language the tradition that guides that
discourse the communication patterns
that give them any way to articulate in
both senses of that word these
experiences
so they happen like portions totally and
then the best how you and what they end
up being is I think this is Jamie wheels
latest kind of criticism of the
psychedelic movement is I would imagine
it is it fair to say that because we
don't have a shared language anymore
that's that where it word sensible to
open up to the mystery as is is that
which is most true right
most most determinate and worthy of
moving towards yeah language around it
right and instead what we're inside of
is something like things being
immediately intelligible to us based on
service can you take this experience and
it becomes a jewel for your narcissism
and what you do is you place it on your
autobiographical shelf and you point to
it as evidence for the your uniqueness
and why you are deserving of attention
because you have a uniqueness that
nothing else has right and so you can
put up clothes saying like right yeah
thank you my shaman just went to this
earth yeah exactly
exactly and so it gets it takes that
real that real experience and it brings
it into and it in frames it exactly and
so what we're what what what you're
pointing to here is okay how do we I'm
hearing both both restore rejuvenate and
and create and reveal the grammar that
that that allows not like allows for us
to one open to those kinds of
experiences but in a way that actually
um they actually deepen like deepens me
deepens me in the ground that I am and
this I can share about it in a way that
like does it in frame it and
calls to you yes it costs so it
increases the call right picking up on
your sense of harkening yeah that also
was I think an excellent thing that came
out in the I believe is discussion area
of a David David fuller that notion of
harkening right that it that's calling
you I just I get I just picked the Adan
up see Aidan's book the sense of a
calling because he's done some of the
work on the on the on tone normativity
the psychology and he's got an ontology
on an anthology about that because I
want to understand this and I and I see
and and and it's you can see you get the
connection between your sense of
harkening what's going on encircling and
what we've been talking about here can
we communicate and commune such that we
don't orphan these things and then fall
prey to narcissistically clutching to
them but can we communicate with each
other and commune with each other so
that we facilitate that you know that
wonder that opening up together so and
then I again III want to understand how
to do what I see in the Socratic
dialogues I see a lot of what we are
talking about the circling but I also
see you know I see rational reflection I
see argumentation I see discussion and
debate but right but the the line of
service has changed all of that's in
service of right the circling but like I
say that's what I'm trying to get with
this right I'm trying to get this idea
of right that we can take something like
the circling and we could bring into it
what you see in the Platonic dialogues
can we can we find in the circling away
as Plato says metaphorically
mythologically I should say so that we
can recover the wings by which we can
again ascend in an agog a right that's
what that's what I'm that's what I'm
trying to see that's what that's what
I'm questing for that's what I sort of
as the friends were becoming that's what
I'm probing you on and trying to get
seeing how to put that together yes yes
the
I don't mean to cut things off guy but I
have to go shortly unfortunately I have
literally about two minutes and then I
gotta go okay well we'll continue yeah
I'm texts and I'm sure I'm sure another
talks for sure as well yeah and I'm
sorry I I like the novel I think this
would be a never ending thing that we
have going which is precisely
exemplifying the very thing we're
talking about yes yes it's nice son it's
nice being called and and calling you
yeah very much and like like I said I'm
really looking forward to well like I'm
doing everything I can to make people
aware well and I understand what you're
saying about the you know there's that
there's the cost of exposure for that
but I think the value of what you're
doing is important so I want more people
to know about it
yes me too and vice versa okay so thank
you very much my friend and as you said
will will will be in ongoing
communication okay take care bye bye