happy Friday welcome to my arrogant
title of fix the world Fridays I hope
people see the humor in the arrogance
and ego that I need to put forth in
order to do this in the world but that's
it doesn't even matter it matters how I
show up and how I'm feeling and never
has that message been more clear than
this last week last weekend I got the
message that like I am the thing good
that I'm putting out in the world more
so than this idea that's coming through
me I had to come up with the idea that
was world saving world changing salt all
of the things in order for me to feel
like I was enough of a person on this
planet with my limitations to realize
the power of our limitations realize the
power of our individual selves and doing
it in that way has made me see that
everyone has that I'm not special
because I'm better than everybody else
I'm special because I'm me because I'm
able to do my piece of what I'm gonna
put on this planet to do and that is
what I've come to this last week is that
I have to bring you all into the journey
and it's not my job to look like the
professional Elon Musk or Zuckerberg
it's gonna like bring us into the new
world because that's not my job my job
is to be me and to do what I am put here
to do which is to create a world of
abundance and peace for everybody but
that's not gonna look like anything that
has come before and so I have to be
willing to let go of the peace of like
society needing it to be that way
society doesn't need to let go of that
peace I need to let go of that peace and
if I think I'm here to save the world
the only person who needs to honor that
it's me I need to like meditate and eat
properly and look after the savior of
humanity if I think that that's
I mean that's not really how I think of
myself but it is it's like I feel like
the whole weight of the world is on my
shoulders and the more that I really
stop the matter yes but today I'm always
open to any questions above over
creating the technological cooperative
but that like it's funny I keep putting
it out there like that and people keep
responding with the same things like
this sounds like open source why don't
you just do open source why don't you
just do you like it's it's not enough a
co-op is awesome but it's not enough
open source is awesome but it's not
enough and it's because I'm selling it
in the old way not the new way I'm just
like and so I'm still figuring out the
piece of right it's not the
technological cooperative gives us
access to our best individual lives
gives us access to groups that are
dynamic and capable of withstanding
whatever chaos the world is going to
create whether from our actions from the
climate from kind of firmer actions that
we create the tools to be able to
withstand the chaos and so the
individual piece is also what I am here
to give and it's the piece that I'm like
no I want to the whole system's piece
like here are the tools we can create
and let's create them but the personal
piece that I have had to figure out in
order to be even a fraction of who I
need to be it releases into the world is
what I have to give because I have found
happiness
I am happy in my life as it is currently
I'm not really happy in the world as it
is currently but I'm getting there
because the more I need it to be
different the more desperate it is and
the less people are willing to come on
board and help fix it even if I'm like
but no big but it is he I promise they
don't hear that they don't hear that and
so this last week I had if you watch any
of my youtube videos I had two days ago
was my one of my best friend's birthdays
he's no longer with us he made me a
necklace the necklace broke it broke at
the exact time it needed to for me to
get that my name is Jubilee for a reason
and even if that doesn't mean anything
to anyone else I'm getting there I'm
getting like right this is how important
I am and as I've just said it's not an
importance like I am more important than
other people it is an importance that
every single human being on this planet
possesses it is what are you here to do
what is in you calling to come out that
is what the world needs for you and in
order to tap into that the best way is
to find what brings you joy find what is
simple and easy for you or challenging
of challenging is fun for you like what
is your path because we each have our
own unique roadmap on this planet and
you cannot judge anybody else's and yet
that's all we do like including me
including me with all of my knowledge I
constantly judge other people but I'm
now aware enough that I can take a step
back and be like oh that's my
that's me judging you that's my stuff I
mean the world is judging me it's their
stuff not mine and so it's very the
reverse of what we're experiencing when
we see someone on a more like they
should be wearing that which I've never
thought in my head ever but I have my
own version of that it's because we
don't feel like we're worthy aside from
the clothes were wearing or aside from
the persona we're putting on or there's
another lesson under there that my
people listen you can't no one else
could tell you what your less to do is
like you have your own lessons in life
and when we tap into that like part of
that I live a very simple life I live a
very simple life
from like those I didn't pick those
circumstances I didn't pick to be in
poverty and I didn't pick to have health
problems in a conscious in this world
way I do think I picked it before coming
here to be who I need to be on this
planet but other people learn from like
right I did this like extensive
meditation weekend that cost thousands
of dollars or I went on this European
vacation and a boat I've been lucky
enough to travel and I have learned
immensely from those experiences my best
friend's necklace falling off in that
moment has taught me more in the last
two
than any trip could and it didn't cost
anybody anything it was just the
universe giving me one single lesson
that because it happened in that moment
because of everything that came together
who I was watching what I was listening
to the moment it like disintegrated in
my hands and where it disintegrated and
seeing how connected even though he
hasn't been here for seven years
seeing how connected he is to even this
project which wasn't here seven years
ago my child who I was pregnant with
when I went to his funeral my brain
tumor that she was absolutely present
for but seeing how he's inter Wolfen and
all of my connections and yep I was
wearing this necklace when I put it on I
got a surge of energy over the next few
days that I was like this is weird like
I hear voodoo stuff that I don't
understand how this could have any
effect on my energy which is part of my
illness and when it came off I wasn't as
aware but it also had a surge in energy
and to just be open like open to the
little magical moments in life that are
here to teach you including the
difficult ones one of the most difficult
ones I've experienced in the last year
is seen losing my sister and people
think she's she's dead for at least now
at this moment in life cutting my sister
out of my life
and it was an absolutely necessary thing
to happen and it was heart-wrenching and
it's heartbreaking and I'm not even
dealing with the heartbreak that it is
and at the same time is absolutely
necessary on my path and I can see it
and feel it and see how she is exactly
who she's supposed to be and I'm exactly
who I'm supposed to be we're just not
compatible right now I'm not compatible
whatever her life's mission is because I
keep triggering her with my g-baby
capitalism's not working maybe people
who have illnesses aren't doing the best
they can
mental physical otherwise and she
doesn't know how to see the world the
other way and it's very it's like having
a racist in your life
color like I'm like oh you're able ISM
is drastically affecting me and making
my health worse and so I had to cover
out and that learning the incident that
happened which is what I asked for not
to happen was like be kind to me and she
wrote me a letter that was anything but
kind but it was like the perfect thing
to happen for exactly what I needed
which is for me not to hold my sister on
a pedestal and not to think she has
things more together than me and for her
opinion not to matter in my life like I
couldn't have planned it better and yet
it was what I asked for not to happen
those things those moments that I'm now
open to in the learning of life are
bringing me to where I need to be like
the more I listen to my internal
guidance system which sometimes looks
ridiculous from the outside the more
ridiculous mine looks more ridiculous I
thing cuz it's supposed to I think I'm
supposed to be here to be like so my
ridiculous it tells me like everyone
else is up we should call it an exercise
mine I can exercise it's at least
currently in this this point in my life
poisoned for my body and how ridiculous
that is to both the medical community
and the self hub community and it's like
they go get exercise for your mental
health for your physical if I do I have
a post exertional fatigue malaise and
I'm out for days and so it took a long
time to learn that takes a lot of people
a long time to learn that like oh I have
to listen to my own body and I have to
pace myself regardless of what's outside
and what outside says I have to find my
own and that's where that simple life
came from is being a Spoony and knowing
that I have to like hold spoons at the
same time there's also this other piece
of it that is mental that is like okay
well that made me collapse last time so
now I'm not gonna do it and if you build
up these barriers but nobody else can
tear those barriers down only I can and
I can only do them systematically with
love by accepting that they're there for
a reason right now and like as I go
forward in life like I can test it and
try it and be like okay like recently I
have gotten back the ability to read and
with these books behind me that might be
a little bit or take
less to say but I grew up reading I love
reading I used to read it two to three
books a week whether nonfiction or
fiction and went through university and
everyone else is like yeah I hate
reading I still read through University
and then after my radiation I don't even
know like there wasn't even a single
like it wasn't like the day after my
radiation I was able to my brain stuff
to be able to comprehend the written
word in the same way it would make me
fall asleep and I couldn't put in new
people like information from authors and
and other people in that format I
couldn't even really read a novel
because I couldn't keep the story in the
people straight and so I learned how to
have my own knowledge how to sit with
the knowledge I already had which is how
I've created this global cooperative
that's gonna save us all which one asks
question but recently because there was
the book the World Cafe which is what
the idea Cafe is based on and what we're
gonna our first project we're gonna
create with the tech cooperative list
that just shifts and changes I had to
read that book and so I sat I'd like
read a page and sleep for an hour and
read a page and sleep for two hours like
well I'm radiant it's you know I need I
need to get through this and I got
through that one and then a few months
later I kind of looked at my bedside
table I had like four or five books
there I stayed at a friend's house and I
asked to borrow Brittany a brown book
that I'm enjoying I read a uh half
ready Kyle sees book I read like there's
I'm like oh I've gotten back the ability
to read partly because it was one of
those things that causes me to crash and
so I avoided it and yes I don't
comprehend it the same as I used to be
able to but like I got I was like I'm
smoking hot to go to sleep when reading
makes me sleep so why not just read even
if it's for five minutes before bed then
it will make me sleep even if I don't
comprehend it like so it doesn't really
matter anyway so like though this that
kind of thing where it was a block that
needed to be there for as long as it was
there now I'm getting it getting it back
and eventually I might get back the
ability to exercise it might be
something that's just blocked in my in
my head in my body and it's not you
don't can look what whatever I'll figure
it out and that is a big piece of it you
know I've had a lot of experience
to the medical community and this is not
okay in society I no longer hold doctors
godlike status it just doesn't happen
like they're human beings they make
mistakes they don't have perfect
information they don't have the solution
for my body and every time I go to see
anyone they're like well I'm gonna say
no you're not gonna fix it you're not
you don't have you don't even have my
information you don't have the
information of all the experts cuz our
system is not designed like that I can't
give you the information because even if
I could you don't trust it coming for me
this doesn't work the system doesn't
work but I can also see how all of my
challenges my health my mind like social
challenges with like a social anxiety
and autism and a DD like everything I am
is who I'm supposed to be on this planet
that only became clear in my mid-30s
so I spent you know the first 20 years
thinking I was gonna save the world
because I was gonna be the jane goodall
of elephants or who knows what I was
gonna be but just that like the world
needed saving and I was gonna be I was
gonna throw a bird but I had no parents
like the world wasn't away there was no
parents to like even fight against me to
not go and protest but I was definitely
aware of climate change environmental
issues at a very young age and felt the
weight of the world and that is what I
like I think I see the world more
clearly now anyway the world might not
think I see more clearly but it's not
about whether I what I believe is right
or wrong
it's like correct or incorrect it's my
worldview at the moments is what I need
it to be in order to move forward and
part of what I can't see not being true
is that game a capitalism the data backs
me up helps people who are sociopathic
the more selfish you are willing to be
the more easy it is to advancing gaming
the people I know who are not selfish
people I know who are who are fighting
for people for animals and people and
social justice and I don't know a single
one who is even ten years younger than I
am who's not experiencing chronic health
problems if you care about people if
you're not willing to
for your fellow human being game a
doesn't work for you and it's I'm not
there are of course exceptions to both
of those rules there are people who are
absolutely loving and wonderful in the
end excel at game a and people who are
absolutely selfish and horrible at also
experience health problems but the more
you care about your fellow human the
more stressful it is to be live right
now more stress you're feeling the more
issues that are gonna be in your body
and the more long-term that is the worse
it is so if you're able to ignore what's
happening completely and just be keep
your head in the sand life is easier for
you and if you're able to even worse
screw over your fellow human beings and
be like even if it's to somehow help
them later on right like well I'm gonna
mass well so I can help all these poor
people which I get I was there I thought
was one of the ways I was gonna save the
world so it was not a pasta I'm like you
don't have the capability of get a
bridge because you cannot screw over
your fellow human being I could do other
some weird shady things that were like
against corporations and stuff but I
couldn't ah even having employees I'm
like I just did not feel right for my
body working for money doesn't feel
right like will you give me a paycheck
for something that stops having the same
benefit on me like if you don't pay me
for something and I'm choosing to do it
it's a completely different experience
that once you start paying me for it
which I'm gonna have to get over cuz I
need to find a way to get paid to this
because I'm also okay we can't hurt of
poverty now does that sound this is just
a lame it's the fun part of being deaf
in one year it's you can tilt direction
of sound so you can't make sense of a
lot of the things but it is what it is I
wouldn't give up any of my experiences
including all of the current ones and
yet I would if someone was like we're
gonna offer you a pain-free existence
and abundance of energy I would
absolutely take that pill I would do
what that thing is if it was guaranteed
or it got a money-back guarantee in fact
I do all the things they're really
cheaper free
back guarantee um but I get that it's
here for a reason and so the individual
piece of what we're creating together
I personally me myself to believe is I'm
figuring out how to communicate my path
and what I've done and so I'm I
understand that that's probably never
gonna happen I'm probably never gonna
write the book it's like and here's the
self-help book for the lazy lazy people
which is basically what I've tapped into
he's like Tony Robbins although I needed
him a period of my life is the
antithesis to what I'm saying
I'm not saying fake it till you make it
I'm not saying pretend to be someone
else because you can get everything that
they have I don't think the data holds
that out I think a thousand people
following Tony Robbins there's gonna be
a handful who get amazing results and
most it's gonna dissipate after a period
of time I think like anything we learn
in life there's things that registering
click and they you move forward with
them and your life improves but if you
pick up and pull forward 5% of it and
you're concentrating the 90 55 percent
that you were supposed to get that
everyone else seems to get that you
don't have that's the piece for I'm like
okay I'm good I don't need to be Tony
Robbins there's already a Tony Robbins
and I tried his stuff doesn't work for
me it doesn't have the life-changing
effect that it seems to have for other
people but does it does it I don't know
um creating this space of like following
your own map you can learn so much from
the mundane from the simple things that
happen in life when you're open like yes
two days ago when it was Eric's birthday
and my necklace fell off it wasn't just
that it happened in that moment and I
could see all this stuff coming
backwards and forwards and how he
interconnected with all of these
important things in my life there was
also like other things that happened
like it was a birthday for one of the
kids at cohousing so we were singing
happy birthday to them like weird I'm
singing happy birthday on Eric's
birthday to this like one-year-old um
also like on the free shelf there were
these 90 CDs that had a bunch of CDs in
it like we used to listen together in
the car it was like that's strange are
those things constantly always present
emerges not
into them because I didn't if I hadn't
had that necklace and fall off in my
moment the fact that it was still his
birthday I wouldn't have registered I
wouldn't have I would have been like oh
it's Eric's birthday cool
nice yeah but it wouldn't have had that
like more deep impact it did on me that
day and the more meditation the more I'm
open to things in the moment the more
the more I get in the moment and so
understanding that understanding that
our addictions following naturally when
we're happy connected and our needs are
met what we do for Humanity when our
needs are met is we give our best selves
so the best way to required for to
unleash people's best selves on the
world is to give them what they need to
give them the food clothing shelter
energy humanity connection that they
need in the world and then you get their
flow you get their genius you get what
they're here to give to the world and
the more we do that the less we have
consumerism the less we have addiction
unless we have violence it might never
go away a hundred percent I know I am
happy in my simple life but I also have
a hell of a lot of recycling every week
come on this is a lot of consumption I
being poor and being sick equals a lot
of consumption a lot of store-bought
food a lot of things that that I can
also see that together we can solve that
and that's the piece that we're missing
and I was talking on Twitter that we
have these dichotomies in life where
it's like well if I'm auntie Connie
capitalism I must be Pro communism and
although yes I would I would sign up for
socialism tomorrow as as a government
structure I live in Canada I like
socialized medicine I think it gives us
more having the government's create
solutions costs way too much money it
takes way too much time our governments
aren't the solution and so this
dichotomy of like well under capitalism
we're all fighting for ourselves we're
all in like uber competition and use
like fire die doesn't work so we're like
well we'll just throw in a little bit of
niceness so maybe you don't die but you
don't do well under that or forced like
communism for
cooperation where we're going to assign
you what you do here's your role in
society that's not the choice I think
the choice isn't give yourself up to the
group a hundred percent you don't get
your personal cells or you're only in it
for yourself and everybody else
those aren't the choices those are
choices
they're definitely choices but there's
at least a third choice probably many
more and the third choice is we
voluntarily together figure out how to
fix it instead of pull yourself up by
your bootstraps how about a bunch of
people without jobs are a bunch of
people without boots gets together
figures out how to create boots for
themselves together without the
government without yelling at the
government to give them boots and
without requiring each person figure it
out individually we all have the same
problem we can co-create a solution
together and that is what the technology
cooperative that I keep talking about is
about is about us as individuals finally
what makes us happy follow me in our
roadmap because we're better human
beings when that happens and we have
more to tap into to give to the world
we're happier the world's happier and
the more people are doing that the more
we all win so therefore we when you tap
into a fraction of that you start
looking for other people to bring on
board you're like hey like this isn't
because I get money out of it it's like
oh I get you on board I get to have your
information and I get to have your
ingenuity and flow whatever you come up
with I know what you're gonna come up
with but I know what I came up with
despite the fact the Society says and I
feel felt a little bit still feel a
little bit like I'm deficient
I can't work full time I can't even work
part-time I can't do what other people
seem to be able to do with their kids
and have a functioning I can't cook a
meal I can't do things that other people
can do but if I let go of that if I
surrender to that's exactly who I'm
supposed to be right now to be what I'm
here to be I get so much more I get
community that surrounds me that I'm
open to and aware of like last night I
cooked for my community that's something
that
I love doing and I get so much out of it
there's been two times in the last few
months both with people I don't
necessarily have conversations with
outside of when we cook together because
we don't sit together at meals
in fact both of them were frequently not
at meals and one of them is is a
preacher and there's a few times he said
things or I'm like oh yeah he was the
one who said when I asked what he would
like in cohousing if we were to recreate
it and I thought he would say he wanted
but he would want to Christian his
family because their Christian and that
week it was I even asked that after I
didn't know what his answer was he was
like no I don't want that because what
if I had a question of face what if I
don't want to get kicked out of my
community because it's like I don't want
my full community to be around my faith
it's like that makes sense but we were
cooking together and I remember when he
asked me but my answer I was like I I
grew up in church I have almost an
anti-christian thing now because of my
growing up in church but what I love
doing is singing I miss singing in
church and there was this experience I
had during a permaculture course what we
were singing in a garden and I was like
this is amazing this is what I want this
is what I want to reconnect just to
community and spirit every week or a few
times a month I want to sing in nature
that is my church and I said that to him
and he was like one of my friends does
that what something flips like yeah they
go do different different like a Central
Park in Burnaby and specific spirit Park
now at UBC and they sing in nature and
I've yet to actually get the contact
information I was like wow that's
amazing
and last night cooking with who I was
cooking with he was like what are your
hobbies and my community Connie knows
what I'm doing but yet they also don't
there's one or two who know and four
ones are like you're sure you're saving
the world I was like honestly I like
sitting around and saving the world like
that's what I like to do like yeah I
know but like what else and I was like
that's literally what I do it's what
he's like to decompress and like yes the
world is stressful and it makes me feel
better to sit down and make it make
sense a little bit even if it's only on
paper and I'm like and I like board
games stuff and there's people like you
know like it's hard to find people to
play with like I'm at my house I can't
do that last minute I need to have a
plan
because of my own list sometimes plans
go away and so he's like well I play
solo board game so I was like there are
solo board games as he led me one and it
was like I've yet to look up kind of
opens it I haven't actually looked at
that at the of instructions but just
those kind of things like having a
conversation and having them have an
impact on my life like that is so much
at I was but I was joking around because
because the game is literally you're in
God fighting against colonialism and so
I was like I just got to save the world
in a board game it was like I literally
get it just sit and learn how to save
the world obviously I just got what I
asked for the world's not getting saved
anymore because now I got a board game
to do it with just that was but more
than that like that's something that's a
byproduct of the community dinners the
community dinners are real resource
where I get to show up with my kid
eat a healthy amazing meal at cost and I
don't have to do the labor they clean up
or the cooking and I get to do that for
my community once a cycle which also
feels good to contribute and so I can
see and I see their also it's a titan-2
microcosm of what i'm trying to create
in the world the people that make up
that community are amazing but it's like
it's not like like everyone participates
in the meals the cooking and the
cleaning if you're an adult but there's
other things people do that are their
own individual passion like one person
makes the schedule of the cooking and
cleaning every week and they're really
good about doing that kind of figuring
out who's available when and making
making up the schedule someone else
makes up app like weird applications to
help rub the community constantly like
oh I made this because it was fun and it
was just uh they you know some people
are woodworkers and you know who to go
to if there's there's something that
breaks it you're in your house and you
want you want help there are nurses who
you're like well this say you should I
go to that but you know like there's
been kids falling and breaking their arm
and you have nurses right there you have
someone who is an expert at compost and
expert at waste management and this is
what makes like they didn't go out and
search for those people they're like we
need a waste management expert we need
it just like naturally forms and there's
something there that I can see as a
truth in the universe we're exactly who
we are meant to be to be what we're here
to do when you give up at least a little
bit because it's not something you just
give out them in your time I'm
constantly shedding
society's expectations of me and coming
more into Who I am in a large way that's
triggering for society when they see
someone who's authentic let me tell you
when you see a poor mom on disability
and she's happier than you are it's
triggering when she's more off then
taking your leg I spent a lot of time
and energy being you know a fan said you
should be inauthentic - its triggering
for people and I have to own that with
some compassion and not change myself
it'd be like I got it I get it it's
triggering like I don't I'm not gonna
change me but I can have compassion for
that and sympathy because I also because
I also constantly feel that with other
people that trigger me I get triggered
by the rich and powerful that's how and
I'm like okay I get it
I can both my sister and this person in
community I was like but you're a
homeowner like you have how do you not
have you're older how do you don't have
your together I'm like Oh cuz you
don't have your together like
there's no guarantee that just because
you have more financial means than me
that you have more emotional means than
me that you've been through I've been
through a lot I've developed a lot of
resilience even if on the outside it
looks like I'm weak because I can't
handle like normal stress that everyone
else could handle being in that position
means I'm highly resilient I've had to
de-stress things that are very stressful
for other people coming on and being
wrong and stumbling over my words not
stressful in the least for me anymore it
was in the beginning which is why I did
it for a year on Facebook with nobody
watching and it's not stressful someone
coming and picking this idea apart and
like please do you'd be doing me a favor
if you actually put holes in this enough
that I saw that this was not a solution
to the world's problems please put holes
and this in this thing which is why I'm
kind of shifting I'm seeing how I can
play that on the internet and find more
people to come in poke holes on this
because it'll be people to interact with
I love questions I want to have
conversations I want to talk with people
who want to support this and create this
that's what I really want but there's a
piece that like people here that I have
a solution to the world and like sure
you do it's like Trump saying he's
amazing and everything and they don't
get because they can't they don't live
my life that I don't take a seat at
every table I feel in highly inadequate
at most I'm like I'm not the greatest
parent I've had the greatest this I'm
not the greatest that the game be table
the table of people that are here to
save humanity I'm taking a space at that
table that table is mine I'm here to do
that not in a and it's not because I'm
again because I'm better than anyone
else in fact the thing that's coming
through me is all about everybody having
a space at that table if you want a
space at that table we will make room
for you we will ask what you freaking
want at that table and help you
co-create it so that you have it there
and that is what we can do together that
isn't open-source software like that
isn't like old people have done that
it's not work you know like no one has
done when I'm
talking about is if they've done it
they've done it in isolation behind
closed doors and then released it hoping
the world would take it on that is not
what I am doing I am saying we anything
we create that we trust together that we
trust it is actually usable by humanity
has to be designed by humanity and that
doesn't mean we need to get 7.5 billion
people together but I myself am going to
be my own individual unique self find
what brings me joy I'm gonna find
somebody else who's willing to walk that
path who's in that path is trying to
find their authentic joy and who they
are and wants to help co-create a global
tech cooperative and we are gonna meet
together on camera for everyone to see
and the two of us will figure out what
works for both of us the third person
will come on board and a fourth person
and eventually there is a board of
directors eventually there's enough
people that we can all do it it's fun
and light for us there's enough of us
enough people watching that if there's
something that needs to get done if we
don't want to do it if we can't do it
then there's enough people to fund it to
do the micro work I don't expect anyone
to do as much work as I am doing on this
and not get paid for it as I am not
getting paid for it and that is I've
been on fur for half an hour now I
should probably go pretty soon but
tapping into our own individual power
finding what makes us happy and doing
that aside from meditation which is hard
for a lot of people doing what makes you
happy
is one of the best things you can give
to society because when you find your
true source of happiness nobody can pay
you to take that away like no one can
offer you employment that's gonna that's
going to infringe on that and you will
take it no relationship is going to be
able to offset that you're gonna choose
your authentic happiness and your path
over anything else and that is the best
thing you can give to the world is
finding that path and we cannot judge
each other's because our Maps our paths
are for us
to understand for someone else to tell
me what Eric's necklace falling off in
that moment meant would have taken away
from me figuring it out in fact the
person who I asked I was like is there a
ritual I should be doing with this now
that it's following off and he was like
well did this happen I was like I will
figure out the message don't worry I
there's message there's definitely
message here I don't need you to give me
the message because it won't be the same
and that was one of the issues of my
sister and she constantly has telling me
what to do with my health and with my
life with my kid and all this stuff and
it wasn't even that she was wrong in
some of those things it's that even if
she's right if I'm not coming up with it
it's not happening in fact you're
putting a block up my siblings told me I
was gay I don't know how long ago and I
was like no I'm not no I'm not and then
I came out his gay a few years ago they
were like see told you I'm like yes and
if you weren't telling me I probably
would have figured it out much sooner
much sooner because if I figure it out
it's a whole different ballgame and
that's what we need to help each other
do in fact most of the advice we give
one another is our own advice were
supposed to get and I know that
constantly and most of the advice other
people give us it's advice they're
supposed to hear there was just a video
of Donnie jr. out there talking about
Biden's son and like literally
everything out of his mouth was like him
talking about him and his family it was
like you don't hear that to you well if
your dad is rich and powerful and that's
like your whole life you're gonna like
do corrupt things to make that stay in
existence so he's corrupt
hello pot-kettle I don't even know who
buy these that is I didn't know what's
going on there I've kind of pulled
myself out of having to know what's
going on in the world I'm here to create
something that isn't about knowing about
the politicians because the politicians
aren't going to solve it they're just
not they're not designed to we have to
do it and fraud so I have to do my part
I have my part it's in me and it's not
about doing it the old way to get it out
in the world it's me following my path
of what brings me joy and as I'm doing
that I I'm getting slightly better
at communicating the idea especially
people are asking questions and
commenting and tearing in part because
that's the
if I could just wave a wand to explain
this to the world if I could just write
the book and explain this beautiful
world we had prayed together easily and
peacefully that would be great but it
doesn't seem to what to have that
happened so it's not supposed to happen
but as I continue along my personal
journey I become more confident in
myself I'm more able able to present it
and the idea itself changes it grows
because I try something it doesn't quite
work and it shifts things and do things
come out of it and I have to learn how
to do that process with other people so
when I find that one other person we
pick one time to meet for an hour online
on video so people can see what does
that process look like so that it works
for me as an individual but also
together we're following a path like
when a necklace breaks off and I'm like
now we gotta go this way that's not fair
like if I change the course of
everything which is not happen but
because my things are more subtle but
sometimes it is changing the path if the
idea Cafe was working in its old
iteration I wouldn't have made a new
iteration so I do think there's a party
that's like I do everything by myself
how do my work with the world to save
the world and yet I can tell it's coming
I can tell I'm getting better at itself
I don't even know how to explain it
and that's a piece of it it's like
living your mouth is the only way for
anyone to prove to you that their mouth
exists because I can and I'm going to
showcase mine like the necklace falling
off and what that meant and the next
thing that happens as it happens I can
talk about the retro I can talk about
them and say hey you know like my sister
in my life you can go back and watch
those scopes you know but I can watch
those scopes that period of time I
talked about it for a long period after
that but and that's the point it's like
 I'm not gonna be able to get to the
end of this and tell you the path
because my memory doesn't work that way
I can't even tell you all the iterations
of this project that I've done I can
just tell you what it is right now like
this slice of time and even that this is
it's fun it is fun to be in my life
right now it wouldn't be fun for anybody
else because it's not theirs but my
guides are like sarcastic and like I
swear at them constantly I think they'd
give me tests and things and I'm like
hey seriously I feel like my whole life
is just a repeat of is it the profit
that's not the word YUM I can't remember
he goes on a journey and he has to go
back to where he started at the very end
it's a very well-known really tiny book
that I read when I was volunteering in
Costa Rica well-known and I'm not gonna
remember what it it is starts with the P
though the P something the P and that's
my life it's like oh you already had
everything inside of you when you
started the journey now go back to the
beginning and it's like that on repeat
it's like transparency and democracy and
like oh I have to be more transparent
and I don't know how I can be more
democratic because my life is not a
democracy and that's a part of it when
people hear that I want to create this
democratic transparent company they're
like democracy does it work look at our
world and like right because your life
isn't a democracy
no one gets to decide what you do in
your life but they do like you get to
decide what you do in your life and
together we can help create tools to
make that better
but the entity that creates those tools
that can be run with a democracy it's
only a technology company it's not
deciding who you can marry if you can
adopt if you can it's only like what
tools can you create and what tools do
which ones do we want to create first
and how do we improve them and so I
currently what I am doing is finding my
path my journey and I'm here at 11 a.m.
on Wednesday it's on Friday is to do
this FAQ hopefully more people come on
and hopefully are asking questions I get
that it's weird to ask questions with
its any questions on but that like if
I'm putting out more videos on my
youtube channel I'm showcasing the
actual process of creation I'm
showcasing where I am in the moment
which is like I have an addiction to pot
then I struggle with constantly and
sometimes it's it's under control and
sometimes it's not and I have illnesses
that are sometimes under control and
sometimes not and I have a kid who is
never under control but sometimes that's
perfect sometimes it's not I'm living my
life and showcasing it
well I'm figuring out how we create this
thing in the world
how I bring other people on board
I find the people who want to do this
because the more I realize I'm trying to
convince people like I don't need to
convince people that this is the
solution it has to arise from within
them so it has to trigger something in
them to be like yes this is what I've
been waiting for how can I help what can
I do what path do I need to follow your
own that's the answer
follow your own path if this is part of
your path come on board to be part of
this and that's what like not
everybody's path is going to be
co-creating in the global cooperative
just like not everyone's path is coding
or understanding Facebook even if we're
all on Facebook everyone can use the
tools we're creating everyone within
financial means will be contributing to
the financial pool of what we're
creating hopefully everyone's voting and
giving their opinions but even that not
a requirement if that does it call to
you if you don't want to vote on things
don't vote on things if you want don't
like us unleashing you on humanity isn't
so you can come be a tech a techie but
you could be a techie I'm a techie
without having any technological skills
like my brain likes to create apps that
wouldn't save humanity that's fun that's
fun thing to witness other people are
gonna be creating art are going to be
creating food are going like for
themselves in their community not
necessarily for everyone it's about
finding your path what do you want to do
what do you want to give gain be is all
about cooperation and flow and finding
your purpose as an individual and how we
kind of add those things up as a
collective in some kind of efficient
usable way and it's going to be
emotionally challenging because we've
all been raised in uber competition and
so it doesn't mean you're just gonna sit
up being competitive but if you allow a
little bit of cooperation right you
don't quit your job and join a commune
although ya do that if that comes to you
you find half an hour to volunteer right
you find five minutes to volunteer you
show up and listen and try to hear other
people's thoughts and ideas you like
isn't a light switch for your now Eber
cooperative it's about odeon that we're
all cooperative we're all competitive
and tapping into the co-operative parts
because the co-operative parts are Omni
in and we all win like that's what I
meant is we all win for them the more
people come on board with what I have
envisioned the better it becomes and yet
it can start with two people starting
with one who showcase emotes until
someone else comes I'll be two of us
three of us that is how it starts and it
isn't necessarily about us creating
something for 7.5 billion it's only ever
how do we create something for ourselves
and I'm start like that's a learning
that has to keep repeating itself
because I want to do these big huge
things I want to create the idea cafe as
a platform I still want to do that but I
can't do that free even if like what I
just played the lottery or even know if
I want it last weekend
like I'm you know what I'm spending all
the money on this but that would
somewhat break it like the point isn't
to find someone if someone came and gave
a million dollars to create a platform I
absolutely would
but and similarly but finding the people
who enjoy the idea cafe who want to put
their passion and intellect into it
right they want to help make it better
they want to say hey this works and this
doesn't work let's have these five
features let's not have this feature
lets you know if we added this feature
it would cost a million I don't want to
create it until those people are on
board because it's already been through
iterations on YouTube when it's free for
me and for people to watch and so if I
just created it from its first iteration
it would already be outdated it needs to
evolve with us it needs to be something
that works for the people having the
conversations which is what the idea
Cafe is it isn't about finding an
enjoyable to watch conversation
it's about finding and enjoyable to
participate in conversation that helps
us evolve as human beings like did you
enjoy having that conversation did you
get something out of it
would you come back if not why not how
can we improve it if yes keep coming
back you know like and that's the like
again the dichotomy of like are we
consumers or are we creators if we're
the creator then we're in opposition to
the consumer and we need to like make it
more expensive and sell more of it and
optimize profit and if we're the user
slash consumer then we need to like it's
just broken and that's not the dichotomy
we can create with the user in mind
together where it isn't one person
taking all the risk and getting all the
reward there kind of isn't a risk when
we create it together there's way less
risk it's like okay we're not creating
an app and then releasing the world and
seeing if people want it when they don't
trust it it might go out of business in
six months we're creating a strong
entity that will not go out of business
even if projects we make go out of
business because there isn't even if we
made it with very little risk and it
turns out people just don't like it and
we decide to go back to the drawing
board that can happen you should own
that and not keep beating a dead horse
or whatever they say it is but we don't
just like create an app to spend fifty
thousand dollars and hundreds of hours
and then oops no it was missing a key
component or people just didn't hear
about it or people just didn't we can
create the tools that even people doing
that we can we can make that more
efficient so that when someone comes up
with an idea that's amazing we can know
about it by creating the Yelp fraps by
creating something that is just hey what
are you doing
what can we create together all right
I'm gonna go I'll be back next Friday
I'll probably be back a few times before
then because that seems to be what is
happening right now in present there's I
want to recreate the Netflix of apps
YouTube video and now that I have stream
yard and I can show my screen I can do
it without the whiteboard so it can be
better sound quality which was the issue
from last time I think that explains
also the global cooperative can do in a
way that me just say McRaney Kula
cooperative what does that look like
what does that look like
it looks like the Netflix of apps and
why it is powerful and then building on
that from there cuz I like I like this
part of it even if I'm doing the idea
cafe also cuz that's the first iteration
I like the idea of co-creating about a
world and creating the big huge global
even if it's just me explaining it
myself and not anyone else coming on
board until there's someone else coming
aboard
so they no comments or questions today
there was a couple few words whether it
was the same one people popping or no I
don't know
thank you whoever that viewer is for
attending and coming and watching and I
am always open to questions and comments
on it helps me focus
it helps me answer in a way that I can
think of 15 questions if every statement
I make and then I end up answering all
of them and therefore don't actually
answer any of them so having someone
have a conversation with or a question
or a comment is very focusing and
helpful and then I see the ways that I'm
like like when people keep asking the
same question over don't forget I'm like
damn I'm not explaining it people are
like technologies the problem I'm like
you're literally having that
conversation on technology are you
giving up technology No then let's
create a cooperative lease we can trust
it and use it and it's creating for
purpose instead of profit no
technology's the devil we're all
addicted gates of get off your addiction
go to it let's see what your let's do
but the more I get angry at people for
being themselves the more learning I
have to do and that's I'm not gonna ever
I don't know if I'm ever gonna be a
perfect human being
I don't even that's not even on the
radar anymore I'm gonna keep figuring
out how to be a better human and as
people trigger me figure out what the
learning is for me thanks human it is
cool alright thank you for for watching
and I will like I said be back next
Friday at the very latest and a couple
times in between