[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so we have been engaged
in a very long discussion because we're
talking about a topic that is central
about the possibility of enlightenment
and to try and make that something
plausibly accessible to us rather than
something wrapped and shrouded in
mesmeric mystique instead we've been
trying to understand this from a
cognitive science perspective that could
tell us why these higher states of
consciousness might in fact provide a
means for the radical self
transformation self transcendence
enhanced inner peace and connectedness
to reality that are the central legacy
of the axial age revolution and that are
still needed today even if we no longer
believe in the mythology of the axial
age religions and philosophies how do we
find a place to vouchsafe the value the
precious value that these states can
confer on lives in terms of meaning and
transcendence when we no longer can
understand and articulate and legitimate
that in terms of a two worlds mythology
so if you remember we had been
discussing the properties of these
higher states of consciousness we had
discussed what it's the world is like
it's a bright both comprehensive and
detailed intricate and interesting the
world in a grain of sand it's highly
intelligible it's beautiful and behind
it is a pervasive sense of oneness the
self that is resonating with that world
in the higher state of consciousness is
a self deeply at peace like in Plato's
description of an agog a it's
experiencing joy it's experiencing a
kind of deep remembrance sake of the
being mode it's true and authentic self
it is losing its ego centrism
we talked about the connectedness
between the self in the world as one so
intimate so flowing so Anna gugak that
the sense of participation and
conformity is achieving a sense of
identity deep and profound being at one
with the oneness but that it is so
profound that it is almost always
described as ineffable we then took a
look at what might be going on in these
states because we're trying to remember
we're trying to give a descriptively
adequate and a prescriptively adequate
account we took a look at the continuity
hypothesis that they're the same
machinery that's at work in our everyday
experience of the fluency of reading
into the moments of insight into the
insight cascades of flow and then being
exempted even more into mystical
experience and then some of those
mystical experiences bring about a
quantum change right they bring about a
deep transformative experience and I
suggested to you I proposed to you that
what's going on in these higher states
of consciousness is something like a
state of flow but that the skill the
expertise that is flowing is not this
particular skill of rock climbing or
being a martial artist or playing jazz
it's the skill the domain-general skill
of getting an optimal grip on the world
and so what's happening is people are
getting a flow state in their ability to
optimally grip on the world this
connection to the machinery of insight
helps to explain why disruptive
strategies are used in order to try and
bring about by
states of consciousness because
disruptive strategies are so central to
trying to create insight
they're both naturally disruptive
strategies and you can acquire them
through mindfulness cycle technologies
we were examining what these disruptive
strategies do they massively increase
variation in your processing and that
reveals invariants both good invariants
you get to see more of the real patterns
that are remaining unchanged through all
the variation that's what science does
across all of their variations we try to
find the real patterns that are
invariant and what science does is
increase the variation we run experience
experiments we increase the variation we
do all kinds of manipulations and
increased variations to try and find
what remains invariant because we take
that to point to us right point out to
us what is more real that's what you're
doing but it also right so it's opening
up the invariance of the world and
you're using the flow States capacity
for enhanced implicit processing
implicit learning of complex patterns
tracking of causal patterns to do that
but it's also picking up on the bad
invariance it's picking up on right it's
helping to reveal all the ways in which
you are systematically miss framing so
that like a child going through a
developmental stage and I would point to
you to the work of my former student
friend colleague Jenson Kim for this
idea of development as a systematic form
of insight something in he and I are
working on together I could like a child
going through a developmental stage
realizing not just this error or that
error but a systematic tricity in the
way that they're miss framing reality
and finding a nexus a point of where the
insight right is not just an
intervention in this problem but in a
whole class and type of problems
that developmental change of seeing
through illusion and into reality that
is so central to wisdom is also being
afforded by these higher states of
consciousness what about the the
centering that's so central to both flow
mystical experiences and then ultimately
to higher states of consciousness my
colleague Igor Grossman has produced
quite a bit of good experimental
evidence that sets D centering
strategies although this was prefigured
in earlier work by the Berlin paradigm
Igor Grossman has done some excellent
work on showing that such dissenting
strategies are very relevant for
bringing about wisdom he has work on
what he calls the Solomon effect let me
describe it to you you'll see why these
disruptive these centering strategies
can be so powerful get people to find a
problem that's very messy problematic
and that they're stuck in usually it's
an interpersonal problem because as
Sartre said he'll has other people
so he's heaven by the way he didn't say
that but right the our deepest and most
pervasive problems are generally
problems with other people why because
the thing that is I've mentioned this
before that is most predictive of how
meaningful your life is is your
meaningful relationships to others the
problem is human beings are endlessly
complex okay so you're describing this
interpersonal problem and when people
describe it they are of course
mesmerised by the Mirage of their own
ego centric perspective they describe it
without thought default from the
first-person perspective and they remain
stuck remember this notion of stuckness
we'll come back to it again when we talk
about gnosis and Gnosticism then you get
the person to read ascribe the same
problem from the third-person
perspective
you get them to D Center what will often
happen is they will break frame they
will realize the way in which they have
been blocked systematically locked not
solving their problem they'll often have
a central insight into how to resolve
their problem this is why it's called
the Solomon effect because it tends to
make you more wise think about the
radical D centering that's going on in
these awakening experiences in these
higher states of consciousness
notice the systematicity of the error of
egocentrism
it's not an error in this problem or
this problem or this problem it's a
systematic error that's why it's often
described with metaphors of like being
asleep because when you wake up you have
a systemic change in your consciousness
so what's happening in these higher
states of consciousness in these
awakening experiences you're getting a
transformation an intervention in
systemic error you're seeing through
illusion precisely because of the
powerful D centering that they are
affording for you now that of course can
be a powerfully traumatic experience it
can be a terrifying experience
pursuing this in an autodidactic fashion
like all autodidactic being a completely
self-taught right it's very very
dangerous autodidact tend to get into
echo chambers vicious circles of their
own egocentric entombment and entrapment
the buddha gives a wonderful parable
about this he says this is how you catch
a monkey you put some pitch on a piece
of wood and it looks like something very
shiny and tasties it's salient it's
attractive so the monkey grabs it with
its hand and it gets stuck and then it
uses its other hand to try and free
itself and it gets stuck so it uses its
right foot and then its left foot and
then it puts its head and smelt on and
then it's completely trapped and then
the hunter comes and kills it okay but
decentering
can alleviate that but if you are still
pursuing this as an isolated individual
as an autodidact then think about how
ill-prepared unskilled untutored and
egocentric li you are trying to confront
this radical transformation that is why
I think it is a very poor idea for
people to take psychedelics without
having them placed within a wisdom
tradition in which they have a committed
community that can give outside the
centering and wise advice for how to
process and handle these transformations
but once again I point to you too
an aspect of the meaning crisis we have
institutions of information we have
institutions of knowledge we have
traditions and we have respected experts
who give us guidance we do not have this
before wisdom now what is amazing of
course is that some individuals like sit
hearta are able to do it as individuals
I want to point out two things about
that they deserve our admiration for
successfully doing it as individuals
even though the Buddha had training from
other people all along the way but we
should not take from that some kind of
promotion of our North American
individualism because the Buddha made it
very clear that the Sangha or the
community was necessary for the
cultivation of these transformative
States so you've got this radical
decentering they can afford wisdom and I
don't want to try and show you how it's
not just a perspective of knowing it's
not just a radical transformation in our
salience landscape this is a
participatory change this involves not
just a machinery of cognition or the
machinery of consciousness this alters
the machinery of the self and therefore
is also fundamentally a transformation
of character never participatory knowing
is knowing by conforming well the
radical at oneness of these brings about
a radical kind of participatory knowing
we'll come back to this when we return
and talk about plutinos but right it's
so beautiful precisely because the
coupling is so profound and think about
you're getting reciprocal revelation to
revert world is revealing itself more
deeply and more depths of yourself are
being revealed
in a couple - --n well that's that
that's love love is mutually
accelerating disclosure if you want
somebody if you want to fall in love
with somebody although you shouldn't you
can never sort of pursue it that way I
think you know but what what happens is
if you get two people mutually
disclosing from each other in a coupled
fashion iDisk
I are honestly disclose something about
myself and then you in response
disclosed and then I pick that up and
disclose more and then you disclose that
reciprocal enhanced mutual conforming
engenders love and love is something you
know by participating in it like your
culture and your language this is
knowing by loving now what I want to
suggest to you is that some recent
cognitive science research can give us
some understanding about why this
decentering and this transformation of
the sense of self might be functional
here there's a lot of work I would
recommend to you the work of soui and
Humphrey from 2015 for example showing
that one of the functions of yourself
right not not your mom but yourself is
to act as glue this is a term they use
it's a metaphor by making things
relevant to myself I can make them
relevant to each other and glue them
together so and and I'm always doing
that right I'm simultaneously gluing
things together as I'm gluing myself
together what the self is is a powerful
set of functions for integrating
actually complexified processing to say
you're you have a self is to say you
have a
systematic set of functions that are
integrating not homogenizing complexify
things together
now if you remember we talked about the
work of Michael Anderson exaptation the
acceptation of the tongue here's a
proposal to you this powerful machinery
that is central to your cognitive agency
your ability to make sense of the world
but by gluing the world together as
you're gluing yourself together this
powerful machinery of complexification
of information and information
processing can be exact 'add what if you
were to take all that machinery of
integration that you're using to
integrate yourself and you turned it on
to the world what if you took all of
that capacity to glue things together
and you exerted it on the world that
would mean that machinery that was
normally self focused about integrating
the self and integrating its processing
could be used to achieve a deeper
integration of the world to reveal
deeper underlying patterns know vark in
96 claxton in 2000 both suggest with
argumentation and with phenomenological
evidence and many reports from people
who undergoing mystical experiences seem
to corroborate this that what seems to
happen is all of the energy and
machinery that has been bound up in our
self has been turned on to the world
that's where the world comes alive to us
and we see so deeply into it
imagine the intimacy you have in your
self-knowledge being turned on to the
world so all of that energy that stored
up in your egocentric processing all the
time and the resource and all Akoo am i
what up what's going on how's it Oh
how's it oh all that all that imagine if
you could take that machine and say
forget about John Verve a key just for a
while even turn it on that turn all that
massive machine onto the world radical
radical decentering I propose to you is
doing exactly that all of the time and
effort and processing and skill and
memory and structures that we've built
into our ego can be exacted to disclose
the world and that of course would be
coupled with a radical sense of moving
into the being mode and a radical sense
of remembering who and what we really
are so what I've tried to show you is we
can understand the higher cognitive
process at the psychological level in
terms of this decentering the excitation
of the self machinery flowing optimal
grip right enhanced awareness of
invariants both in the positive sense
and then the ability that allows us to
become systemic error we can see why
this machinery is operating and
producing the experiential profile it is
producing what about the information
processing level I don't want to get
very technical here but this is the
level at which we return to work that's
being done in machine learning
artificial intelligence where people are
actually trying to make machines that
make sense of the world and what kind of
strategies do they come up with for
trying to get the machines
be better learners well one interesting
thing is precisely the use of disruptive
strategies so Woodward at Al in 2014
this this is a direct quote from them
right they they introduced the quotient
sect they introduced randomization into
a neural network a neural network is a
very powerful and cutting-edge form of
artificial intelligence that in some
important ways mimics how brains work
and when you're training these neural
net you'll program them you train them
to learn for themselves right but very
often what you have to do is you have to
introduce noise entropy randomness into
these networks in fact he goes on to say
that such randomness quote is essential
aspect an essential aspect of the self
optimization process you have to give so
what these aren't people doing
psychology these are not people trying
to understand higher states of
consciousness what they're trying to do
is they're trying to make neural
networks that learn better that can self
optimize and what they do what they say
is essential that's the word he used to
this is disruption disrupted strategies
why see the problem with powerful
machines is they pick up on patterns and
you say well but John that's good isn't
picking up patterns good well remember
all the stuff we've talked about about
when we talked about implicit learning
and picking up on only correlational
patterns I'll pick you come on real
patterns see the problem you face is
you're always sampling from the world so
here's your experience and then here's
the world and there's some pattern in
your experience and what you want to
know is that is that pattern in the
world or not this is we invented a whole
discipline to deal with this it's called
statistics all statistics is basically
this problem how do I know if the
patterns in my sample are the same as
the patterns in the world
how do I know that right
so for example if I was in class at U of
T and I let say season even huge class
500 students psych 100 I say how many
people here think that student tuition
should be reduced or schools should be
free and they all put up their hands
should I then conclude look the
overwhelming majority of people think
that student tuition should be reduced
you'd say that's ridiculous and this is
what you should say because that is not
a representative sample the pattern
there is all students you need the
sample to have the same patterns as the
environment so why is that relevant to
disruption very often what will happen
with these neural networks is they will
over fit to the data they will to
tightly
pick up on the pattern in the sample a
pattern that does not generalize to the
rest of the world so let me give me a
way of understanding this graphically so
very often right we're like you've been
probably taught this right you do a
scatterplot
you point your point right and then you
don't typically draw a line like this to
try and capture the data instead what we
typically do is a line of best fit which
might might touch any of the data points
this is called data compression the line
of best fit why do we do that we do that
in science because what we're trying to
find is the function that will
generalize that will go to all kinds of
different contexts that will not be true
just of this sample but will be true of
the population but what the networks do
is they do this they over fit to the
data
they track a function that perfectly
describes the sample but does not
generalize to the population precisely
because they're so powerful
they over fit so what do you do well you
you can you can throw some noise into
the system you can turn off you can do
drop out you can turn off half of the
nodes you basically disrupt the
processing a lot because what the
disruption does is it prevents you from
overfitting to the data and an avowal
aoz you to compress and what does the
compression do it allows you to find the
real invariants the real patterns that
will generalize across all the varying
contexts now of course right you don't
want to under fit if you under fit then
you're not picking up on any patterns at
all so notice again you these systems
have to toggle they have to toggle back
and forth they have to disrupt right
very analogous to breaking frame in
order so they can make a better frame
and they're trying to find that sweet
spot between disruptive variation and
compression to detect real patterns that
allows them to become good learners so
what we know is that again you have to
have disruptive strategies set within
powerful pattern detection that's
exactly what we're seeing at work as I
mentioned to you in these people that
are pursuing these higher states of
consciousness it's also again why
belonging to a tradition that can afford
powerful pattern detection introduced
disruption when needed and guide you to
help toggle to find the sweet spot is
very very important
if you want to be really good at jamming
and you write you have to have the
requisite skill jamming without jaws
just sorry jamming without skill just
gives you junk doesn't give you jazz so
what's going on in the brain so notice
notice what I'm showing you here the
machines are doing right the compression
that compression is right that toggling
of attention that you see going on in
the higher state of car
they're open they're disrupting and then
compressing and they're trying to find
the huge and variance patterns but
they're trying to break frame and
they're doing stuff that seems I think
plausible to say is analogous to what we
see going on at the psychological level
within people what about at the brain
level well this is where we have to turn
to Newburgh because he's done most of
the work on tracking brains as people
are having these kinds of experiences
and what you see is right initially you
get increased activity in the frontal
area and the parietal area these are the
two areas a frontal parietal connection
that is most associated with your
general intelligence your ability to
make sense and get an optimal grip on
the world because that's what your
general intelligence is so the initially
you see these areas get hyperactive and
then you see the opposite you see them
hypoactive so huge increase followed by
a huge decrease
now throughout you have throughout all
of this this is the frontal parietal you
have enhanced activity in the thalamus
this is the area of the brain that tries
to integrate all kinds of different
information together the greater the
shift the greater the disruptive shift
the more powerful the awakening
experience is it's just like what's
going on in insight you initially bring
all this machinery to bear to frame it
and then you have to massively disrupt
it and break it and then the system re
self organizes and that is precisely
what's going on I would suggest to you
in these experiences so
what is happening in the brain for
example in psychedelic experiences
because you'll often see this kind of
shift what's important and there's a
bunch of people doing work on this
metastability so what for example
psilocybin does according to recent work
done by Lord Adel is increases
metastability in the brain so if you
look at the work of Kelso tog Noli and
others what metastability is is a state
in the brain that's doing this
complexification I talked about so
normally your brain is integrating
things or segregating integrating
differentiating but in psilocybin what
you get is a state called meta stability
where and this is a state in which the
brain is simultaneously integrating and
segregating it is massively complexify
please remember complexification is with
us when a system is both integrating and
differentiating when you went from being
a zygote to being a biologically complex
organism your cells were differentiating
into different types of cells liver
cells eye cells etc but they were also
integrating you are complex because
you're both highly integrated and highly
differentiated complexification gives
you emergent functions it gives you new
abilities you can do things as a person
right a biological human being that you
couldn't do as as I go precisely because
you're complex
look emergent functions come to the fact
because I'm highly differentiated I can
do many different things but because I'm
highly integrated I don't fall apart as
a system by doing these many different
things I get new emergent abilities the
way you grow and self transcend as a
system is by complexify psilocybin by
putting you into metastability right
helps your brain complexify and come up
with emergent abilities it allows you to
see the world
massive integration in a grain of sand
massive
pronunciation so I think what we can see
here is at least I highly plausible and
I'll come back to what I mean by that in
just a minute
the count at the psychological level at
the machine processing level and at the
brain level of what is going on in these
higher states of consciousness and why
they are so powerfully optimizing your
cognitive functionality once again not
to repeat this but that of course has to
be placed within the proper zappy ntral
context you need a tradition and
institutions a committed community of
cultivating wisdom now what about the
prescriptive argument I've laid a lot of
the groundwork for this why should we
listen to people who have been in this
state why should this state serve as the
justification for a transformation for
your life if someone comes up to you and
says I want to transform you I want you
to transform your life according to X Y
Zed right you need that claim justified
not just described and explained you
need to justify what would make it a
good thing to do are these states
actually good guides for transformation
well in order to do that I need to
introduce a notion to you first we're
going to come back to this notion again
when we talk about the nature of
cognitive science although I've been
exemplifying a lot of cognitive science
to you throughout these previous videos
this is the notion of plausibility we
need to talk about this because
plausibility is central to your notion
of how real things are now there's two
senses of the word plausible one is a
synonym for highly probable that's not
the sense I'm using I'm using it in the
sense that Russia and other made famous
where this means makes good
stands to reason right
should be taken seriously
most of the time and I'll make this
point in detail in a few minutes you
cannot base your actions uncertainty but
you have to rely on plausibility now
there's a lot of work on plausibility
and I'm just going to try to sketch to
you what I think will work on doing with
Leo Ferraro and Anderson Todd about
trying to integrate work by Lombardi and
Nash Minh and Sinatra from 2015
Kyle 2006 Milgram 1997 kishar Ressler
Russia I should say there's just a lot
of different work going into this here's
what I think it is to make something
plausible first of all it involves what
Russia calls trustworthiness I think
there's an important way in which
trustworthiness comes about you can see
this in some of the work that Kyle has
done on explanations we prefer we regard
a particular proposal or a construct or
some way of trying to model the world as
trustworthy if it's been produced by
many independent but converging lines of
evidence let me give you a clear
concrete example alright you will regard
as more real information that comes
through multiple senses as opposed to
one sense if I'm only seeing something
there's a good chance that it's an
illusion or a delusion caused by the
subjectivity of my seeing but if I can
see it and touch it and hear it and
smell it then the chance is that each
one of those independent senses are
right producing an illusion is radically
diminished the fact that they all are
telling me that same thing now that
doesn't give me certainty but it gives
me trustworthiness
it reduces the probability and that's
what trustworthiness is right it reduces
the probability that I'm self deceived
now that's not the same thing as
certainty because unfortunately for
example there is a form of schizophrenia
in which people not only hear voices but
they see people attached to those voices
and when they reach out to touch the
person they get a tactile illusion and
it's very hard to convince those people
that their illusions aren't real
precisely because this is highly
trustworthy this is why science likes
numbers we like numbers because they
allow us to converge the senses look you
can see three you can touch three one
two three you can hear three we like
numbers not because we're fascists or
something in science we like numbers
because numbers quantification help us
to increase the trustworthiness of our
information gathering they allow us to
reduce the chance that what we're
getting what we're measuring what we're
modeling is being produced by
self-deception is that enough for
plausibility I don't think so
so we're converging to some processing
state here but we also want something to
be the case because we're not just
looking backwards into how we got there
we're also looking forward what we can
do with it what we want is we want a
model that we can now apply to many new
domains that will open up the world for
us that's multi apt
this is like again taking a martial-arts
stick I don't use this but I taking this
stance because I can quickly adapt it to
many different situations it's multi opt
it's highly functional so why do I want
this right when I can use the same model
in many different places this is I I I
would argue what people mean when they
say a theory or a model is elegant you
can use the same model right it can it's
adaptive enough it's multi app that you
can use it in many different places and
apply it so you have convergence for
trustworthiness but you have elegance
for power for multi aptness for multi
apt application is that enough no right
I think this state has to be highly
fluent to you
remember we talked about this this has
to be one that you can use readily
powerfully for yourself that you can
internalize when you have this when you
have fluency convergence elegance right
you need one more thing you need a
balance between the convergence and the
elegance if I have a lot of convergence
without much elegance that's triviality
the thing about trivial statements is
not that they're false they're true but
they're not powerful
they don't transform many times we
reject things we don't take them
seriously they don't make good sense to
us precisely because they're trivial
what's the opposite very little
convergence with a lot of promise of
power
this is when things are far-fetched
conspiracy theories have this feature if
they were true they would explain so
much if we would just accept that the
British royal family were lizard beings
from outer space we could explain so
much of their behavior but the problem
is although that would be a very
powerful explanation we have very little
trustworthy evidence that that is in
fact the case so what we want is we want
that are as Milgram says our backward
commitments and our forward commitment
map we only commit powerfully forward if
we've got a lot of trust in the model
that we've produced when all of this is
in place right I think we find what
we're processing not only fluent we find
it highly plausible when we have very
deep convergence and very deep elegance
and very like efficient fluency I think
we then find the proposal profound so
you're saying why are you going on about
this because what I'm trying to show you
is what the brain is doing is a that it
is performing a kind of evaluation of
its the plausibility of its processing
when it's in a higher state of
consciousness see this model what did we
see what did we see we saw lots of
things going into the higher state of
consciousness we saw D automatisation
right
we saw dese entering all of these things
are strategies for reducing bias
reducing bias these are all strategies
for reducing bias right
the automatisation D centering fluency
and processing the state that you're in
is a state of flowing optimal grip
it's intrinsically valued it's
optimizing for processing and what's
this affording this state well you're
finding a nexus for a development you're
finding that systematic error you're
getting that complexification of your
processing so you're getting emergent
new functions you're getting the
acceptation of machinery the insight
machinery and the self machinery into
new abilities do you see what I'm
arguing
your brain is in a state in which it's
getting information that saying this
processing is deeply trustworthy deeply
powerful deeply fluent therefore
profoundly plausible a plausibility is
not certainty the plausibility is what
we have to rely on what do I mean by
that you can't get certainty for almost
all of your processing you have to rely
on plausibility all the time you say but
I could turn to science will give me
certainty for first of all pay attention
to the history of science when does it
ever done that almost all those theories
that have been proposed in science have
ultimately turned out to be false in
some significant or an important way
science isn't believed in because it
gives us certainty or facts science is
believed in because it gives us
self-correcting plausibility look this
is up what how do I decide what
hypothesis to test I don't test any
hypothesis I come up with
I wonder if clipping my toenails will
reduce famine in the Sahara let's test
it out I wonder if I gather enough frogs
together can I influence the Australian
election let's test it out do you no
matter how many hypothenuse a to me
that's what ridiculous that's absurd
what you're saying to me is those
hypotheses don't make sense they don't
deserve to be taken seriously what
you're saying to me is I reject them
because they're implausible now I go
into my experiment I'm going to run an
experiment in science what I'll have to
do I have to control for alternative
explanations what we're always doing in
science is inference to the best
explanation
this goes to the work of Peter Lipton
and others right here's some phenomena
what I do is I have some candidate
explanations for what's causing the
phenomenon and then what I do is I put
them into competition with each other
which one of my hypotheses best explains
it and the one that best explains it
right is chosen as what's real but this
how do you make how would you make this
certain the way you would make this
deductively certain is you would have to
check all possible explanations how many
possible explanations are there an
infinite number
you can't ever make science certain
because you're always doing this this
explanation is only as good as the
competition it beats in science you
advance by coming up with plausible
alternative explanations that you beat
with yours science depends on
plausibility judgments it depends on
plausibility judgments when we choose
our hypothesis it depends on
plausibility judgments when we choose
what variables were going to control
foreign experiments it depends on
plausibility judgments once we're done
and we have the data and we have to
interpret it what is the number of
interpretations I can give for any data
infinite in number what do I do i
generate the most plausible
interpretation before the experiment
during the experiment and after the
experiment I'm relying on plausibility
plausibility is indispensable that's why
your brain looks for it
so notice what we've got this higher
state of consciousness is an
optimization of your processing it
brings about a state of high
plausibility and it's relying on
processes that are fundamental right
because optimization has priority I have
to get my optimal grip before I can
judge what it is I have to zero in on
the relevant information and have the
right formulation of my problem before I
can try and answer it these higher
states of consciousness that's what I'm
saying is that they have
indispensability because they run in
terms of your plausibility machinery
they are optimal in terms of getting the
best possible functioning for you
they are prior because they are
fundamental to any and all of your
cognitive processing getting this
optimal grip toggling between trade-offs
getting the best relationship between
generalizing and discriminating all of
these have priority these are why these
states are such good guides again if
they're set within a set of soppy intial
practices set within a central tradition
now what what I'm saying is these are
states of consciousness are great guides
on how to transform yourself how to
cultivate wisdom how to see through
self-deception but sometimes people come
back from these states and they make
pronouncements about the nature of the
world sometimes these are bizarre people
will come back from DMT and tell them
that hyperspace elves have told them
that they should remain and forever
inside their head or some bizarre stuff
here's the thing you should know about
the propositions that people generate
from this are largely useless
you can read these reports people will
have these higher states of
consciousness and one group of people
will come out and say I know there's a
god other people have these experience
and they come out and they're they're
filled with joy and they say I know
there's no God
diametrically opposite because this
isn't about propositional knowing this
is about participatory transformation
this isn't about getting secret
metaphysical knowledge this is about
getting wise practices wise
transformations ultimately what we need
to do is to take the wisdom from these
higher states of consciousness and get
it into rational discourse with an
independently established via our best
science metaphysics by science and
philosophy when we can put those two
together then we will have properly
salvaged what these higher states of
consciousness can afford for us do not
confuse the rationality of wisdom with
the rationality of knowledge so next
time what I want to do is now that we've
got a preliminary account of what these
higher states of consciousness what
these awakening the what the awakening
of the Buddha might have been plausibly
like we can return to what did he
propose specifically thereby finishing
off the axial revolution our discussion
I should say of the actual revolution in
India and then we will return back to
the Mediterranean world and look at what
was happening there after Aristotle
thank you very much for your time
[Music]
you
you
[Music]