if we are gaining the power of gods then
without the love and wisdom of gods we
self-destruct that we are gaining the
power of gods is now both a given and
unavoidable so what is the gain the love
and wisdom of God's curve that gets
there in time greetings future fossils
welcome to another episode of the
podcast that explores our place in time
and as I'm sure most of you already know
our location our address in the
landscape of time is right at the crux
of what chaos theorists call a
catastrophic bifurcation a shift between
one way of living in the world together
and a completely different way of seeing
and understanding our surroundings and
our participation in them to help us
make sense of this turbulent transition
between worlds
this week's guest Daniel schmock Dan
Berger of the neuro hacker collective
joins me for a conversation about
complex systems thinking and
macroeconomics that I found surprisingly
engaging but as daniel says later in
this episode
that's just evidence that gaining
insight into structural incentive and
value systems or to put it in different
terms starting to understand the
operating principles of the ecology of
mind in which all of us exist what
motivates us and of course how we can
design better systems that allow us all
to win together on that note before we
begin this episode I want to thank all
of you who have taken a moment to rate
and review the show on iTunes your
5-star ratings and creatively
enthusiastic reviews have been very
helpful getting this podcast into the
ears of like minds and kindred spirits
and I appreciate you I also want to give
a shout out to Aaron Young the newest
supporter of future fossils podcast on
patreon I'm up to almost 80 subscribers
on patreon right now which is really
exciting and very close to my year-end
goal of a hundred people who believe
that this podcast is facilitating
important conversations about our future
and helping people make sense of the
complex and confusing times that we live
in so if you want to join that group and
help ensure that I can continue devoting
my full attention to intelligent and
inspiring creative media then you can
join Aaron and 77 other people and
Counting over at patreon.com slash
Michael Garfield where you can also find
for free an extensive amount of the
music that I've produced over the years
including the kind of stuff that you're
listening to now as well as the science
fiction audio book I just released an
oral history of the end of reality which
explores the social psychological and
spiritual consequences of AI forgery and
our decaying ability to agree on the
facts kind of a dirge for simpler times
and an ode to the vast new landscapes of
possibility
emerging before us lastly before we
begin this episode a big thanks to
future fossils podcast sponsor the body
hacking conference here in Austin Texas
from February 2nd to 4th of 2018
body hacking Conn is about human
augmentation personal expression
democratized medicine and bringing the
DIY ethos to our own bodies
they're bringing people together from
all industry is interested in what's
happening right now your body hacking
all over the world to make connections
friends and share experiences and
resources in order to build the best
possible future some of these folks
including conference director Trevor
Goodman and one of this year's key
presenters from Australia my buddy Miao
Ludo Miao Miao have been on future
fossils before I highly recommend that
you go back and listen to their episodes
and if you're interested in that juicy
confluence of intelligent and creative
people then go to you be dy h ax comm
and with that i release you into the
wilderness of this wonderful
conversation with daniel schmock dan
berger of the neuro hacker collective
thank you so so much for listening to
this show thanks for telling your
friends enjoy and have a beautiful day
[Music]
so shall we begin
we shall awesome Daniel it's a pleasure
to have you on future fossils it's a
pleasure to be here with you like we
were discussing just before the call I
heard you talking on future thinkers and
was impressed with your conversation
with them and the the scope of your
synthesis of like ecological thinking
and how it is that we can create real
powerful opportunities for ourselves in
a regenerative economy over the next few
decades and you're clearly in this space
already with your your various
enterprises so I am I'm curious to know
how you got to this point in your life
how you how you decided that thinking
about this biggest you know this
big-picture stuff was important to you
and why it became like personally
significant to your work mm-hmm I had no
it's great it's great to kind of
understand where people are coming from
into this I had a fortunate early
exposure so I grew up on the work of
Buckminster Fuller and complexity
science and systems theory and futurists
and so it's kind of always been the come
from and then fairly early on I got into
activism work and it started with animal
rights work and then environmental work
and then social dynamics work and so I
was working with different NGOs that you
know starting really young like nine
years old homeschooled that got to be a
huge part of the home schooling and
having some Systems Theory background
already I was able to see that the
causes of the issues weren't being well
addressed in the interconnection of the
issues and the generator functions
weren't being well addressed and as a
result the really well intentioned and
very hard earned successes largely
displaced problems elsewhere
there were externalities even to the
positive projects that we're trying to
solve externalities
and so you know where we would think of
something like the death of elephants
has an externality of an incentive
system that makes their tusks worth
something
there was a project that I was working
on to try and protect elephants had a
Preserve Greenpeace and World Wildlife
Federation a number of groups were
working on it and the solution was
bigger fences around the preserve and
harsher sentencing for poachers and
after a tremendous amount of work that
happened and it actually succeeded in
terms of keeping poachers from poaching
elephants in that area it of course
didn't address the poverty of those
people who had really no other solutions
at all it didn't address the world view
towards animals at all as a whole the
black market on various other animals it
didn't address the macroeconomic system
that creates poverty inexorably it
didn't address any of those things so
the same group of poachers moved to
start hunting the mountain gorillas in
the white rhino and because I wasn't
working on enough different projects I
got to see those movements and you know
there was an existential devastation
that started it started with seeing all
of the suffering that humans were
inducing unnecessarily on themselves and
each other and the world and then at
least there was some hope that there
were projects working to resolve these
when it became clear that the projects
working to resolve them weren't really
resolving them I started to look deeper
and say where else is that happening
where the other environmental project so
we work really hard to prevent a dam
that's gonna have ecological catastrophe
but then that means that the energy from
the dam doesn't come in so the coal
plant comes in or you know like there
wasn't a deep enough focus kind of
anywhere at how do we actually do
complex system problem-solving and
design and management we only knew how
to do simple systems or complicated
systems and we're doing complex systems
and the toolkit was obviously broken
right and so as I started diving in
deeper they're kind of early in
teenagehood I saw that the trends that
were happening in terms of biodiversity
loss and in terms of peak resource use
with nitrogen phosphorus etc if we just
continued those curves of their current
rate
while also looking at the positive
curves of increase in solar or whatever
kind of positive curves we only got to
an adequate evolutionary place to deal
with the negative curves after
extinction and so the the forecast you
know and this was basic methods of
forecasting but the forecast was
inexorable self-determination and so
then I'm thinking not only of you know
unnecessary human induced suffering in
the failure of the solutions but
existential risk writ large and so of
course the idea of succeeding at some
partial set was broken right the idea
that I can have success in my personal
life working on some of the problems and
other ones are continuing to happen and
I know about them I know what it's like
in a factory farm right I know what it's
like in in extreme poverty but I can be
stoked because I'm succeeding in some
small area I can only be stoked if I can
disconnect my empathy from what's
actually going on which is a kind of
being a psychopath right some level of
abstract psychopathy yeah cognizant is a
is a characteristic of the modern human
I think it's like it's necessary it is
because we have a system where
structural violence and externality are
implicit throughout the system
completely so participation with it at
all
requires participation with that right
and so it was clear that there were no
models of success that could actually
work for me and that killing myself to
get off of the kind of like a crazy bit
of of violence didn't help anyone else
and so the only thing was is there a
solution to all of this that's actually
viable and it was clear that it wasn't
going to be more of the kinds of things
we were already doing that weren't
working it was going to be you know for
the crew got in the for-profit world
something like 70 trillion dollars
trading hands every day that is almost
all externalizing harm somewhere along a
supply chain then if if I was to
allocate a billion nonprofit dollars
really intelligently per day I'm still
five or six orders of magnitude too
small in my effect how do we we have a
system where human
agency has been predisposed to be
directly and indirectly harm causing how
do we change that generator function at
scale we're all human agency is disposed
by the nature of the system to be on the
positive and that if you do that you can
get off of the current curves and have a
discrete nonlinear phase shift which
evolution does single cell to multi cell
you know etc and it was clear that
nothing less than a discrete nonlinear
phase shift was adequate and so then you
know the rest of the process has been
what are the necessary and sufficient
criteria of the post transition world
and how do we actually support that
emergence yeah so this is around what
time are you starting to think this way
like how long have you been in this part
in in the pocket with this one the
assessment of definitely self
terminating on the current path was a
Braun 15 yeah
and so yeah because there's that that
thing about you know the neglect in the
traditional presentation our mutual
friend Bruce Damer talks about how he
was helping ray kurzweil with the images
for his book that like the graphics for
his book and that he was responsible for
giving the first whale the infamous
hockey stick chart which is appropriate
cos Bruce is a Canadian and the you know
he makes this point with the chart that
you know a lot of this stuff was absurd
but that the timing of those predictions
aside you're looking at the collapse of
that complex dynamic that you're you're
met you're discussing here into this is
it like a common problem with science
fiction it's like even if reycarts Ville
gets all of them even if his projections
are all totally accurate and the oceans
die in like 2033 we never get to the
2045 it's the neglect of well like any
science fiction film where it shows one
one thing that's been torn a hundred
years into the future and then they're
still driving you know internal
combustion engine cars around or
whatever so seeing it this way knowing
that there has to be this discrete jump
and and to be clear like this kind of
thing does
happen it's not like you said just the
transformation and individuality from
like individual cells to a multicellular
organism but it's even you see it even
within human culture where we start to
organize a larger level and so the units
of human society that were at once the
the major organizing unit like the city
becomes an organ in the body of
something larger so like I guess this
might just be a tangent but it
let's write it and see where it takes us
how do you understand your work as a
junior process or an organ within a
superior process or super organism in
this particular thing like is that a
framing metaphor that you use is this
how you understand the nature of this
shift and like in that sense like what
kind of rolled you and and the work that
you're doing fit into that so if we
think about that question in light of
the name of this podcast future fossils
right so we think back about all the
civilizations that we know of in
recorded history and one of the first
valuable insights is that they all ended
right and so if we read Joseph Tainter
in the collapse of complex societies we
see certain patterns of and in their
updates to that work since then but we
see certain patterns of how collapse
occurs but whether we're thinking about
Sumeria or Mesopotamia or the Byzantine
Empire or Rome like none of them exist
anymore and the thing and there were
actually elements of unsustainability in
their own growth patterns that led to
their self termination even if there was
an attack from outside it was usually
after there was increasing decoherence
where they weren't able to have the
military capacity that they previously
had etc but they were all local
collapses right the collapse of that
empires because it was wasn't the
collapse of it everything and so we're
in a unique position now where the only
meat like the thing that we're looking
at
and collapse is a fully globalized
civilization and the collapses are all
between catastrophic and existential
right the collapse scenarios and we are
currently on the path for collapse
scenario z' and so when and it's
important to get that many of those
early cultures actually did ruin their
environment they had unsustainable
agriculture that desertified the area
and then people starved right but it
didn't ruin the life-support capacities
of the planet writ large right which is
very different and a lot of them killed
each other militarily but they didn't
have nukes that could leave nuclear
winter for a long time and so if you
think about the evolution of history
from a game theoretic perspective and
you think of it as the evolution of
power and win-lose games and so you have
tribes that so long as the resource is
plentiful relative to the population
don't bother killing each other and as
soon as the population outstrips the
resource they're competing implicitly
for scarce resource it becomes important
to then compete explicitly and so then
one tribe kills the other one that has
the river front now they don't have the
competitor for the same resource and
they have the river front life is better
for them now all the other tribes who
didn't do that have to do that by
default or they're going to die from the
ones who learned to start doing military
strategy as a method of you know
advancing and so then you have a big
tribe little tribes can't compete so if
you have them band together and now you
get groups of tribes and then you know
this continues to happen and then you
get villages and kingdoms and
nation-states and global economic
trading bloc's and they increase their
competitive power in a win-lose game on
all sides and so that means military
power goes up it means the ability to
extract scarce resource from the
environment including unsustainably
faster than it can reproduce and they
increase their propaganda capacity to
dis inform the other side and you know
have more adherents on their side you
when you add the hockey stick part of an
exponential tech curve to that win-lose
game theoretic dynamic and you get
exponential military capacity where no
side can actually deploy the power
necessary to win without destroying the
playing field you get X Bone
intial extraction capacity where you
actually run up to the fragility limit
to the biosphere you get exponential
information Tech applied with the
incentive to dissing form and you get
now a post fact world where nobody knows
what the is true about anything you
get to the place where to try and
continue to win at a win-lose game with
exponential power equals Omni lose lose
equals existential collapse and so
either you figure out an omni win-win
game or you self-determining and that's
the that's the discrete fascia basically
we've been in a win-lose game theoretic
structure for a very long time and
that's the phase that's ending and so
then we either have a discrete phase
shift up to an omni when when kind of
model in which we need to say what is
the larger body that they become organs
of all of the separate in groups that
define themselves in relationship to an
out group in a win-lose way actually
dissolve here and become and it doesn't
mean there aren't levels of
self-organization a city is a real thing
right it has a natural self-organizing
dynamic tribes within it are real things
but the wind lose dynamics that the
boundary have to go away if you look at
the cells within tissues within organs
with an organ systems in your body your
kidneys not competing against your liver
for scarce resource if it was you would
be dead very quickly and so they have
boundaries right yours your cell has a
boundary but energy and information
transmitted across that boundary in a
inter symbiotic way with the other
things around it right and the same is
true across all of the boundaries right
plants and animals and gas exchanges so
that's the like that's the key thing we
have to get so anything about future
fossils there won't be future
generations to be able to look at the
fossils of this culture if we don't
actually make this phase shift up and if
we do they won't have to be looking at
fossils because we will actually get
down intergenerational knowledge
transfer
so we've already a unique point in that
whole historical curve right now so I
happen to be reading
two books that you alluded to very
strongly in this this last bit
Timothy Morton's hyper objects if you're
familiar with this one philosophy and
ecology after the end of the world
talking about the influence of this this
these complex and distributed phenomena
that we have to take is real and like
you know a phenomenon like global
warming and then the other one is James
P cars' is finite and infinite games and
this this is exactly a vision of life as
play in possibility the fact that it is
we we transit here if successful it
sounds like you're saying we transit
from that finite zero sum type thinking
to a game the goal of which is to keep
the game going for as long as possible
and add to continuously better the
quality of the game yes and so that
rewards all participants and so that I
guess the you know the the question then
is at its base an economic question
isn't it and so I think this is a very
fun topic like I can tell that I've
become a boring grown-up because I'm now
like fascinated by economics and it's a
big part of it is watching the
conversation in the last few years shift
around crypto currencies shift around
universal basic income a lot of these
things that I didn't really give much I
didn't put much stock in quote-unquote
when they first appeared on on my radar
to mix metaphors but the thing that's
always stuck with me is something that
Doug rushkoff brought up in in present
shock in terms of which you know he's
the one that introduced me to finite and
infinite games he said that you look at
the really thriving societies and it's
the societies for whom the money lost
value if you kept it out of circulation
where the money was pegged to the decay
of some real-world resource because we
don't really you know news doesn't gain
value when it's a day-old bread doesn't
gain value and it's a day old and so he
is he was suggesting that some sort of
negative interest could be applied to
things so that it propels everyone it
encourages and incentivizes everyone to
keep their money in circulation it
encourages a culture of micro
philanthropy I mean that to me seems
like the real the real thing or like is
that is that something that you're
thinking about talking about in all of
this or like where what do you see is
the potential strategies for this whole
thing to flip tonight so when you say
that you're boring and dull because
you're getting interested in economics
if you're getting interested in
economics as a philosopher it actually
means that you're just gaining deeper
insight into how structural incentive
and structural value systems and
disposition work which means you're not
being a good philosopher if you aren't
thinking about those things and so if we
say all right how much is air worth
economically right now it's worth
nothing at all and because it's worth
nothing at all we make decisions based
on financial statements right then we
will pollute the air and burn it up now
how much is gold worth it's worth a lot
of certain amount per ounce so we will
destroy an ecosystem if we need to to
get the gold out from underneath it to
put it in bars and a safe that is not
doing anything for anyone other than
effecting a financial accounting sheet
and I want the gold because since we see
it as relatively scarce in a win-lose
game structure if there are scarce
things that with it not everyone can
have it abundantly
then I get differential advantage by
having it if something is abundant like
air where everybody can have it then it
gives me no competitive advantage over
anyone else so it we don't value it
now if we were valuing what's really
relevant to life support or to quality
of life or to systemic advantage of
course that would be flipped but in a
fundamentally win-lose game theoretic
structure we value things that are
relative to our capacity to win at that
game
and that is pretty much exclusively
pathological it doesn't mean that it
didn't serve some relevant evolutionary
value but that value is at the end of
its lifecycle and so so let's talk about
what the future of macroeconomics has to
be and then so the the concept of
Demerara negative interest obviously
when we have interest we have an
incentive to keep money out of supply
and keep resources out of supply which
means that it's gonna maximize
extraction and have an maximized
hoarding right
and you're also gonna get increasing
wealth inequality because those who have
more will get more compounding interest
on that and etc so there dem raj is an
interesting thing to address some of
that
nowhere near adequate and it creates
some of its own problems which is now
you have an artificial incentive to make
transactions occur and transactions
movement and the system actually is
entropy if the action is not actually
relevant right so system-wide incentives
of almost any kind are usually
problematic right so we need to actually
go to a much deeper level of insight
here so we say what what is it that
we're really trying to do one way of
defining it in terms of macro economy
would be we need to rigorously align the
incentive of every agent and whether the
agents an individual or a group of
people a government a corporation
whatever we need to rigorously align the
incentive of every agent with the
well-being of every other agent and of
the comments with no gap and to the
degree that there is gap meaning that
two agents have misaligned interest and
you have direct arm right direct
competition which can express itself
militarily or through corporate
competition that can involve
disinformation in whatever right or to
the degree that someone's interest and
the well-being of the Commons are
misaligned then you get externality as
you run exponentially more energy
through a incentive system that
externalizes harm
or that causes direct harm exponential
externality is existential it's a lot of
X's right but is accessory will be is
the point and if it goes down and so in
the face you can think of exponential
Tec and specifically distributed
exponential Tec as increasing our agency
vector our capacity to affect the world
but if we are not increasing the
goodness of our decision-making right
then if you have more ability to affect
the world in the way we've always
affected the world we've always murdered
we've always caused or we've always
we've always used war as a reasonable
way to solve problems and in fact it's
really important to get that in in every
society that had private ownership you
had increasing wealth inequality until
the wealth inequality was so much that
war was the only mechanism to stabilize
it to address it in every democratic
society you have increasing polarization
and radicalization of political views
into a war zone a way of stabilizing it
we and yet when you have exponential
tech you don't get to have war anymore
and make it through and so we don't know
how to do civilization without war right
we don't know how to do it where we
actually have reasonable ways of
resolving differences and etc so it's a
fundamental shift so if you say we're
really talking about getting off win
lose game theory completely that's the
phase that we're at that's of course
unprecedented right it's unprecedented
the whole story but as you said
unprecedented shidduch
actually is the precedent of universe
when you take a very long view which is
you know let's say that life originated
on this earth and the model of cosmic
Genesis that we use commonly is true
neither of those are true but let's just
take them as true for a minute as
because it's a good analogy then you've
got 12 billion years of universe
existing and doing all kinds of and
making galaxies and stars and supernovas
and all the stuff and it never made life
and you would think if after 12 billion
years of interactions it would have kind
of exhausted its search space so life is
not possible and then life
happens and it's totally unprecedented
based on the things previous right and
then you go on and on all of human
history to earn 50,000 years right
before the plow and there's we didn't
actually have a economics we only had a
ecology we were part of an ecology but
we didn't have surplus and without sir
surplus you don't have private ownership
you don't have economics right so the
economics emerged unprecedented and on
and on right so it is actually the
precedent of universe in the long view
to do unprecedented and so the
shift for us right now is if we look at
curve as wells curves of everything
getting exponentially better in terms of
compute power and the corresponding
power to make better biotech and address
health issues and it can solve problems
it's true all of us drew all those
exponential puzzle curves are true if
you look at all of the decrease in
biodiversity and increase in pollution
and damage to the biosphere and increase
of existential risk probability all the
negative exponential curves they're all
true - and people cherry-pick the ones
that they like from the data set to
cause a confirmation bias but when
is getting exponentially better and
exponentially worse at the same time
neither of those are actually happening
it's just that the phase is
destabilizing right the the movements
away from the homeo dynamic centerline
is getting further and further that
means you're moving from one type of
organizational complex system into a
chaotic phase which will be a liminal
phase and then you'll get the emergence
up into a higher degree of order or an
entropic drop down to a lower degree of
order
that's the precipice run the verge of
and it it is not economic it's economics
governance infrastructure culture
together right and we can say but
economics is a good way of thinking of
the the heart of it because economics
can be seen as the interface layer
between our values and the way we build
the world the value equation right which
is that the air is worth nothing because
we're only valuing things that give us
competitive advantage our value systems
get codified into an economic value
equation of how much actual value that
confers real power we give different
things right a whale swimming in the
ocean has no economic value to anyone
currently a dead whale on a fishing boat
might be a million dollars in well me so
this is why we are fishing out the
oceans and causing species extinction of
mass right but that's a value system
right that is a memetic that spiritual
existential ethical value system
codified as a value equation that
determines what we confer power an
advantage to what ends up winning and
how we actually build infrastructure in
the physical world so changing that is
actually at the heart of and requires
change in infrastructure changing the
corresponding social structures
governance law you know etc and in the
world view so clearly this is not the
kind of thing that's going to happen in
a linear way because there's an obvious
chicken and egg with you've got to get
people to shift you got to get a
critical mass of people up to a
developmental level where they are able
to think in terms of the complex systems
in order so that they can start
assigning an economic value or at least
urging an economic value for things like
that living whale or as Christians fat
girl talks about in in the Anthropocene
he talks about his discomfort with the
notion but his sort of settling on it as
a best best strategy that the World
Economic Forum was examining how we
could assign a value to the atmosphere
processing that a given acreage of
rainforest and the congo would provide
so that those people are able to
participate in an economy without having
to succumb to you know predatory
international development strategy is
you know so like that that all makes
sense but again like you can't put it
you can't put a number on what you don't
see right and so and we up and we know
through work a developmental
psychologist like Robert Keegan at
Harvard that it takes years for people
to learn to think that a new structure
of consciousness like a new layer of
awareness to move out of you know
self-interest and into a wider sense of
participation and therefore ethical
responsibility
you know so I don't know what it where
are you you seemed like you were shaking
your head about the the ecosystem
services too so I'd love to break off
wherever you want to break off into that
ecosystem services sounds like a nice
idea like lots of kind of New Economics
ideas sounds like a nice idea and it's
not that they have no possible
transitional relevance but in the face
of distributed exponential tech it
doesn't work at all and so you know we
can just think about that as a defining
criteria for a moment and say okay with
the distribution of tech right and the
first existential tech the world had was
nuclear bomb we had two superpowers that
had it because it was super hard to make
super expensive and so you could have
those to spy on each other and have a
mutually assured destruction system so
nobody could use it and we could live in
the relatively dreadful peace of the
Cold War right now of course we have a
lot more than two countries that have
nuclear weapons and we have nuclear
weapons and places that we don't even
know but with exponential biotech and
nanotech and AI Tekkit cetera you have
stronger than nuclear level capacity by
non-state actors radically distributed
how do we make it through that is a very
deep question right and it really is if
you want to think of it in a mythopoetic
sense which I think you actually have to
if we are gaining the power of gods then
without the love and wisdom of gods we
self-destruct and that we are gaining
the power of gods is now both a given
and unavoidable so what is the gain the
love and wisdom of gods curve that gets
there in time and so that that power is
actually used for the good of the whole
because if it's used against which
elicits counter against switch have that
much power everywhere then you get self
destruct and so it's important to really
get that as a framing so we don't think
that the things that have worked before
some modified version of them will work
now because it's a radically different
context okay so environmental services
so if I have a rain forest or a
marshland or whatever it's not worth
anything right now so if it gets cut
down and turned into grazing land for
cattle or whatever it's worth something
so how do i how do I keep it from
getting cut down low can I make it worth
more alive well I can say it's
sequestering so much co2 and stabilizing
so much you know soil runoff when the
rains come and then if I can get a value
on that at the co2 can be in terms of
carbon credits and you know whatever
rain then maybe we can keep it alive to
the degree that that helps any ecosystem
right now I'm delighted as a long-term
strategy if what I'm in several things
wrong with it if I'm incenting if the
way that it's making money is
sequestering co2 then I want to start
optimizing it for heavy sequestering co2
plants right well then it makes more
money as opposed to the whole rich
biodiversity that makes a healthy forest
or ecosystem many of which are going to
be less optimized for co2 sequestration
then you know another way of doing it
right and so but then I say well what
are the other things that it's doing
that I don't know how to monetize yet
there are other plants that are pulling
out different kinds of particulate
pollution and also what is the effect to
the pollinators and to the birds and do
that right and when I really understand
what a tree is doing it's doing an
indefinite like an undefinable number of
positive things to an undefinable number
of beneficiaries and when I take some
small metrics based subsets then I will
start to optimize for that small metrics
based subset which is exactly the
 wrong problem that we do
everywhere which is we take a complex
system reduce it to a complicated system
optimized for the complicated system
kill the complex system in the process
and so if I take an n-dimensional set of
self-organizing complex metrics and I
reduce them to 10 metrics and I run
optimization functions across those
it'll be the wrong thing every time
so metrics based optimization right I
can look at somebody's low-density
lipoprotein give them a statin drug and
there
and their low-density lipoprotein comes
down awesome except that the toxicity to
the liver in the toxicity to the brain
that come with that statin and etc and
even why the cholesterol was high that
might have been the body's protecting
its vascular system from certain kinds
of damage I'm not measuring those things
right and when if I try to measure all
of them now I get so many metrics and
try and do optimization across them
that's actually uncomputable it becomes
an np-complete issue and you can't
actually find optimization points and
metrics based optimization has to us
always think in terms of theory of
trade-offs so okay how much liver damage
is worth how much brain damage is worth
how much risk of heart disease so that i
optimize between those but they're
uncommon tradable right how many dead
rhinos is worth how many parts per
million of mercury in the water is worth
how many tons of co2 to know how to
allocate my resources no but I'm gonna
find out because I'm you know but you're
right though it's like they have to
actually start that for uplift connect
there is like you you know this the
whole there's like there's actually like
a a socially toxic dimension to life
optimization for this very reason it's
like the sinister side of this trend to
reduce the human being to information
there is part of that that you say oh
you know and in order to adapt to my
post industrial work existence yeah then
I have to optimize my my life so that I
can get as close as possible to an
imaginary Paleolithic human being or
whatever it is you know it's just it's
it's bonkers so anyway so go on there's
a couple different issues there one is
are the things that we think we are
optimizing for the right things at all
right if we have the ability to
genetically engineer the human is our
goal to make us all the best hyper
computers possible right like as we get
exponential technically can actually
change what we've thought of as nature
itself we get very deep ethical and
existential questions at the core of it
but what I'm actually bringing up here
is a that's a core issue but I'm
bringing up a separate issue which is
actually was just just a result of
metrics and there is actually around it
which is
eat from a information theory point of
view I want to know what is everything
that matters in a particular situation
where we're going to try to do
development or you know in enhance
something but I want to know what is
everything that matters what is it that
matters about it how is it
interconnected now if I use metrics and
I've got this thing is on a one to a
thousand scale and this is on a negative
a thousand to a thousand scale and this
is this kind of unit in this kind of
unit how do i commensurate them when
they're actually non fungible types of
value right this species goes extinct
but this other one like it gets a little
bit better there well did they have a
say in it are they considered
beneficiaries of the system and so if
instead if I use a if I use a boolean
system where it is a zero on one based
system and really what I'm looking for
is does this thing matter does this
particular value creature process matter
and if so then we have to create a
design that tends to it and then we can
have a boolean tree underneath it that
says what matters about it but when I
have them in 0 and 1 I don't look at how
much do i damage it or how much do I
take care of it i define thresholds of
what takecare means it creates two zero
one but then everything that matters
becomes a design constraint to an
integrated complex system design process
and now I'm not looking at these each of
the issues separately and saying how
much resource do I put into this one and
put into this one what's the
optimization point I'm saying how do I
create an integrated system design that
tends to everything that matters here
and so this is a different information
theoretic way of approaching complex
systems it is actually relevant to
complexity so it seemed for a while
there that you are getting into this
whole stream conversationally drifts
into the area of
where this change is gonna come from and
clearly because it is a planet-wide
phenomenon it's gonna come from
everywhere at once
in some sense but then you have the
William Gibson future arrives and it's
unevenly distributed right so how do you
see this well it's it's more than
holistic right because holistic tends to
reduce things to systems and I know from
you know your acquaintance with Ken
Wilber that you know you don't see the
individual or the system or the culture
or the the inner life world the
experience as like reducible to one
another you know so how do how do we
understand this like every like all
scales of organization all levels of
complexity just go a current shift in
the order like in what way do you expect
to see it taking shape you know how are
you consciously participating in its
emergence yeah so there's a number of
projects that we're working on related
to these things but I'll just go ahead
and talk about how do we see this shift
occurring kind of macro so just to use a
very classic analogy when we think about
the transition the discrete nonlinear
phase shift transition from caterpillar
to butterfly it goes through a liminal
phase right which is the chrysalis and
the caterpillar doesn't just like lose
weight and grow wings the caterpillar
actually goes through a very complete
dissolution process and then the amino
acids are resequenced by a second set of
DNA butterfly DNA caterpillar DNA two
different code bases and so we can
really see that the caterpillars job was
it had a developmental phase where it
was basically defined by net growth and
consumption on renewably gathering the
parts necessary to then be reassembled
foundationally into a different code
that was not about net growth and
consumption in the same way if the
caterpillar didn't go through
phase-shifted eat itself into extinction
so if you plotted those curves you would
say it eats itself into extinction but
of course as the blood starts getting
rich enough to be able to you know go
into the chrysalis you start getting the
first imaginal cells kicking in which of
course the caterpillar body attacks as
foreign invaders but then they start to
proliferate more triggers to movement
into the chrysalis dissolution of the
caterpillar recoding so this and then
just to complete that story the
butterfly is actually pollinating the
plants that the caterpillar decimated
but across these vast ecosystem spaces
that helps the evolution of the whole
thing right so you get what was that an
unsustainable devastating based on
growth and consumption was actually a
developmental phase of something that's
helping the evolution of all those
systems so if we think about
developmental phases the forty weeks of
a baby in utero if it continued would
kill itself in the mall and the the
phase shift of leave the birth canal
umbilical cord cut is not predicted by
the forty weeks before if you didn't
know that thing was going to happen
right the the same is true of a chicken
inside of an egg shell so you have all
of these discrete phase shifts
associated with developmental phases and
I think it's fair to look at humanity as
being in a developmental phase defined
by net growth and consumption of the
technological and scientific and you
know etc capacities that are necessary
and and it was win lose game theory and
capitalism in the military industrial
complex that got us those but now it
self terminates if you keep it in that
phase just like the caterpillar or the
in utero baby but you can then and what
the interesting thing is if the baby
comes out too early it dies but if it if
it stayed in later it would die it is
there's a very kind of tuned window
where it both has to shift and can write
it didn't have the capacity to before
all the developmental phases are defined
by that so the kind of economics that is
necessary for a distributed exponential
tech world is not Marxism is not
capitalism is not any version of
capitalism not socialism or fascism it's
a fundamentally new that we
couldn't have even thought of before
because we didn't have the
and so you know if you have shitty jobs
that nobody really wants to spend their
life doing that civilization needs you
have to figure out how do you force
people to spend a lot of their life
doing the shitty job so you either give
everybody you know meet everyone's needs
as a state and communist way and then
the state has to force people to do the
shady job so it's Imperial we don't like
it or you let the free market force them
which is if they don't do the jobs they
starve but as soon as technological
automation starts replacing the shitty
jobs and it's non-sentient doers of
those things the need for extrinsic
control extrinsic incentive of all the
humans goes away and it's a foundational
axiom of every economic theory so far
you think we're gonna go is all shitty
jobs progressively yeah and but
basically it goes like this if you can
write a process for it you can automate
a bit
it requires the technology to advance
but anything you can write a process for
you can automate and without a GI right
with just automation and anything you
can write a process for no human wants
to spend their whole life doing it's fun
for a little while you might get kind of
Zen with it you might learn something
but ultimately doing things that are
discovery and creativity and connection
based is where our intrinsic incentive
is gonna come and so there happens to be
a very nice match here right between
what our generalist capacity that can
write processes and create technology to
do those things can do and what we
actually want to do in an intrinsic
incentive based civilization in economic
educational system etc so where does the
change come from like the imaginal cells
there will be initial prototypes that
now you know we have plenty of eco
villages that are prototyping some
things and it's a part of the curve
right and it's nice but they actually
don't offer a model for how civilization
could change comprehensively they don't
have the ability yet technologically to
automate the shitty jobs to you know
have an internet of things that is
taking an inventory of the Commons and
being able to inform a data system that
can help the enrichment of the Commons
ready to
it doesn't have those new forms of
governance and economics factoring
boolean field so they're nice steps but
our ability to actually build prototypes
of civilization that have fundamentally
new forms of economics and governance
and infrastructure right integrated
complex system that have necessary and
sufficient criteria for complexity
they basically out-compete the current
world systems comprehensively because
the increased coherence of those systems
makes a lot less resource per capita
create higher quality of life output
across the entire set of things that we
would consider and so here's the real
funny irony is that the Omni win/win
system actually outcompetes the win-lose
system well obsoleting win-lose dynamics
itself and that is the transcendence of
the win-lose phase into the Omni win-win
phase because in the win-lose phase you
get a fractal win-lose defect process
where I'm supposed to cooperate with
these guys on my team to compete with
the other side but the the competitive
mindset has gone it's such that even
though CIA and NSA and FBI are on the
same team called the United States
they're all competing with each other
and then different departments within
are competing with each other and then
different people are and as a result
you're actually getting fractal
decoherence everywhere which means we're
out of call inefficiencies right and the
best things that could be built won't be
because the IP separated by separate
companies that are competing with each
other so they can't synthesize the
knowledge and because information equals
competitive advantage we hide the
information and then intentionally dis
inform others so then we live in a world
where there's so much disinformation you
can't parse signal from noise that is
the decay of this system fractal
decoherence and disinformation that will
make it possible for another system to
actually radically out-compete it if it
gets coherence down and coherence
actually does mean not when lose
dynamics within that system sounds like
you're your
in in the sort of like Hyperion cantos
where the character Annie has asked she
attempts to reduce Jesus's Sermon on the
Mount - two words and she offers choose
again yours might be open source
that's the distillation here is that if
we really want to you know like was it
former CIA guy he was
he's been strongly advocating the open
sourcing of intelligence agency work and
it sounds like that that's exactly what
you would see if you're gonna get this
sort of multicellularity like the
emergence of a like a planetary
individual as you were discussing
earlier that there's there's a free
exchange of information across the cell
membrane of participating subordinates
although you got to be careful with that
right because you're talking about like
a what you might call like a whole ARCIC
organization
it's a nested natural hierarchy not like
an enforced hierarchy a hierarchy of
inclusiveness mmm-hmm so a city includes
all the tribes within it the tribes
don't include the city so there's
different levels of consideration where
the city is working on having the tribes
within them have Omni win-win dynamics
across them that the tribes on their own
bonus I have to think about but it is
not a hierarchy that has any of what we
have thought of as power structures
involved open source as we understand it
right now as necessary but not
sufficient and if you were to you know
reduce it to a couple words you could
reduce it to a word which would be Omni
considerate more than the applied side
of that which would be Omni win-win
which means that any act of agency
positively effects everything that it
effects and what is the only considerate
is the consideration of how to do that
right but that can't just be an idea it
actually has to be the economic system
itself in the governance system as well
as culture and the tools that are
necessary to do that
so I know that we're running out of time
here with you and this is this just
points us to what could end up
ultimately being kind of a cliffhanger
question because I feel like we've we've
created up you know the map of the
problema TKE here and we're starting to
glance at at least the the contours of
or textures of this the flavor of some
solutions but I guess you know if you
have insight or suggestion into this
particular area maybe this would be a
good way to end it which is because
we're all at different points along a
like a developmental sequence you know
like what we're able to consider what
we're able to attend to who were able to
take into consideration as an audience
or as the affected by our actions is you
know limited by our ability to perceive
and to cognize by by that like by how
much we are able to experience and thus
I have the potential to identify with in
our in our world you know like how much
how big is the planet of our experience
how far is that horizon and so you know
when we talk about the the way that this
is gonna work is by organizing things so
that everyone's incentivized to
participate in a way that benefits
everyone is it even possible to have
that kind of does not Omni consideration
require omnipresence like a total
surveillance or like perhaps like a
shift in our consciousness as
individuals that would be perhaps like
difficult for us to contain
psychologically I mean how does this
even how do you see this being deployed
implemented sure so it's pretty hard for
me to consider how to increase the
quality of life of the creatures in
another galaxy because I don't have very
much since data about them to know how
to do that fortunately I also don't have
the ability
affect them very much so it doesn't
really matter right now as soon as I
start getting the ability to affect them
then understanding that matters so I
need my sense systems and my information
processing systems and my actuator
systems connected if you think about
from an evolutionary bio point of view
it's never advantageous to select for
sensory systems alone it has to be
sensory systems that then can integrate
that sense input with the other senses
and then be able to have information
processing to inform choice and then
have the actuator capacity to act on
that choice within a closed loop of the
ability to sense the effects of that
choice and learn right and so
information input information processing
actuator output closed-loop that's
actually what gets selected for is that
triplicate if you if I could send
something that I couldn't make any sense
of it would actually me up if I
could send something that I couldn't act
on it would mess things up right
similarly if I could act on things where
I couldn't sense the effect of the
action and I wouldn't be able to learn
if that was successful or not
and so the triplicate of those is what
defines the evolutionary adaptiveness of
a creature now what's happened for
humans is that our ability to make tools
which means our ability to identify some
of our capacities our corporeal
capacities and extend them in tools I
can see the way that my fist can bang
something I can make a hammer that can
do it better it can make a wrench that
can do what my grip can do better it can
make a telescope that can extend my eye
or a microscope I can make an industrial
supply chain that can extend my entire
production capacities right I can make
computational systems or an abacus right
that can extend my my processing
capabilities but we can make these in
isolation from each other so the
triplicate is not bound anymore so right
now we have a world where we have an
amazing amount of sensory input possible
right we can see stuff from the Hubble
we can see stuff from electron tunneling
microscopes and then we can see input
there on the world on the Internet
but we that's decoupled from sense
making so when I read stuff I can't
she tell if it's true or not I
can't put it together with the other
things that I know right and so I have a
tremendous amount of sense input that I
can't make sense of then to the degree
that makes sense of something like okay
their co2 is actually a problem I have
no idea how the to act on it and
then to the degree that I act on things
like I go by this laptop that we're
talking on that comes from industrial
supply chain that affected life on six
continents I actually have no sense
coupling to what the was actually
affected and how it was affected to
inform if I want to make that choice or
not so it's our information processing
system is broken open which is
fundamentally non adaptive and we're
running exponentially more energy
through that broken open information
ecology and so Omni consider it we
basically when you said this require
surveillance the sensory input and
information processing and actuator
output have to be coupled if I'm
affecting I have to know that I'm
affecting it and be able to factor it if
I'm not affecting it it doesn't matter
that much so to the degree that our
actuator technologies are giving us the
ability to affect things in the world we
have to know how they're being affected
and then be able to process that in a
way that informs how we use that
capacity and that's why it's so exciting
to plant this recording in history that
Facebook has told everyone this week
they will be letting you know who paid
for that ad so this has been super
fascinating I know you've got a hop to
another meeting I feel like we've really
only started getting into the real meat
of it and I would love to do this again
with you sometime yes I didn't actually
answer your primary questions I want to
say one thing to it the people who
already have the capacity and
disposition for Omni consideration will
find each other and build systems that
increase that capacity and more people
and that will be an auto poetic cycle I
think I agree that really it's not so
much about making this change occur as
it is making it land as lightly as
possible making sure as many people can
get on that boat
possible possibly widening the
definition of person here and where the
boat is actually a training ground for
boat builders right and and captains and
this is the key thing is that those who
are oriented to will build refugee
solutions at scale for the massive
upcoming human migration issues and
they'll say how do we build refugee
solutions since the people won't be able
to integrate with current societies
because nobody wants them and they won't
be able to go back to the places they
came from for maybe forever so they have
to be enduring which means that we can't
subsidize them forever they have to
actually be generative and since we're
basically building cities from scratch
that have to be generative at scale for
a long time this gives us the
opportunity to take the fall out of the
current failing system and build a new
world
what should the education system there
be what should the economic system be
which is the governance system B what
should the media system be what should
the you know all the Human Services be
and how do we actually prototype that
there will be people similarly thinking
about how do we create macroeconomic
systems that automatically are incenting
when wind dynamics better so that
everyone who's participating in those
will be growing in their omni
consideration by the byproduct of
interfacing with the system educational
systems etc so it is those at the front
end of a omni consideration bell curve
from the fortune of the life that
exposed them to those things have to
self-organize and will self organize to
create systems that then bring that kind
of disposition to wider audiences which
then continue to do the same thing and
then it scales absolutely yeah I think
one of the most interesting things about
this is imagining how we can encourage
people to play by new rules that benefit
everyone
and with that how do people find you
other than your totally pervasive
Facebook ads for your amazing nootropic
prod
where do we send folks to follow up on
you and the way that you're helping out
so the ads you're speaking about our
company that we have called neural
hacker collective neural hacker.com is
the website and there's one product out
right now which is in the cognitive
enhancement space but the the goal of
that just to tie it together is working
on complex systems medicine and complex
systems psychopharmacology to actually
do a better job of having human
physiology predisposed in fundamentally
balanced and positive ways and there's a
whole bunch happening beyond what's
obvious there so far I have a blog you
can check out civilization emerging calm
just put up has a little bit of stuff
and Facebook awesome
Daniel it's been super fun I think I
didn't have to bust out my brand of time
travel sickness pills for this
conversation but I we got close I think
you have a really clear vision for all
of this and it's a treat to have you on
the show thanks a lot I love the show I
love the concept of it and what you're
doing here and it's really fun to be in
the dialogue so I look forward to more
absolutely cool take care have a good
one take care my friend thanks again for
listening to the Future fauces podcast a
member of the mind pod Network along
with such excellent shows as the
synchronicity podcast third eye drops
it's all happening exactly REE
and many many more and go to mine pot
network.com to check those and out and
if you would like to support the show
give us a rating on iTunes or stop over
at patreon.com slash Michael Garfield
thank you
and have a most excellent Eon
[Music]