[Music]
I'm so delighted that shadow work is
becoming popular because it's absolutely
essential our survival may depend upon
this work and doesn't have to be one
individual at a time for it to work is
there a way for us to do shadow work on
a more collective level well I suspect
you've played with this we certainly
have and integrals in we do a lot of
group shadow work yes it is possible
where it gets really complicated are
where the collective shadows the group
shadows like the green shadow starts
interfering with the shadow work you're
doing with individuals can you expand on
that a little bit how does that look
well yes I don't know let's let me just
approach this without using any
technical jargon but I'm a Zen master I
have a rather authoritarian leadership
style which actually I mean there's all
kinds of psychological reasons for that
but we don't need to go into those I'm
happy to but we don't need to I'm a
lightning rod for projections from this
green collective shadow where
authoritarian hierarchical leaders are
taboo that is a collective shadow and
I'm a lightning rod for that shadow I
get it all the time so in order for me
to survive and have green students come
in we have to have collective ways of
dealing with this collective shadow and
we've developed some some collective
shadow work some group shadow work where
we we really talk about these shadows
and we work on them and we help people
become conscious of them
one of the practices we have called
embodying them and it has to do with
only talking about things that are
immediately experienceable by your
senses so this is the collective
agreement and we sit in a circle and we
go around the circle and we say
something but it has to be something
that's happening in real time and the
input has to come from our five senses
and what becomes immediately evident is
how important people stories are because
if you're talking about
only things that you can immediately
experience you're not pulling anything
out of your mind or any emotions out and
telling a story about it because that's
not real time that's a form of group
work that is really effective at helping
people see and realize for themselves
how addicted to their stories they are
and it's a great beginning right so
certainly we we went there from there's
the individual level someone doing
shadow work by themselves you can do it
as a group but in terms of a wider
culture because there's millions of
people out there and a lot of them well
a lot of us I don't go to these types of
groups yeah so I'm curious around do you
see any way that a culture as a whole
can start to look at its shadow it is is
it have to be done face-to-face nature
has a way of of helping us with these
problems when great shadows accumulate
it's called war do you know what causes
peace tell me war
is that the only way well so far and
this massive scale that you're talking
about I don't think were evolved enough
to do it on this massive a scale so
nature takes care of it for us
interesting and one of the things that
gives me great hope is we may have to
find a way to do this to survive when do
we change as my teacher always asked and
then his answer was when we have to
certainly been true in my development
yeah
we're talking about war there's another
question I wanted to ask you which was
around just death in general in our
culture death seems to me and always has
to be one of the only certainties we
have and I find I take great solace in
that there's a certain theme through
meditation practice also meditation is
related to death what do you think the
shadow that we seem to have around death
in our culture does throughout the
culture we avoid it like the plague I do
a lot of death and dying work you know
Zen is known for its relationship with
death we say die before you die so that
you can live I do a workshop that I'd
love to do because death is a Dharma
gate you know we were talking about
meditation being the old standard way
there's actually a more effective Dharma
gate than meditation it's called a brush
with death it's a huge opportunity to
open into the great mystery so I start
this workshop with a question isn't it
interesting that we all know we're gonna
die do you know you're gonna die yeah
and none of us believe it
isn't that interesting why is that what
is going on here
so this body's gonna die I'm fairly
certain that's true now there seems to
be overwhelming evidence that tells me
my body is gonna die I'm also fairly
certain my precious ego is going to die
because it's connected to the body what
is it that was never born and perhaps
will never die
if we cut away all your thoughts all
your feelings all your stories if we ask
you who are you really and every time
you answer I hold up the mirror and say
I ask you who you are and you tell me
what you think isn't that interesting
isn't that interesting can you go deeper
than thought and you do you go deeper
than thought and you find what you feel
and I say interesting first you tell me
what you think then you tell me what you
feel can you go deeper than feelings and
eventually as you said your mind will
tie itself in knots what did you call it
a thought bomb yeah the thought bomb
will go off and there'll be nothing
there and you'll tell me the truth that
you don't really know who you are and
then we get excited now we're getting
nowhere finally
[Laughter]
and we look into the mystery this don't
know mind is what knows we call it not
knowing mind this is I know mind
problematic arrogant this is don't know
mind and ironically this mind doesn't
know and this mind is open honest
vulnerable and knows a great deal it
knows that this awareness that's looking
out through these eyes into those eyes
those eyes into these eyes this
awareness was never born and will never
die
it changes bodies like you change
clothes how many times was this
awareness abandoned in the forest and
eaten by wolves and how is that related
to your fear of being abandoned
now we're getting nowhere and fast and
the Dharma gate to the mystery begins to
open so that that process you're just
describing so ken wilber talks about
showing up cleaning up growing up and
waking up so that sounds to me like a
waking up process what what I'm struck
by is that people like Jordan Peterson
have had a very strong grow up message
and I guess a clean up message look at
your stuff you clean outlook yeah clean
out your shadows yeah what do you feel
the culture needs right now of those or
is it all of them is there anything
particular that the culture is begging
for all of them and we've added one more
mm-hmm it's essential to wake up this is
the most important thing because this is
what
whar growing up continuing to evolve is
also essential if you stay stuck and
uninvolved you stay stuck and unevolved
you stay where you are the one that
we've added right here is up I
don't know about you but I've learned
everything I know by making mistakes if
I can't up I can't learn I'm
terrified of not up now if I am
shopping for a brain surgeon I want one
that already knows I don't want one
that's in the upstage and if I'm
shopping for a Zen master there's some
truth to there too if I'm shopping for a
therapist but I don't want one that's so
rigid they're unable to take risks and
work with me that they're they're
terrified of up because you are
gonna up that's why the next one
cleaning up is important as soon as you
realize you up and you've learned
what's going to be helpful for you to
continue then you clean it up very
quickly as efficiently as possible and
only then can you show up as a fully
awake evolved compassionate human being
so all of those processes the the waking
up the showing up the growing up the
 up all of them have a
developmental quality to them all of
integral is all a developmental model we
are moving towards something an
evolution and development is core to
existence I think that's one of the
great gifts of what integral is shown
we've often talked amongst ourselves
around that the developmental model
isn't so present in the cultural
conversations that we're covering often
with the intellectual darkweb it is a
bit with jordan peterson he talks about
for example Piaget
why is something like integral important
why is it important to see the world
developmentally do you think I think
it's critical to move out of I'm right
and you're wrong space the whole problem
with all what our so-called first tier
levels of development which is through
green is that they all believe they're
right and everybody else is wrong
nobody's that smart what happens when
you go beyond that is you can see that
this is an evolutionary sequence and
that one stage is more right than the
stage before it and the stage after it
is more right than the stage before it
and the stage after it is more right
than the stage before it what gets real
tricky is as Piaget was so good at
displaying the capacity to see and
evolve has to happen and the way to look
at this is to look at it that when the
ego first shows up that's a first person
perspective I'm not capable yet of
taking a second person perspective if
if I show this to a three-year-old I say
what color do you see like what color do
you see what what color do I see white
but the three-year-old says black
there's no ability to abstractly take a
second person perspective and
theoretically see what I'm seeing that
doesn't happen until about five or six
years old and that's where we start
getting enculturated into our parents
belief system so this is really an
important thing to understand if the
capacity to see isn't there a second
person perspective there's no way I can
teach you to do that you have to evolve
the capacity the third person
perspective which happens about puberty
and happened in the Enlightenment in our
culture this has the capacity for
operational thinking right now we can
abstract rules they don't have to be
concrete they can they can be more
abstract and I can theorize the
scientific method is born if I only have
a second person perspective like common
people in the Middle Ages there's no
possibility that I could develop a
scientific methodology I don't have a
third person perspective now to move
into post modernity what we're referring
to is the green altitude you have to
have a fourth person perspective which
is you have to be capable of seeing
systems theory and you see the whole
system in which the third person
perspective is embodied in that's a
fourth person perspective the reason
Trump can't save the environmental
problems is he does not have the
capacity to take a fourth person
perspective he can't see the whole
that these problems are embedded in and
that's been true of many scientists
until the evidence is so overwhelming
that they can no longer argue with it
it's true a businessmen they don't see
the problem they don't take a systems
view they don't have the capacity no
matter how intelligent they are to take
a fourth person perspective now the
fifth person perspective is the
evolutionary perspective and very few
people have the capacity to see the
evolutionary nature of these
perspectives so you can preach you can
talk you could twist their arm you can
insult them you can bribe them and
nothing helps until they've evolved to
the point where they're ready and they
have the capacity so my final question
is what is what do you feel is the main
thing standing in the way of us taking
that step taking that evolution to that
kind of perspective as a species right
now
this is a really important question and
to answer this question it's really
important to understand the difference
between an individual hold on and a
social whole lot the explain would hold
on is for any of you is something a
whole lawn is a whole system it's a
functioning system you're a whole lot
I'm a whole lot our Sangha are our
integrals end community your rebel
wisdom community is a social whole on
now there's a really important
difference between an individual hold on
and a social hold on and an individual
holon has a dominant mode a dominant
monad you have an individual ability to
make a decision
now your body is a whole lot and it
includes this ability to make decisions
if you decide to walk out that door you
can't leave your hand here without
radical surgery now if this group of
people assembled here today if you
decide to walk out that door you can
walk out that door a social hole on
doesn't have the same limitations as a
the your body is a whole lot you know a
flock of geese is flying south one goose
can fly north not a problem so a whole
social whole one doesn't have a dominant
monad they don't have the capacity to
make decisions they have a dominant mode
of communication and so when we're
talking about evolution we can help an
individual evolve at least to the next
step we can help an individual awaken
social whole ons don't awaken groups
don't wake up individuals wake up it's a
function of it requires a dominant monad
to awaken so the chances of getting a
whole group to evolve short of something
really radical happening that causes us
to have to evolve or a brush with death
that is so radical that it terrifies us
and shocks us into something that would
not normally happen a freak of evolution
for example are pretty slim so I don't
spend a lot of time hoping that as a
species we're going to wake up and I
don't spend a lot of time trying to make
that happen because it's not
helpful hmm so it's up to us as
individuals I work with individuals I
work with groups
I don't work with species I don't know
how to work with species beautiful dusty
thank you so much it's been a pleasure
again