howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
rut show com that's Jim rut show com
today's guest is Joe Edelman philosopher
social scientist and designer it's good
to be here Jim thank you hey Joe it's
great to have you on board for the show
Joe's the founder and flight attendant
at human systems can get human systems
at human - systems org human systems is
a network for mentorship and research
around one global challenge redesigning
social systems so as to better support
meaningful lives and human values human
systems is a network for mentorship and
research that gets to some of the meat
of the deepest issues of our time let's
start with what you mean by meaningful
lives there's been a lot of talk
recently in circles I travel and about a
meaning crisis I'm not quite sure truly
what that means so you know I'm gonna
open it up to you what is a meaningful
life and do you see a meaning crisis in
modern life yeah absolutely so I think
the question here is what are the atoms
of meaning and what is that one of the
atoms of life meaning and I think that
they're values so living by your values
is kind of like what makes life
meaningful so to give a really concrete
example if you really believe in being
honest or deepening your relationships
or getting real but you have a
conversation where it's difficult to get
real but you do it that's the kind of
thing that makes for a meaningful life
or if you're super into creative
productivity and and generative
brainstorming with somebody and then you
find a way to do that with somebody new
that's a little piece of a meaningful
life so I come to this conclusion
that meaningful lives and human values
are
quite closely related kind of
empirically by looking at what are the
most meaningful times that people report
what are the least meaningful times
what's the difference between the most
and the least and I've come to the
conclusion that has a lot to do with
with the person's values I like that but
and if it does then there's this kind of
explanation for the meaning crisis which
is in many places in our lives different
kinds of game theoretic or strategic
incentives or social norms and
performances that require certain
expectations live up to certain
expectations like the performance of
professionalism or the kinds of
performances that we do on social media
these are crowding out situations or
live life values so we approach a
situation and because of the strategic
incentives of the situation or because
of the norms that impose in the
situation our values are no longer kind
of top of mind because there's some more
pressing concern and so the more that
happens the more that our we are part of
strategic and norm driven systems with
less slack for living by values the more
there's a kind of a meaning crisis where
it's impossible for people to live in
the way that's meaningful for them I
like that a lot because it's quite
simple unfortunately a lot of the talk
about meaning crisis you know it leaves
me scratching my head I don't really you
know what the hell they're talking about
but yours is a very good solid tangible
example in a lot of your work you've
done for a long time even way back
yonder and the game early game B days
you always stress the importance of
values you know that's a term that's
often been you know kind of politicized
you know think things like GOP family
values etc and I know you don't mean
exactly things like that what do you
mean when you say values maybe give us
some example yeah sure so I think
there's a difference between what I mean
by values is a kind of heuristic that we
use to interact improvisationally in a
way that we've decided as part of the
good life or is what's meaningful to us
so the examples I gave before about
creatively riffing with somebody or
being honest are good examples of values
something I specifically don't mean by
values are the things that I cover with
terms like social norms or ideological
commitments so this is when you're
modeling a certain behavior or you want
a certain behavior to be normal so
you're either trying to set a norm you
say for instance people shouldn't flirt
in the office or we have to check our
privilege or we need to support the
troops these are statements that are not
really about me improvising in the
moment making my social interactions and
decisions for myself in a way that's
meaningful to me they're kind of
ideologies that I'm battling for I'm
saying that a space out there in public
should be different it should be one
where our troops are supported or one
where and you can do that with honesty
for instance two you can say oh we
should all be honest this is a space
where we demand honesty and that's a
situation where you're turning honesty
and it's no longer acting as a personal
value it's acting as an ideological
commitment and so this is I think the
missing distinction if you can separate
out the ideological who and some of
which are quite reasonable like it makes
sense for us to discuss what's normal in
a space like whether it's okay to flirt
in the office it's totally cool to have
those conversations but they're not the
same as values and it's the same with
many of the larger banners that we're
fighting in our society like support our
troops make America great again
fight the patriarchy all of these are
maybe necessary conversations to have
but they're not exactly the same as what
I mean by values and they're not what
makes an individual life meaningful you
use the expression we have decided about
values so I'm gonna tease that apart to
what degree are values truly personal or
to what degree are they a consensus that
arises amongst a community of
interaction hmmm now use have a social
life it's just different than the social
life of social norms or ideological
commitments but all of them are irony
you could say socially constructed or
they have some kind of at the D me ology
where they spread to a population so I
don't mean that they just like arise
spontaneously inside of an individual
human soul but values spread by things
like admiration inspiration appreciation
so you see somebody who's curious in a
way that you want to be and it shows you
how to improvise
in a different way the way that they do
you see how they do it and it feels
meaningful when you see them do it and
then you try doing it yourself it feels
meaningful when you do it yourself
and so this is how we learn from
role-models mentors things like that and
this is really different than the ways
that social norms spread through
pressure usually like if you're not
professional you'll get fired and I do
like women spread through some other
kind of rational argumentation kind of
thing or there's in-group out-group
dynamics there's a bunch of different
ways that I do logic wounds spread but
but one way they spread is like I see
that if I'm gonna have a safe workplace
then we we need to make it not okay to
flirt in the workplace so I decide that
I need to fight for our workplace where
we don't flirt that's a really different
kind of epidemiology than the admiration
story interesting they know what that
really brings up to me tell me if I'm
right or wrong here but your definition
of values strikes me as very similar to
the traditional category known as
character if we go back to Aristotle you
know who calls excellence of character a
very important way in which we organize
society did you maybe tease apart any
distinction if there is or if there
isn't say hey yeah they're the same
thing they're very close to the same
thing I think that Greeks were less
confused about values than we are I
think the medieval church was probably
in the West got people really confused
between norms and values because it was
kind of interested in confusing those
two categories but before that like the
Greeks and even Aquinas earlier thinkers
and philosophers were kind of clear
about this category which includes I
call it values this is very broad term
slightly narrower terms are virtues
character but those are maybe subsets
when Aristotle was talking about
character he meant something that's
closer to what I might call moral values
but unfortunately in medieval times and
sense and Enlightenment times the term
moral also got mixed up with social
norms so it's really hard to like take
the Greek
and map it clearly to the present
because there have been so many layers
of confusion in between them and us but
I think that one thing that Greeks had
more right and you can see this in
Plato's symposium for instance is that
they didn't make so much of his stink
she in between what we might call moral
values and what we might call aesthetic
values at least in terms of a life
well-lived if you look at Plato's
symposium you have a bunch of Greeks
arguing about what makes their kind of
acquit they have an equivalence between
what makes a beautiful alive what makes
a good life what makes a true life and
so if character does this spread like if
it includes both the aesthetic and the
moral then it's yes very close to what I
would call values ah I like it and of
course since Aristotle we've had things
like we might call them systems of
character one that seems to be kind of
in the upswing right now is stoicism do
you have any view on those kinds of what
I might call packages of values or
packages of character are they useful
yeah absolutely
I think what's the one thing that's true
about values is they're kind of
multivalent or you can explore like if
you make a roof decision like am I going
to be monogamous or poly amorous or
something then there's a bunch of
different values that you might discover
in each direction so people kind of
diverge or explore a complex space of
different sets of values that work
together in business there's a set of
values that go with ruthlessness and a
different set of values that go with
collaboration and so some people end up
in one subtree some people end up in
another subtree and so maybe that's one
way to think about what stoicism or even
certain branches of Christianity are is
explorations of a coherent subtree yeah
that's a good thought and I think the
fact that there are differences is
really important and something that our
current society seems to be having more
and more difficulty dealing with you
know from one of your class descriptions
which I pulled off online you said being
meaning first involves getting a grip on
others values which might be very
different from yours so it sounds like
you know you're well aware of and a
supporter of the idea of pluralism could
you talk a little bit about that and why
does it that we seen behaves in such a
hard time with accepting the fact that
people's values might be different from
ours hmm I think it comes down to this
distinction I was making earlier between
ideological commitments or social norms
and values so one thing we've seen over
the last 100 150 years is a collapse in
the fractal nature and the number of
social spaces so it used to be that you
had all these different churches and
families and not really much visibility
into the other kinds of things and there
have been kind of two trends there one
is a flattening where we go as like all
of societies has been flattening into
kind of the government takes care of the
individuals so there's kind of two
layers there's like a social safety net
and the individuals and there's less of
these intermediate social fabric of
different kinds of religious groups and
congregations and communities and so on
this has been collapsing some and then
also there's social networking things
like that there's been this kind of like
panopticon effect of modern media and so
these make the areas that are governed
by idealize commitments of social norms
much bigger like if everybody's watching
the same comedians then it's really
important what standards we hold them to
and that we all agree and have the same
standards and assert these standards so
that you know the one thing that we're
all deciding whether that's whether
there's a social safety net or whether
the comedian behavior is okay you know
we have the idea that there's one social
space and that we all have to decide
what's right in it we don't really have
this idea with with values if you're
capable of making this distinction
between ideological commitments and
values then it's fine for someone else
to find something else that's like
personally meaningful like you want to
be really honest and they want to be
really creative
that's fine there's no problem there and
you you can both make spaces for you to
prove you to pursue your values so I
think once you get clear on this
distinction then this problem gets a lot
more less severe and pluralism is just
obviously the right answer but maybe
it's at the values level it's obvious
but maybe not I know I'm currently
involved in a couple of threads on
Twitter about metaphysics and it's
important so I put that kind of in the
values category rights quite personal
and I take a radical view that
metaphysics ain't that important and if
you're gonna have metaphysics it might
well be as simple as possible and that
really seems to get some people annoyed
and they start arguing with me right and
I go well you know why you arguing with
me but none of us know a goddamn thing
about mental you know what is the real
ground of being right we just make some
 up and we medically propagate it
and it sticks on some people doesn't
stick on others so you know what's wrong
with us
each having our own view of metaphysics
and be willing to boldly put ours forth
and defend it but also be honest about
its limits and yet when that happens it
clearly stirs people up hmm I don't know
I because I would have to look into we
have a interview technique we use that
we call it if any interviews that tries
to get at the values behind these kinds
of disagreements or positions and I
would have to interview these people and
see what's stirring them up to see if
it's really a value difference my sense
is if it is a values difference once it
was revealed as such my sense is that
maybe it's problematic because you have
this shared social space and maybe you
want to have one conversation and once
the different values were clear it might
be also clear that it makes sense to
have more than one conversation or
something like that yo or though we just
there's just some fundamental
differences of views about things oh
well right and that we don't all have to
agree you know one of the things I love
the point people too is I think one of
the most important documents from the
Enlightenment but it's very little
talked about in our schools or anywhere
and that's the Virginia statute of
religious freedom of 1777 it was written
fourteen years before the First
Amendment was ratified and it was
written by Jefferson and Madison two
characters who popped up later in
history it's available on Wikipedia just
type in Virginia statute for religious
freedom and it takes a very strong and
wonderful principled perspective on how
you know the idea that we should demand
uniformity and metaphysical commitments
is just a bad idea and it's even worse
to give anything like government
authority to it for such I would really
recommend people take a look at that
they want our old yet at this point
fresh look at the ideal pluralism sure I
do think that we're looking for to have
an idea of pluralism and to think as a
society that pluralism is a good idea
you have to kind of be able to make a
kind of a map of diversity in your mind
and see it working out and I think we're
pretty good at doing that with goals and
preferences like we're like oh some
people prefer tennis and some people
prefer video games and you can kind of
imagine what a society is like where
some people play tennis and some people
play video games and it's alright but I
think because the whole idea of values
in the sense of what values are in art
and diversity of values it's like a lot
harder for people to imagine because
we're less articulate about values than
we are about preferences this makes it
harder for the public right now to
really buy into value pluralism yeah it
might be useful you know for us all to
you know try to propagate your
distinction that these things that you
call values are distinct from social
norms and let us have a conversation
about those values because people don't
generally have a conversation of things
at that level yeah I think that make
might be part of the issue and I will
also say when I talk about pluralism I
also warn you know that infinite
pluralism or infinite diversity ain't a
good thing one of things I find most
annoying about our current world is that
people use the word diversity as if it's
a monotonic whole increasing good you
know more diversity is good and that's
not probably not true almost certainly
if I definitely not true there's some
optimal amount of diversity in any given
domain and the example I give is there
are very very few people that would like
to live in a town where every person
spoke a different language and nobody
spoke two languages that would be highly
annoying and yet it would be very
diverse and so I've been trying to push
forth the idea of something I call
coherent pluralism which is to tune some
coherence and some pluralism so there's
a few things we agree on
you know maybe honesty and good faith
and maybe it's a few more than that and
that we have pluralism and other
dimensions you know same would be true
and then in the neighborhood maybe we
have 300 languages spoken but it'd be
great if there was
one language that we all spoke and so
you know thinking about the tension
between coherence and pluralism is also
something that least strikes me as
making sense and might apply to your
values level yeah well I think I think
actually this ideological movements our
social norms versus values thing Maps
pretty well onto your coherence versus
diversity thing my guess is that in the
realm of values the normal functions by
which shared values emerge which are
admiration inspiration appreciation
experimentation and reflection roughly
these these and shared practices maybe
which is sort of part of experimentation
these work very well so that my guess is
that that you don't need some mind
shared values if you have a situation
where people can appreciate each other
admire each other and so on where they
can experiment together you're going to
end up with maybe the nearly optimal
amount of value coherence versus value
diversity what's in trouble is not
actually this coherence force diversity
issue in the realm of values but in the
realm of social norms where our social
spaces have been so reconfigured that
we're scrambling to find those minimal
norms like you were saying like I think
that may be acting in good faith could
be a social norm where it makes sense
actually to reject those who are not
doing that so this would make it a
social norm it's something that's
maintained by a pressure it's something
that's an expectation that we all have
that's a social norm and that's
something that maybe should be more
coherent and it's this area in the realm
of social norms and ideological
commitments where it maybe make sense to
worry about what kinds of coherence we
need to find maybe but I have to tell
you in the area of well I would call
values maybe I'm wrong here in your
definition I'm seeing some pretty
strange divergences in sort of deep
values what I might call the and bothers
me maybe I'm just an old fuddy-duddy but
it seems to be a growing amount what I
might call anti enlightenment thinking
which to me seems like people who are
actually insane you know post-modernism
etc and those strike me is pretty close
to values as opposed to social norms am
I getting that right or am i mixing my
levels
oh it's a good question again I might
have to interview these people but even
if it is in the realm of values it may
also be a breakdown in this kind of
systems of admiration appreciation
inspiration and experimentation one of
the things that's happening is that
there's so much discourse around
ideology right now especially in the
internet places like Twitter so much is
ideological that the discourse around
values and people just being kind of
impressed with each other's character or
whatever this is being crowded out so I
think there's actually been a reduction
an unusual reduction in the amount of
admiration and mentorship and role
modeling and so on entry of course that
also speaks to the weak nature of
internet links it's something that
something an again I've been pushing for
years you may remember it from the old
game B days is the distinction between
weak links and strong links online I
would posit we mostly make weak links
because of the low bandwidth if nothing
else right we don't see body language we
don't smell we don't see the person's
eyes etc we don't see how they
physically occupy space etc and so it
may be a lot harder to even visualize
character and values in these low
bandwidth environments like online while
face-to-face we seem to do that
naturally what I call strong links and
it seems to me that if we're going to
really take advantage of our new
capabilities in a networked world being
discerning about how we mix strong links
and weak links may be important I know I
go out of my way to try to track down
people who I find interesting online and
engage them in a video chat for instance
what which while not as good as
face-to-face is a hell of a lot higher
bandwidth in this ability to access
people's character and values than you
know a stream of text on Twitter
absolutely yeah and most of my internet
career you know I worked at couchsurfing
and I started this startup ground crew
and both of those were online to offline
websites where people would meet each
other or kind of connect through
profiles online but then meet each other
in person I think this is a we need much
more of that I am kind of optimistic
that if there were social networks that
were built
specifically around things like admiring
each other we might be able to do better
online as well that's kind of a cool
idea could you unpack that a little bit
well so one thing that I would love for
Facebook newsfeed to do
I'll get maybe two examples so one
example is imagine if on newsfeed when
you posted a news link
it asked you why you care and somehow
through some interactive process got
down to the value that you think like
the thing that you think is important
that's relevant to the for you
personally that's relevant to the news
story so you're you're posting a link on
the news about Trump making America
great again and like doing something for
coal miners or something and somehow the
website interviews you and it ends up
with the idea that you value small-town
living and there are particular kinds of
relationships that you have in your
small town that are endangered by
economic decline that you think are
actually really special and you don't
think those relationships are you know
the same and cities and that they're
really valuable and so somehow it
captures this value and puts it up top
and makes the news link subsidiary to
that so the big thing is your value you
say small town living and these
relationships and then the news link is
you know smaller and available now I
think there would be a lot less debate
on that on the comment thread under that
like people be like wow like yeah small
town living I haven't really thought
about that I live in a city I want to
learn more about your relationships etc
right instead of saying like no Trump is
a bad guy or whatever like he's not
making America great again so that the
discussion would be completely different
and I also think that people would find
something to like and admire about
people that they they don't know so
that's one example I like that and it's
implementable where I can actually see
how one might implement that why do you
think we haven't seen things like that I
think our culture is really really
confused between values social norms
ideological commitments nobody knows the
difference even in their own life like
if you have this people have this idea
about being a good man or a good husband
or a good entrepreneur and they haven't
decomposed this into it's actually made
up of all three like it
made up the idea of being a good
entrepreneur is made up of some values
some social norms that go with
entrepreneurship and some ideological
movements where you think more people
should be like this or something because
that will make a good Society and no one
knows how to decompose that and so this
everything gets lumped in the kind of
like this is what's important to me
bucket and no one can imagine this
interview process that you would need to
be able to pull out the values
interesting okay so it might even call
it an ontological problem not in the
metaphysical sense but in the category
sense that we use in everyday life that
if people have this kind of swarm of
things that they're worried about but
haven't thought about the distinction
between values norms and ideological
commitments then it's gonna be difficult
for them to prioritize values for
instance totally and I've actually
proven this and this is the kind of the
big success of human systems so far is
that when we train people to make these
distinctions and see a couple other
things like how norms evolve when we
train people to do this they actually
design dramatically different things and
those things actually tend to work do
something very different socially and
we've seen this in social networks we've
seen this in other kinds of policy
designs and social space designs so it's
a kind of a existence proof that if
people can get clear ontological e
something very different as possible
are there any publicly available like
say social media sites that yet
exemplify these distinctions yeah
absolutely
one of them is named jolly Jo lly it's
calm yeah it's a LinkedIn competitor
based around meaningful work and so one
of things it does is try to separate it
does this kind of interview process to
figure out what your work-related values
where if you can work in a place where
those values are supported and not
suppressed you'll do well figures out
what your work great values are and to
do that it needs to separate out your
ideological commitments and norms it
needs to separate out how you think you
should be like you should be
professional are you how you think where
places should be and focused just in on
the values and then it does a kind of a
workplace matching search you
marketplace thing with employers around
those values so that's one example we
have we have several different startups
social startups that have gone through
our program ah very cool we'll put a
link to those on our episode page so
people take a look at them we talked a
lot about values we've talked in passing
about norms and ideological commitments
could you tease out norms and
ideological commitments how they differ
from values and from each other mm-hmm
yeah so enormous ideological movements
are kind of two sides of the same coin
something that seems to be part of human
nature is that we battle for what's okay
in a space so you know it's okay to go
to work naked no and this is a good less
you work at a nudist colony all right
you work at a nudist colony be okay yeah
exactly so there's this kind of like
almost imaginary readwrite list of
what's okay and what's not okay in every
single social space we're in like
whether it's an intimate marriage or
whether it's a workplace or the street
or the sidewalk it's almost like there's
this you know imaginary chairlift that
everybody can see two different
resolutions and then we all keep track
of and it's just part of our machinery
and this is not really about what's
meaningful to us there's a whole bunch
of more or less strategic concerns that
go into the formation of norms so you
can imagine that you work at a place
which does stand-up meetings first thing
in the day a norm that will arise in
this kind of workplace is getting right
to the point right because it wastes
everybody's time if you're doing the
stand-up meeting and somebody's like
going on and on and on and not really
getting to the point of their concern or
whatever right so this doesn't say
anything about what's meaningful to
people it doesn't say oh it's really
meaningful to get to the point or
something but people will develop an
ideological commitment to getting to the
point because there's a big social cost
to not doing it and they'll feel a
pressure to get to the point which is
the social norm part coming from the
other people so you see that social it's
really just like whether I call it an
ideological commitment or a social norm
it's just about whether I'm trying to
set an expectation or meet an
expectation
either way the expectation is this kind
of thing that's in the space and that we
sometimes fight
because sometimes there's differing
incentives for different people norms
evolved through a relatively robust
mechanism and in all sorts of different
kinds of situations based in the
structure in the situation when driving
we have a norm of either
everybody has to drive on the right side
or in the UK everybody has to drive on
the left side but this kind of social
negotiation gets set up because there's
really high costs for not setting it up
and social norms and idealized
commitments generally work in that way
yeah I could see how the norms part
works like very interesting example and
when you and I both sat in enough
business meetings to know that there is
this tension where people want airtime
right somehow in the business world
people think the more air time they have
in meetings the more important they are
of course they don't realize if they're
a idiot
all they're doing is advertising that
fact of the world but nonetheless there
is that tension well on the other side
there's a community interest in keeping
air time as short as is reasonable to
get the core of the ideas across and so
we're gonna have this dynamic group
versus individual misalignment I guess I
would say and that norms I would say are
a dynamic equilibrium between those two
sure yeah I don't think that anybody
only a very powerless person is
completely obeying the norms that have
been written into their social
environments everybody's trying to
calculate how much they need to obey the
norms and how much freedom they can give
themselves to live by other strategic
incentives they have or to live by their
values we only really get to live by our
values when neither norms nor other
strategic incentives are operating
really strongly on us yeah what is that
right or are they operating at different
levels in which you know that working
within the norms you can do without
violating your values or is there a
natural tension between the two I think
there's a tension I think that you can
say that I guess what I think is that
values are although this is getting
pretty esoteric and I'm not really
committed to these views values are all
we really care about in long run values
this is what makes for a meaningful life
but we do some
kinds of trade-offs about well if I if I
don't really live by my values at work
then I I'll continue to work there I'll
get paid and I'll be able to feed my
family and so this is another way that I
get to live by my values so it's worth
it to sacrifice my values over here to
be able to live by my values over here
and so values are all that matters kind
of at the end of the day but in the
middle of the day we're constantly
making trade-offs of values against like
against our values and for social norms
like professionalism at work or
strategic incentives like making a
promotion yeah
maybe more neutrally you only talk about
trade-offs in the world the universe is
full of trade-offs maybe we're talking
about the fact that your values are
personal as you've made pretty clear but
in any multi person system there's going
to be inevitably coordination issues
right and the example we talked about
earlier
then maybe my value is I want to be
really open and really share everything
that's inside my head you know so that
would lead you to being highly garrulous
and going into you know seven levels of
meaning on every topic and yet if
everybody did that in a stand-up meeting
in 15 minutes the 15 minute meeting
would become 15 hours so we have a
legitimate coordination issue where we
have to as a group of say 30 people on a
stand-up meeting collectively get the
most value out of that 15 minutes as
possible even though by definition
closing that coordination value is gonna
cramp people who have a value for
open-ended discourse shall we say sure
yeah exactly that's what I believe I
believe that norms in general always
evolve because of coordination problems
exactly like the ones you you said and
one of the other big mistakes we're
making as a culture is missing that and
this is also something that we teach you
can't just make up a norm about like
let's say gender roles or something you
can't just arbitrarily decide what kind
of norm you wish like how you everybody
should behave and then enforce it you
have to understand what coordination
problem the norm is there to solve and
then find maybe a new set of norms but
instead of norms that actually addresses
the underlying coordination problem
otherwise you're just starting a war
it's doomed to fail now is that part of
the distinction between an ideological
commitment and a norm that a norm is an
evolved solution to a coordination
problem while an ideological commitment
is a top-down statement of how one
thinks things ought to be in the norm
space
sure yeah absolutely I don't usually
teach it that way but I think that's
that's that has legs it's good how would
you teach the distinction between
ideological commitments and norms well
yeah I think that the issue is that the
solution of the coordination problem
doesn't really just emerge it's kind of
subject to debate and so that debate
actually involves different people's
wrong ideas about what the norm should
be so there's just not a clear-cut
distinction between the two kinds of
things that like a sort of bottom-up and
top-down kind of mode that you were
talking about really the bottom-up
includes a lot of top-down arguing and
so when I use the terms I just refer to
ideological it minces when it's kind of
outward like I have an idea about how
things should be and norms when it's
inward I sense what the norm is in the
space and I try to comply let me throw
out what I use as a probe for these
kinds of things all the time because
it's it's in some in some ways different
than some of them talked about which is
punctuality one things we know is that
cultures differ hugely in how they view
punctuality let's even narrow it to a
business sentence you know the
difference between business meetings in
Italy and business meetings in Germany
for instance right
how would you place punctuality in the
space of norms versus ideology if you're
any of either of these countries it's
probably just a norm in most of the
spaces that you're involved in and we
could even say that there's multiple
solutions to this coordination problem
and they have different trade-offs and
they've just been these different
countries has has settled on different
areas in the solution space and thus
different norms but if you have the idea
let's say you grew up in Germany and you
go to the US or something and you have
the idea that it would be better in the
second country if things were like the
first country then you're maybe trying
to spread an ideological commitment to
punctuality and if you actually
try to find some way to do that in a
position of power like let's say you
take over our company and you say that
you know there'll be this payroll
penalty for people who are late then you
actually may be in a situation where
you're changing the norms in that
country or in that area otherwise you
just it stays I would just call it an
ideological movement okay that's
interesting yeah one of the startups I
did it was extremely fast startup we
went from you know zero to 100 people in
like six months and very early on I did
exactly that it's interesting we did do
a equivalent of a stand-up with a
different name for it and a little
different format but people were not on
time goddamn it right and so I started
charging him a dollar a minute for being
late and it stopped real quick so there
was an example where you know I chose an
ideological commitment which resulted in
a norm yeah exactly
I think we've probed on this a lot this
has been hugely interesting let's move
on you coined the term time well-spent a
concept that has long intrigued me in
fact I must say I've been a little
disappointed that it hasn't propagated
further you know sometimes I will put
down on when I do I like a movie review
or a book review all if I really like it
I'll put hashtag time well-spent but
that has not spread could you tell us a
little bit uh time well-spent what what
you mean and where that concept is today
yeah I coined this with a really
specific meaning which is an alternative
to engagement metrics in the tech
industry so most of technology is built
around the idea of maximizing time on
site or time spent YouTube wants to get
people to watch the most YouTube videos
to spend the most time watching YouTube
videos newsfeed for a long time wanted
people to spend the most time on
newsfeed and this is really bad creates
a lot of negative externalities and a
war for people's attention which is
ruthless and creates a lot of regret
because people regret if they if they're
manipulated into spending the most time
they can on a site they regret a lot of
the time they spent and so in 2016 I
wanted to show the tech industry what
else they could measure
and what else they could count a success
instead of time spent that would create
a better ecosystem and so I coined time
well-spent to be this other metric a
number that matches roughly the amount
of time that people feel was on the
margin a great use of their time on
newsfeed or YouTube or whatever and so
this you can also measure with surveys
by interviewing someone about what they
did yesterday and saying you know was
this you spent this much time doing this
was that a better use of your time and
everything else you could have been
doing at that time and maybe even
helping them think about other things
that they could have been doing at that
time and if they say holy yes that
was the best thing I could be doing then
you count that towards the number so I
gave a talk cause anything worth
maximizing in 2016 and that showed how
to calculate this number what to do with
the surveys and this talk was quite
influential it was adopted at News Feed
it was adopted in some of the
measurements used it's Siri and the iOS
App Store some measurements of some
products at Google so actually this
narrow meaning of time well-spent was
fairly successful in the tech industry
at pointing to another number to
maximize it's difficult because a lot of
these companies are advertising based
and so when they focus on this number
that they want to keep lower that also
maybe reduces the amount of ads they get
to show but in general it's worth it
because there's some loss in the value
of the brand if people regret most of
their time with it
yep that's interesting but it may also
have helped the tech companies if it
became more a more general human tag
time well-spent
this was actually time well-spent so all
your listeners out there if you see
things you like I review books talk
about going to restaurants or seeing
shows if you really do think it was
about the best we could have spent the
time give it the hashtag time well spent
let's see if this thing can break out of
the techno sphere and out into the
popular sphere hmm you like that idea is
that a bad idea I like it but I think
that why
thing that I was missing in that 2016
talk was this analysis that the level of
values and getting into the details of
how people want to live because I think
it's actually pretty hard for a lot of
people to do all of that accounting
themselves and to decide what is time
well spent for them and what's not some
people who are like right at the edge of
a meaningful life their life is some
days very meaningful and some days they
get stuck on YouTube and it's not those
people will have a pretty easy time
deciding what deserves the time well
spent tag but people that are not quite
riding that edge will have a harder time
doing the kind of internal accounting
which involves kind of implicitly
subtracting the life that you're
actually living from the life that you
want to live or that's most meaningful
to you this kind of subtraction more
people may need some help doing how
might one help somebody to make that
analysis when talking about social norms
I didn't talk much about something that
in the class we call internalized norms
a little bit so if you have the idea
that you want to be a good father a good
entrepreneur you want to be crushing it
killing it you wanna be productive most
of these things are not actually
people's values like people think that
the way they should be living there's a
mismatch between that and what is really
meaningful to them and often the way
people think they should be living which
we call sometimes their internalized
norms would actually be horrible for
them you know so like if you think for
instance that you should always be
dieting and doing push-ups and working
on your side business you know maybe
that life actually sucks like maybe it's
exhausting and you know you're starving
yourself or whatever and you've had
these internalized norms which don't
actually map well to what's meaningful
to you and so unless there's some kind
of interview process or someone helps
you figure out what's actually
meaningful to you
what's watching this YouTube actually
meaningful to you or was it like just an
example of you kind of performing for
yourself something about finally being
productive unless somebody can learn to
kind of tease those apart
the algorithm or the the hashtag or
whatever is going to kind of map to the
wrong things
in some portion of the population that
has strong internalized norms okay
that's interesting I'm not quite sure I
totally get it but I got a sense of
where you're going let's switch a little
bit and talk about the thing you talked
about a minute or two ago which is that
goddamn incentives that come from
advertising supported business models
you know I've been involved with the
online world building products and
companies there since 1980 oh man what's
at the source the very first consumer
online service back in the day and we
had the advantage I would now say that
we charged for our services right and we
charged a fair amount
you know people find it hard to believe
but we had basically most of the things
on the web today except porn character
mold only 30 characters a second ten
bucks an hour seems outrageously
expensive but it was the only thing like
it on earth and the substrates were
expensive then however that made us
think about our products in a very
different way we did not want our
customers to stay on too long
surprisingly even though it maximized
that revenue because we discovered that
if we did and we sent them an eight
hundred dollar bill they quit right so
we want we needed to implicitly or
explicitly optimize their time spent
versus value received in this current
world where most companies are
advertising supported it's quite
different you know at least at the first
order naive level it's how long can I
keep you online and you know maybe your
some of your recent influences have
changed that a little bit but it seems
like that's pretty well baked into an
advertising supported model you know how
much can we really fix an advertising
supported ecosystem I'm optimistic on
several levels with the big tech
companies well first let me talk about
some of the difficulties so I think
they're one of the main reasons why
there is so much ad supported tech and
social networking especially it's
because there is a very strong social
benefit in the network effects of having
liked the developing world of the third
world on the same platform as the first
world and having kind of one social
network especially in areas like
LinkedIn or when Facebook had graph
urghhh when it's possible to kind of
find introductions between people and
stuff there's this win in having one
kind of service that can reach also the
poor and this is pretty hard to do if
people are paying for memberships one
way that it can happen is if there are
something like like so iCloud or Google
Play services it's becoming more and
more common for people to pay a monthly
fee for their cloud services and these
can be different in different countries
and they can be much lower in poorer
countries so that people can still
afford to buy in and so one optimistic
transition is from advertising revenues
to kind of service fee monthly revenues
that are different country to country
another promising one is to change the
way ads work so right now
ads are mostly like conversion is enough
to get to add money and you can imagine
advertising network where the whole
pipeline only gets paid if the consumer
is really happy with the product or
service in the long run if it becomes
like an important part of their life so
they buy a bike and they're riding it
every day that's when Google gets paid
if they you know sign up for an online
service and they're regularly using it
and it becomes an important part of
their infrastructure in their lives
that's when Google gets paid and this
would lead I think to a very different
kind of AD model and ad supported
business these kinds of tech stack
companies would migrate towards
something more like health insurance
model where their intermediaries in
creating markets that give people good
lives or something like that so I think
that there's some hope in long term
transitions with these texts at
companies and there's also some
short-term hope because most of these
companies are kind of flushed with cash
and so they don't actually need to
maximize their ad revenue and what we've
seen with Facebook is
they've lowered their revenue to
increase to switch more it's time well
spent away from time spent they've
lowered their ad revenue and they've
also hired like something like a third
of Facebook now is social issues related
sociologists people that are worried
about things like political polarization
and bullying and sex trafficking and
stuff like that it's like a third of
their headcount so this is incredibly
big expense and so yeah I guess what
you're seeing is these companies aren't
maximizing profit or revenue at all
right now and so that sort of means that
it doesn't matter so much what the
business model is so long as it's in you
know a couple orders of magnitude
capable of paying the bills yeah I don't
know if that's true cuz if we do know
that you know the stock price of a
company is the present discounted value
its future cash flows and I would be
quite surprised if even Zuck who has
total control of his company doesn't pay
some attention to his stock price which
is by definition the integral of his
future cash flows discounted by some
reasonable discount rate sort of I mean
so he has to tell a story to keep his
shareholders happy and the story has to
go something like we have to reduce our
revenue to keep our brand good we have
to hire these you know sociologists
otherwise we're gonna get broken up by
Elizabeth Warren he has to tell a story
that he's making the best business
decision and it has to be convincing to
shareholders otherwise there's legal
ramifications even for him but I don't
know like with these big tech companies
their share price is not so closely tied
to like a straight accounting and also
like I said they're flush with cash so
they certainly don't have to I just just
pulled the chart up and Facebook's
revenue is up every year and its
quarterly revenues are also on a
trendline there's a some seasonality in
it and has been forever but I see no
sign that they're pulling back on
growing their revenue even as their user
base starts to stabilize at least in the
rich world
I'm not sure I see any empirical sign
that that hypothesis is true maybe I can
send you links to press releases and
shareholder calls after the podcast
there were specific points of time in
late 2015
mid 2017 where you know projections were
adjusted down where it's things like
that they have a lot of control one of
the advantages that Facebook has Google
has the same kind of thing is there's a
lot of knobs they can tweak to change
how much money they make every quarter
just by inserting you know slightly more
ads on the newsfeed exact like them and
so they can kind of cover up losses in
one area with gains in another and
they've done this to kind of manufacture
a smoother curve and they do with
otherwise half and we know why they play
those games I've been I've been the guy
on those earnings calls it's kind of
very interesting one of things I find
interesting about Facebook is for a
substantial period of time their average
revenue has stayed about $2 per active
user a month which I find pretty
interesting right they're actually
making a big profit $2.00 a month per
active user which indicates to me that a
paid model isn't that unfeasible I mean
there aren't too many people in the
world who can't afford $2.00 a month I
mean there are some for sure but in
certainly as a couple of billion people
in the world that could could afford to
pay that and we have all these
complaints about Facebook many of which
or all of which would go away if there
were many of which would go away if
there were no advertising and time
online supported incentives and for 2
bucks we could be out of that yeah I
think it's kind of unrealistic for two
reasons one is that is this commitment
that Facebook has to the developing
world but again like maybe through other
modifications to the model that could be
worked around they are looking at a
couple different there so they have a
payments revenue model growing through
messenger and this thing Libre that they
launched and they have a kind of
e-commerce thing called marketplace and
these things are kind of slowly growing
with a possibility that at some point
they disrupt kumain
appetizing business model but the other
thing is that people at Facebook are
convinced that a lot of their ad
business is beneficial a lot of it is
you know small businesses that are
connecting with communities and
consumers wouldn't find otherwise or
whatever I think the interesting
question is maybe just not like what
other business models for Facebook have
but how can you address those benefits
in the developing world with regard to
the you know the benefits of advertising
can you do that in a way that doesn't
have any of the drawbacks that the
current setup has and I'm optimistic in
that area and it the thing the solution
to that might be called advertising or
it might be something that's so
different from advertising that we
wouldn't call it the same thing but it's
still some kind of discovery process of
businesses and things I got yeah it is a
good point that you know say Facebook
advertising is actually really good for
certain kinds of small businesses and
the time I got deepest into Facebook
advertising it was sort of a Facebook
came on after I'd retired from business
so I never had to deal with it in my own
businesses but I helped my daughter and
some friends of hers launched a music
festival and I became an internet
marketing guy for it and I've quickly
found that by far the best was Facebook
you know for a few hundred bucks we
could drive quite significant ticket
purchase for a very obscure brand new
startup music festival there would have
probably been no other way to have done
that in the past so there was you know
the Facebook's existence actually
allowed a startup business to occur yeah
so if you can figure out how to have
that kind of benefit and not be other
costs I think I would be very interested
in I think probably many people at
Facebook would be very interested well I
might give that little thought another
very interesting comment I saw on one of
your web pages is that social software
is different from laws and social
conventions you said it guides us much
more strictly through certain actions
and ways of relating and as a result we
have less of a chance to pursue our own
values as you said in practice laws
can't structure social life that tightly
even the worst dictatorships as law
something like for instance Twitter code
would be impossible to enforce but its
software
it's impossible not to comply I don't
know why I never had that thought before
but I loved reading that and that is so
very true could you say a little bit
about that sure
although I think you kind of that was
them that was the best quote yeah I
think this is a characteristic of how
we've learned to design social software
now and I hope that it will change and I
even have some experiments in this
regard I have a chatroom software called
habitat or bonobo that I made a couple
years ago it's a chat room that you can
change the rules in it in so you can say
like I don't know if some of your
listeners might remember IRC or slack
has the same kind of thing there's these
slash commands where you type the
forward slash and then the message that
you write has like a special meaning in
this chatroom that I made this have that
way you could say okay slash and then
you could type a rule that's like okay
everybody who's in the chatroom now has
to have a profile photo and then you
could do a different slash command and
say something like people can only talk
to each other once they've liked each
other's profile photos and so now you're
kind of like building something more
like tinder and this nobody else comes
in and they they clone it and they take
away the profile photo rule or whatever
and this becomes a little bit more like
how law or social interaction works
where there's some flexibility and
people can say oh I don't want to do it
that way but because of the division
between programmers and users and
because of the structure of user
interfaces where it's usually like kind
of a forum like even when you're typing
in Twitter Facebook there's this box and
you can only type certain things in the
box and there's a button so it's very
little flexibility and then you can
really respond in certain ways you can
reply or you can retweet you can you
know favorite or heart or whatever so
like our social Dragons are very very
structured by the visual structure of
the user interface is presenting options
and by this weird division of labor
between the programmers and the users
yeah that's interesting I for instance
thought about some law like features
that might be available that kind of
reminded me of that
which is for instance one of the
problems we see on some of these social
media platforms or things
related to social media is that people
hog the bandwidth you'll see one person
just posting over and over and over
again I was thought it'd be cool to have
a thread posting regulator so if I start
a thread I can say okay we have a rule
on this thread that no one can post more
than twice a day but wouldn't that be
interesting for instance yeah this is
one of the things if people are running
habitat I mean I just made it as a kind
of a demo so nobody's actually using it
but it actually already supports that
kind of slash command rule so you know
if you imagine some kind of future where
everybody's running this software then
that becomes just a trivial experiment
for anybody to run in whatever chatter
they care about that's really
interesting that we talked of a lot you
know we have been here and other places
people talk about it even more are the
harms that social media can be causing
what about the good I mean I still think
that despite some of the bads the good
still outweigh the bad you know what are
your thoughts on that and you know how
do we go about getting more of the good
yeah I also think that there's a lot of
good one way to see it is that there's
been a succession of different media
cultures in the modern world including
kind of pamphlets and newspapers and
then radio and television and now social
media and really different
I don't know optimality Xand visions for
society seem to go with each like one
way to think about it so we might be
trying to get back to some of the
benefits of pamphlets and newsletters
now after recovering from a very
different kind of alignment in mass
media and so I I guess I see current
social media like Twitter as having some
amazing attributes where people are
finding each other communities are
forming there is something like the
public debate or public sphere that
existed in the 1700s that was
responsible as the formation of so many
nation-states and things there's there's
very intellectual discourses that are
happening
people that would normally never be
connected that are happening mostly on
Twitter and this is beautiful and also
in blogs but this is mostly drowned out
by a bunch of other stuff that's
happening that it takes for instance
politics and brings it also in a really
negative direction but I kind of have a
hunch that actually if we subtract out
some of the negative things what will be
left is a flowering of a kind of public
discourse in public sphere that hasn't
existed since before mass media yeah I
think one good example that I know it's
true of my own behavior on Facebook in
particular is least my sense Islander if
you have better data than I don't have
any data I just have experience is that
more and more of the conversation on
Facebook is happening in groups rather
than out in the public newsfeed and a
lot of these groups are really good you
know for instance I'm involved quite a
bit and the game be Facebook group and
another one called rally point alpha and
both of those groups are extraordinarily
good I think and I know there are
hundreds thousands probably of other
good groups out there in Facebook and
Facebook finally is now starting to
invest a little bit in the group's
toolkit for a long time they put all
their effort into pages which are much
less interesting in many ways and he
thought on how Facebook finally putting
more emphasis on groups and probably
many people spending more time in groups
is changing the nature of how social
media impacts us yeah I do know even
data so you're right
it's not just you there's a massive
Exodus in the direction of groups on
Facebook and not just on Facebook but in
other places there's a massive movement
into a more private fora and Facebook is
betting on this the reason that they've
been investing more in groups it's a
couple reasons one is some of the people
at Facebook groups went through our
human systems classes and some of the
new features like the mentorship
features in groups come from from people
that were inspired by our classes to to
bring groups in a better direction but
some of the reason that Facebook's
investing in groups is just because of
this and because they see a future for
Facebook that's almost
entirely groups so where newsfeed
doesn't really have posts in it anymore
but newsfeed is just you know a remix of
all of the best group posts for groups
that you're in this is kind of where
Facebook is heading is like merging
messenger threads together with groups
and getting rid of things that aren't
groups interesting that's of course
that's the reddit model that's where
reddit was all groups where they call
subreddits and then the front page and a
couple of different variations on the
front page which are nothing but ranked
extracts from the group's yeah Facebook
is doing exactly the same thing and
there's things that are good about this
but also things that are a little bit of
a kind of a letdown I mean I think it's
a kind of a failure to create a public
space and it doesn't really address some
of the issues that have emerged like the
sort of polarization issues instead it
hides them and so yeah we'll see how it
works out but I'm not entirely
optimistic about it
now you mentioned polarization now this
is one of my favorite little topics I'm
gonna be writing an essay on this fairly
soon and I think it may be that people
have misdiagnosed this polarization
issue to some degree at least one of the
things I am positing is that the online
world more generally and probably social
media has been one of the bigger but not
the only impact on this have opened up
what's called the Overton Window in
politics and the analog can apply in
other domains the Overton Window is in
politics is the definition of the space
in which a reasonable person might have
some beliefs right and or even an
unreasonable person let's call it a
population of people historically
particularly in the era of mass media
you know say up through nineteen early
90s the Overton Window in politics was
pretty damn narrow it kind of on one
extreme you know Barry Goldwater on the
other extreme George McGovern which from
a you know all possible ways of doing
politics is extraordinarily narrow today
we have a much wider set of political
views being considered and talked about
and some of them very different from the
status quo you know
we have people like antifa and one
extreme we have proper terry uns you
know we have the dark enlightenment the
number of political ideas has widened a
lot which has the effect that there are
more people out on the extremes and even
though I'm giving a more tangible
example I know it's one that people
worry about a lot and maybe this tells
me we should be worried about it some
but maybe less than we think and that's
racism if you look at the general social
science survey which is a beautiful
study that's been going on for 40 years
by any reasonable measure racism has
been declining in our society at a quite
steady rate for the last 40 or 50 years
and continues to do so so we probably
have less racists in our society this
year than we did last however if we open
up the equivalent of the Overton Window
on racism it may well mean we have many
more extreme racists right now
you know those willing to kill or engage
in racially motivated assault
so this broad tendency of the network
meme space to open up the range of
beliefs means that we can have both more
extreme racists at the same time we have
less total racists
I think this mechanism is happening in
many domains yeah absolutely I guess the
way I think of it is that the Overton
Window is a mass media concept which
doesn't apply either before radio and
television or after when people can
communicate in more small groups in
peer-to-peer and so on and so there was
sort of two deeper issues that the mass
media Overton Window kind of structures
served which now that we don't have an
Overton Window we have these open
questions about how can we possibly do
these things one is political it
legitimization and the other is social
control so there was a way in pre radio
and television in the age of pamphlets
and newspapers there was not really in
Overton Window there was a crazy mix of
different views from like Henry George
to Marx to whatever right like there's a
huge range in what kinds of political
views were being put forward
but there was a kind of a small elite
people like Thomas Jefferson and Thomas
Paine and so on that could could pick
and choose and present things as viable
and have a kind of a public showy
conversation that reduced this huge
range into something that could form the
basis for say governmental changes so
now we're back in the situation where
you have this huge range of discourse
but we no longer have this clear idea
this like small elite that can filter it
all for us and so one question is like
well how would we do that now and
another question which comes up with
this thing that you brought up about
racism is about social control like one
way to control a large population is to
have them all watch the same things and
get kind of the same culture through
their eyeballs through television and
sitcoms and stuff like that and if you
know like I have these like four
channels that are deciding what American
culture is we would need another way to
do some kind of social control to make
sure that we're not having these like
bio terrorist cells or racial cells that
could cause like a lot of problems for
everyone so yeah I don't even see I
don't see it as like a wider Overton
Window it's like the Overton when it was
just gone now and that leaves us with
certain problems because the Overton
Window was solving some of those
problems and now it's not there yep so
first let me push back a little bit on
the idea the Overton Window is gone or
that it didn't used to exist I would
suggest it's more useful to think that
it's a curve that its shape has changed
at any given time there's always a
central tendency and most the majority
of people have a relatively narrow range
of beliefs and that's still true today
right most people's beliefs fall within
the Goldwater dogma govern or maybe a
little Ron Paul to Bernie Sanders window
but the tails have gotten much wider and
I think that's a more useful way to
think about it rather than saying the
Overton Window has disappeared it's just
but it was also true in 1970 right that
the height of the mass media age there
were trotskyists and there were American
Nazis right in
1870 there were just a very much smaller
number than they are now so if we think
about the Overton Window is not a sharp
window but rather a curve drawn on a
distribution we can think about it as
widening and the pails getting thicker
in our current time I think that's a
much more useful way to think about that
maybe I don't know I think to really go
into this which we probably shouldn't do
right now we would have to look at times
outside of America and times in in in
the more distant past look at like you
know the the variation of political
beliefs in 15-3 Italy and Spain and
France or something and was there any
kind of force that was creating a kind
of a bell shape or something was there
any kind of unifying you know
overarching structure my sense is that
before there was mass media there wasn't
much there to do this shaping function
uh well there was the Catholic Church of
course and it had a big impact on what
discourse was considered reasonable what
wasn't including in the political realm
you know for instance until the Catholic
Church lost its power in the Reformation
there were no absolute monarchs in
Europe the monarchy was constrained by
the rules of the Catholic Church
essentially but anyway that's neither
here there let me address your second
point which is you know what will take
the place of Walter Cronkite I think you
know to make a short form a version of
that and I suggest it's already
happening and it's gonna be fractal
which is there aren't gonna be any
single spokesmen rather there gonna be
people who say things at various levels
of scale you know let's look at this
space pod casting you know pod casting
is now getting to be pretty damn
powerful at its highest then guy like
Joe Rogan has more listeners to his
episode than the number one show on Fox
News right and Joe therefore is a pretty
interesting broadcast point to millions
of people and in in in podcast land we
have a curve a very small number of
people in the millions you know a larger
but still not real large number of
people in the hundreds of thousands and
then you know you have sort of middle
and fish like me who have maybe ten
thousand listeners but growing but
growing and then you have a huge tail of
people to have
you know a few hundred to a thousand
listeners and we influence each other
right you know I don't tend to listen to
Joe Rogan that much but I do listen to
Sam Harris and Eric Weinstein and some
of the others and I imagine some of them
listen to me so you know we have this
new emergent bottom-up set of broadcast
points that don't naturally tend to
produce two or three solo broadcast
points that everybody else has to dance
to the tune of rather we have a fractal
structure with some having bigger
audiences some having smaller but the
information flows go both ways sure yeah
I mean I think that's true one of the
things that happens in this media
landscape over and over again is some
kind of optimistic new set up emerges
and people have a lot of kind of utopian
hopes for it and then the economic
incentives or kind of viewership or
clickbait incentives kick in and the
thing transforms fairly radically and
becomes kind of dystopic and
manipulative and I don't really have a
view of the podcast the ecosystem and
what kind of incentives might
restructure it yet but I'm always a
little bit wary when I don't have a view
yeah that's a good point yeah it's funny
I just got enough traffic that I'm now
starting to get inbound calls from
advertising networks and so far I've
said nope I'm not gonna do any
advertising until I get a little bigger
and when I do I'm only gonna do
personally curated advertising only
products I use and believe in sounds
good I think I'm not so worried about
you I think you'll do a good job Jim but
I'm not sure that the biggest or the I
mean Alex Jones would be a kind of a
good example right of some incentives
that might not be the best and I'm
worried that maybe that's actually just
a taster that we haven't actually seen
what a real podcast native manipulative
media looks like yeah and that and then
it won't my hunch is that and it comes
down to this thing about values and
preferences and all the stuff that we
were talking about towards the beginning
of the show my hunch is that unless
there are very specific checks to
incentive systems that involve keeping
things meaningful that we tend to get
into trouble and that's the largest
story in capitalism not just in social
media yeah that's very difficult
you know people especially in a free
society people react to their local
incentives right and if for instance it
turns out I'm it I should have jumped in
on this when you said that
well maybe Google only gets paid if
people love six months later the bicycle
they bought on Google I said I don't
think that seems very realistic to me if
I'm a person and manufacturers bicycles
and advertise them on Google I'm happy
to pay Google when people buy the
bicycle don't only give a if they
like up six months later and I mean I do
give a for my brand equity but in
terms of the atomic transaction between
me the bike manufacturer in Google I'm
gonna pay them when they sell stuff you
could do something with escrow I mean
just if it's about like I think that
there is an example here with you know a
Google pioneered conversion based
advertising instead of display based
advertising so they already made this
decision to get paid later than they
would have and less than they would have
because it aligned them better with
users and maybe Google or maybe some
other company that disrupts Google could
make this decision in an even bigger way
and yes it involves a like media term
loss but in the long run what happens is
there's a kind of a virtuous cycle where
customers know that if they see an ad on
this new platform there's no incentive
for this ad to be manipulating them in
any way the ads on that new platform
would be kind of this gold standard of
like holy these are all things that
everybody in the whole pipeline thinks
would like really add to my life I'm
gonna be a lot less scared of clicking
on those ads interesting I now start to
see it at first I said I Joe smoking
that wacky tabacky again that's just
some hippy right but now that when
you present it that way it actually
makes some sense it reminds me a little
bit of my friend Jordan Greenhalgh used
to work around some things called
ethical marketing that had some of those
attributes where you know if a domain
claimed it was an ethical marketer you
could be sure that
the incentives were correct you know
we'll the idea you that you proposed
which at first struck me as unworkable
I'm now willing to at least grant some
some time to think about I like that so
thank you for that
sure yeah this is an area where I would
like to support research I think it's
something that's really important that
hasn't been cracked yet and that our our
organization and human systems is kind
of well positioned maybe to network the
right people together to make it happen
yeah and as you know I interested in
research so we should continue that
conversation unfortunately we're almost
at a time here god damn time flies when
you're having a good time you know I
still have two pages worth of topics to
talk about maybe what to get you back on
but let's say that's it a couple of
things before you go if you got a few
more minutes yes you a little thing
what's the kind of thing that people in
our audience are interested in as I
noticed that you use notion software
some of the pages that I read while I
was researching for the show have been
created in notion and I was recently
tipped to notion by some of our very
interesting young man I had lunch with
and I've started using it a little bit
are you still using notion and do you
have good things bad things mix things
to say about it
oh yeah notion is great I I think it's
to some extent what the web should have
been in that it's a little closer to
Xanadu and the kind of ted nelson older
web goals man of are bullish this kind
of stuff it's not misses there's a lot
of other things that it's missing that
it would be great some of the things
there's a competitor to notion called
rome has maybe some more of these older
web features but a little less visual
polish yeah I mean notion is a is a is a
kind of a wiki and it incorporates
lightweight aspects of databases and
this is a kind of media structure which
makes it very easy to prototype things
and it grew
you can keep let's say you have a set of
games or practices or recommendations
for teams or something and you keep them
as a list for a while and then later it
becomes harder to search for them and
then you just make a little database and
the same page and drag them into cells
in the database and now it's a little
easier to you can filter and search you
can put
Fields on them and stuff like that so
this is a very good kind of platform for
slowly evolving and making things more
sophisticated in the way that you do in
any kind of startup and it lets us
collaborate with a large group of people
slowly making things more formal as we
go yeah I like that what I'd call the
fractal nature to it which is that base
can be used just as a personal
productivity manager and content manager
kind of a cross between Trello and
Evernote which are two tools I've
historically used and then it's also got
looks like good tools for small groups I
haven't used it in that mode yet but I
probably will be soon and then it has
capability for larger groups kind of
nested small groups and then it has the
ability to reach out to the wider world
through its wiki web publishing aspect
so I found that to be the weakest part
so far so for instance it really annoys
me that the URLs for your publications
are ugly alphanumeric strings rather
than a nice clean hierarchy of URLs like
you'd have in WordPress right sure you
can build a nice canonical well-designed
URL tree in notion you can't though I
noticed on the bulletin boards people
are asking for that so maybe sometime in
the future so anyway yeah let's give
notion a little bit of a call-out that's
notion dot s Oh check it out next little
quick topic turtle ah cracy is something
you talk about tell us about that oh
yeah I'm really excited about turtle
accuracy it's one of the things that I
have kind of Co invented it and I feel
like it yeah might be one of the big
ones in the long run and it's brand new
like it's only existed for three or four
months turtle accuracy is an
organizational structure but built
around questions instead of projects so
you know in any organization you have
this question about like who works for
who and what are they all in charge of
and how do reporting relationships work
and how two roles work and and how does
budgeting flow through the organization
usually downward you know like this
division has this budget and this
division has this budget and turtle
accuracy is a way of doing all of that
but based not around the idea of like
different people being responsible for
metrics or for getting things done but
different people being responsible for
looking into
questions in an experimental and
open-minded way so it's kind of an
ordered structure that's maybe
especially relevant and maybe that's
been especially missing in areas like
research labs like if you look at the
history of Xerox PARC or Bell Labs
there's often almost like just a missing
org structure or something which is
something like just find good people and
resource them and hopefully they do good
work without like a good way of you know
everything that's important in that
recipe is kind of left to the reader as
an exercise how do you find the good
people how much resources do you give
them like all of this is just kind of
hand waved away and so turtle accuracy
is kind of like obviously relevant in
that part but it turns out to be
relevant not just with regard to
research labs but in other areas like
startups advisory boards academia where
there have been often deep unanswered
questions like in advisory boards for
instance or or in corporate boards often
there's a non-profit or a company which
has a mission but what actually does
make a difference in the mission is
often a very deep question like for
World Wildlife Foundation what will
actually save the animals this in turns
out to be like super deep strategic
question that involves global economics
and climate change and like a million
different things it's a research
question there you know mission
statement is a research question and and
yet there's no real structure that
supports that aspect of world by the
foundation so that so they just they
just have to kind of punt and the CEO
makes a decision about the strategy and
there's no more questioning about the
strategy and strategies for now until it
maybe becomes an obviously bad strategy
later than maybe they make a new
decision because there's no way to
organize that area of work and it's
similar in academia where often people
are isolated because there's no way to
organize their work together and so
turtle accuracy is a solution to all
these kinds of things by creating a lot
of check-ins and structure and
relationships between people with
different kinds of related questions
stuff like that do we have a pointer to
a write-up of turtle aqua see you
I can send you a lien captain show okay
we will put it up on the website as
always and I think maybe I did post on
Twitter anybody got a question for Joey
tlemen and the number one liked question
might you might have just answered it
which is what is a small group practice
that is applicable in nearly any context
and reliably delivers good things like
insight connectedness and innovation
sounds like turtle ah Chrissy might be
that hmm
well turtle accuracy is an org structure
so it's kind of for larger but there's a
there's a there's a couple games that we
have so I want to mention three games we
have a kind of a room scale version of
turtle accuracy which we call the turtle
in game or turtles rule this is a game
it's very very simple the game is just
that everything you say you have to make
a turtle gesture or a rabbit gesture or
a bird gesture or a mushroom gesture
before you say it so if you make a
turtle gesture you're saying something
you're curious about usually you're
asking a question it's something that
you don't know the answer to if you're
making a rabbit gesture you're saying
that you have an idea if you're making a
bird gesture which is usually like
flapping wings rabbit gestures like you
make the ears you know with your fingers
in your head yeah
gesture is like flap your wings that
means like oh I'm actually an expert
about this I know what the best practice
is I know what the answer is and a
fungus is like a like a mushroom it's
like a clarifying question or like how
are you feeling or some kind of more
infrastructural interjection and so you
have to constantly track to play this
game which mode you're in are you being
curious are you having an idea are you
an expert are you being infrastructure
and this is really good for people
because it turns out that they're always
pretending to be curious when they
actually have an idea or they you know
they're not claiming expertise when they
have it or there's all sorts of
different kinds of places where people
do a kind of a subterfuge or even
confused in themselves about what their
deep questions are and the other rule of
this game is just that everybody else
works for the turtles that's why it's
called Turtles rule so if you have an
idea or if you're an expert the eye
you're only encouraged really to
contribute you
idea or your expertise if it relates to
a deep question that somebody else in
the group has and this tree it's a
really beautiful kind of conversation
that clarifies a lot about what people
really care about and where they're
curious and open wow I really like that
a lot and make sure you send me the URL
so we can post it on our episode page
and people can go find it because that's
it that sounds like wonderful work and
it sounds like you're doing a lot of
good things here at human - systems org
any final things you'd like to tell our
audience about that you're working on
yeah I guess I'll pitch joining our
Turlock recei or taking our classes so
if you design social systems which
include things like social networks like
we've been talking about but also
systems like schools or events or public
policies or places like unemployment
offices workplaces if you design these
kinds of things these are places where
people can either live by their values
or not where norms or ideological
commitments might take over if you
design that kind of environment you
would maybe benefit from taking our
class HS 101 which will also send a link
to people who take the classes I
mentioned earlier end up designing
radically different environments and
they would have without all of this talk
about how norms evolve and values and so
on so we're also doing research about
you know wider social transformation on
a whole bunch of different levels and
I'll put a link to our turtle Agra sea
so there's different they can be
multiple turtle accuracies turtle
accuracy is an org structure but our
turtle accuracy is all about how to
redesign all the social systems of the
world to work well with people's values
and well for life meaning and so that
includes this sort of entire stack going
from things like how to redesign markets
and capitalism and national democracies
down to like how to redesign small
organizations workplaces community
living this whole kind of vertical stack
corporations is a kind of research
project that we're helping to organize
and we would love how
that's a minor little project redesign
capitalism democracy how corporations
work etc I like it thank you yeah I'm
kind of ambitious I love it well thank
you Joe this has been an amazingly good
and deep and wide-ranging conversation
you know I definitely over guessed how
many topics we'd get to because they
were so interesting we spent a lot of
time on each one I'd love to have you
back on another time to talk about some
of these other things on my list but
this has been great and I certainly
encourage people to check out these
links cool yeah it's been really fun
thanks Jim production services and audio
editing by Jared Jaynes consulting music
by Tom Muller at modern space music.com