all right and we are back it is Jack
Murphy you are on the Jack Murphy live
podcast you can find me on Twitter at
Jack marks live I have the website Jack
my flat calm at amazon.com for Democrats
a deplorable go out there get booked
today we are just going to drop all that
and get straight to it I've got a guest
with me that has been very influential
on me and my writing I psych him heavily
in Democrats horrible especially around
the discussion of blue church and red
religion and his name is Jordan Hall and
he is a tech CEO from the early days
been around on the internet since it was
really coming up and he spent a good bit
of time writing about his his a
viewpoint and situational assessment of
the world that we live in today and we
are going to just jump right to it and
so Jordan thank you very much I really
appreciate you coming on better welcome
it's my pleasure
all right awesome so one of the first
ways that I came across your writing was
with the situational assessment Trump
version and so I went I read that one
and then I went back to the 2015 one and
if we could just sort of introduce the
listeners to the concepts of the
included in the situational assessments
I think that'd be a great place to go
like how how did you come to write those
it's sort of my first question and what
was your motivation and then you know
maybe if we could just sort of break
down some of the basic concepts were in
there and then sort of move forward and
apply it to the world today sure so I
think probably the best way to begin is
just to to begin with the proposition
that I happen to be a somewhat unusual
person certainly somewhere on the
spectrum and had a childhood that was I
think largely partaking of what you
might consider late 70s early 80s
nerd culture so I had a very healthy
dose of say Dungeons and Dragons and
comic books and science fiction and
science and early computers so I was
actually involved with computers as soon
as pcs happened and all the kind of
dense that make someone's personality in
psychology but in in in kind of the
language that Eric Weinstein has used in
order to simply survive in the world
that I found myself and I had to figure
out how to build
a kind of a bespoke sense making
capacity just to just to make sense of
what the hell was going on around me
the tools that were headed to me just
didn't work so I had to start getting
pretty good at building my own tools and
please sure so since making is something
I think we're gonna talk a lot about and
can we can we define what that means I
think it sounds sort of self-evident but
I think there's a lot more to it sure
so what we can do is we can say that in
the beginning there's perception well in
the beginning there's reality
so you're find yourself in reality and
one of the things I think we should
maybe notice is that reality is is vast
and reality is mysterious I actually
oftentimes use William James phrase the
blooming buzzing confusion and if you
really just allow yourself to notice
reality is much more complex than we
adults when we give it credit for you
know watch a small child in reality
you'll get a sense of it so the
beginning there's reality and in the
context of reality as an individual your
first person experience is the you'll
notice you'll be having some kind of
experience you'll be proceeding things
and your perceptions are of course a lot
aren't the notion of five senses is an
old story there's thousands so you've
got a lot of different perceptions and
one of the things that you'll have to
deal with is that you have vastly more
perceptions than you can possibly deal
with to make choices so the objective is
to figure out how to be in relationship
with reality in a way that is misused
evolutionary language whoa are you still
there I am still here hold on my
somebody's trying to call me on FaceTime
and somehow that has priority over all
the rest of my computer haha good ol
Apple yeah that's no problem would just
keeping it real last time I had no
sirens and dogs barking so it's
frightening me although it's so so if I
could just interject real quick so what
what you said five senses we have a lot
more than that one of the things that
I've read that you had written was that
the body senses things much more so than
the you know our prefrontal cortex and
that's something that I actually wrote
quite a bit about in the book as well
too so what can you can you tie those
two concepts the
then also you'd mentioned that your
sense maker you felt was broken and I
was born in the mid 70s and I too was
his product of you know early media and
70s and 80s I played Dungeons Dragons
comic books I played on Commodore 64
computers I remember saving saving
programs on audio cassettes they and you
know I wrote 10 you know print print
jack 20 go to 10 I thought it was a
great greatest thing ever in the whole
world so I played with basic from you
know early on and my dad actually was a
data processing guy and so I had access
to email in like the 80s and so he he
used me as a way to be like well can
these other guys you know is this easy
enough for professionals to you so I've
been sort of in the similar situation as
you and I feel like my sense makers
broken too so maybe if you could explain
what that sensation was for you and then
maybe tie it also together with our
powers of perception of this vast sense
of reality that's out there store okay
so so we've got perception and just to
very quickly speak to the notion of the
body I think anybody who has learned
some kind of embodied skill like the
juggling or even just catching might
have maybe even a sense of wonder at the
fact that you can throw and catch a ball
that's a serious deal like try
to have you ever try to do the actual
math it's not trivial right and so
there's no freaking way that your
prefrontal cortex is doing differential
equations to estimate the projection of
a ball in the air but your body has the
capacity to relatively quickly and
multiply effortlessly learn how to do
that and then of course if you spend
some time at it do some really
interesting things yeah it's only and
even children have look how hard to do
that I mean I played catch with my son
since he was a little kid and he can
gauge 20v 3340 I mean it's incredible
it's incredible right so that's that's
one piece so the recognition is that
there's a certain vastness to the
possibility of perception and then we
find ourselves in the world with a
almost instantaneous need to figure out
how to to deal with the world to
navigate as an infant you have to figure
out how to do things like move food
through this tube of your body in a way
that causes as little pain as possible
and then keep it coming in the front end
right so we are immediately cast into
having to figure out how to deal with it
and so this notion of sense making is
just saying okay I have reality I have
my perception of reality
how do I make sense of that perception
how do I convert or compress that
vastness of perception into things that
I can do with that will help me make
effective choices in the world you know
and we could talk about this in terms of
very step-by-step like literally the eye
the retina is a process that converts
the broad spectrum light that is
literally bouncing off the back of the
retina into just that subset of the
frequency of electromagnetic radiation
that the retinal cells can be sensitive
to into the subset of that that the
optic nerve brings into the visual
cortex and then the visual cortex of
course was doing a huge amount of work
trying to take this raw signal from two
different eyes and then convert that
into the stuff that we see or that least
we have the capacity to choose to see if
we point our attention at it and and
then it's course percolating through
other parts of the brain to try to
identify what matters in what we see I
said this making a process from the
point of vision right and one of the
themes I think well you just mentioned
was filtering - right like massively
yeah massively massively massively right
and that's sort of what's being affected
in many ways I mean I'm not gonna jump
ahead here but like media filtering
information your body filtering
information everything is sort of
filtering this infinite amount of
information to figure out what is
accurate what is important relevant
useful all right interesting signals is
is that relevant to sense making like
your filtering capabilities what's its
irreducible almost all the perceptions
thrown away so the question is how
discerning is your filtering to what
degree are you identifying the aspect of
reality that is meaningful and to what
degree are you throwing away the aspects
of reality they're not meaningful given
the fact that you're throwing away
almost all of it so you so so that's big
right so let's listen maybe do two
things at once so one is my personal
experience was one where
it's not necessary that my cents miracle
was broken but rather that culture the
culture that I had been born into heard
the society that I had been born into
had a particular way of trying to
accelerate the development of my sense
making giving me frameworks education
and looked and stuff like that
that didn't work for me and so the the
prefab toolkit that our culture to some
extent that tries to give to the younger
generation to the ginger generation has
tools that it can use just didn't work
for me so I found myself in a
circumstance where I had to do it myself
I had more fully sort of ended as an
individual step into reality and kind of
build my own since making frameworks
bespoke and this showed up a lot for
example in the notion of being an
entrepreneur as opposed to say being a
businessman businessman is somebody who
can for whom the machine works who can
step into a place turn certain cranks
and be able to do that with with what
Eric calls excellence and often times
entrepreneurs or people who can't like
literally that road is just not
meaningfully available to them and on
the flip side if they have gotten to a
point of some level of adaptive capacity
if their own bespoke sense making has
gotten to a high enough level
zaiah can also see things that other
people can't see and can and maybe
actually have to have have learned how
to be willing to take risks because the
easy path wasn't available like they
couldn't they couldn't just learn
schools teaching we had to go out and
stake out new ground and so for me being
an entrepreneur being a tech
entrepreneur was part of the same
process and I was using a lot of those
same developing frameworks that bespoke
sense-making in that same context I was
making sense of the inner the
relationship between digital technology
and the analog world to try to identify
where opportunities might lie and how
for example networking technology
intrinsically changes the relationships
between people and how power human
relationships congregate and create
groups that may
choices together differently than what
happens in a place where say broadcasts
television so noticing that like
literally just being there present - has
it evolved from watching how it changed
and then in my mind trying to figure out
why like building framework to try to
explain what I was observing in my life
and that I was having to respond to
because that was the the my job my my
job is actually to be good at figuring
out how these things were going to
happen and having my skin in the game if
I made a bad choice as an entrepreneur I
was going to lose so the the adaptive
framework was was stark and so yeah that
happened and in 2007 I exited my my
third company DivX and more or less
retired and spent a lot of time just
just watching and learning and just
exploring the world with my I wouldn't
say he'll gotten gains my well deserved
became well deserved and and on that
note I think I read also that you were
one of the few people to start up get
initial offering and then bring public
companies that right yes that's right
yeah I was involved in three startups
that were from beginning all the way to
I P oh and the third I was the you know
co-founder and CEO up and it went from
an IPO on NASDAQ so from zero from
nothingness all the way to idea which is
you know that's a fun game all right I
think that's that speaks to your ability
to create new frameworks and move
through those different different zones
that you were talking about which is
like the visionary versus the day-to-day
businessman right and I pick just to
keep a little bit more sharpness to it I
wouldn't say that I'm particularly good
at it so to the degree to which there
was any success it an earth to both
lucky timing and to maybe some some
insight that was helpful like giving an
advantage so I spent a lot of time like
I really delve deep into all kinds of
interesting things like complex system
science and whatnot and the financial
crisis that happened right afterwards
gave me a very interesting opportunity
to get a sense of yet another taste and
I was involved in say the emergence of
crypto with Bitcoin not too long after
watch that as it evolved
and as the 2016 election started to play
out some friends I just noticed it as of
the conversations with friends of mine
that I had a perspective that a they
didn't share and B they thought was
actually rather interesting and this is
like the straight truth in order to just
simplify my life so that I didn't have
to repeat the same story to many people
i sat down and about seven hours cranked
out the first situational assessment
2017 medium post with the you know the
basic sense that I would get I don't
know 500 or 600 people would read it and
it may or may not be somewhat youthful
to them 20 2015 I think right no no 2017
I had written a previous one in 2015
that was a different kind of object it
had a different arms so 2017 this is 19
yeah 2017 was Trump Edition right and
was little just laying out hey here's
the way I'm thinking about this story
and as it turns out that was well
received like about a quarter of a
million people read it and so we can
kind of go from there that's that's sort
of the story that brings us to the point
of how that particular object was or why
was created right you know if I remember
reading the 2015 version you laid out
four elements about the future I think
if I can recall them Muslim push back
against globalism strain and the
financial markets and a couple of others
that I believed sort of evolved directly
into the 2017 version where I was
reading the 2015 version and I thought
to myself he predicted the rise of a
trump-like figure in 2015 and in 2017
you were writing is sort of explaining
why did you yes did you feel like a
trump-like figure was on his way as
early as 2015 well I would say that I
I've expected a trump-like figure since
we mean 1996 okay and it's not I mean in
some sense is pretty obvious so it's
just a matter of having a model or a
framework that tries to make sense of
how culture evolves and how politics
which of course is this sort of
epiphenomena of culture shows up in that
context so I can go into that if you'd
like but we can yeah I would love that
also could you explain the word a people
phenomenon Carl no it's totally fine I
think I've read it a million times but I
couldn't use it confidently in
conversation and you know my listeners
are very smart people and they come from
walks all of all different walks of life
but you know we're all about trying to
learn as much as we can and to help us
make sense right that's what this sort
of like the old gist of the podcast so
makes sense of the world so that's right
that's right so what do you mean what do
you mean of that culture is a
epiphenomena politics is an
epiphenomenon of culture what I mean is
that that culture is more fundamental
and that politics arises you might even
say like on the surface of culture so
that while politics is real and has its
own characteristics and feeds back on
culture right politics can shift culture
culture is more fundamental okay I think
we've also heard that quote several
times that politics is down stream down
from culture yeah this is a very another
way of saying the same thing except that
that maybe implies that politics has no
capacity to shift culture and that's not
right
these things are very complex they
relate to each other right so what was
it in 2017 what were the issues that you
were seeing let's break down the
situational assessment because that was
hugely influential to me I also don't
then into this sort of explanation of
the blue church at that point so let's
let's break that down the 2017
situational assessment okay so I think
probably the best way to start is to to
acknowledge that I have a particular
perspective
that well history happens that's the
first and what I mean by that is I mean
that changes things that were going
along for maybe a very long time
suddenly stop being around and new
things happen I found I had to be very
clear about that because I noticed many
people mostly people from the political
class didn't seem to have that notion
right for some reason they seem to think
that what happened last year is what's
gonna happen next year so being aware of
the fact that sometimes things are
different sometimes things really do
change and when they change they can
often times change in quite
unpredictable ways so that's the first
proposition the second proposition is
that we right now are part of a very
large change many different large
changes and they're all kind of building
to a big one so I think of it as perhaps
say a big a big wave that is breaking or
a big bubble that is popping or you want
to be really poetic a big bubble on top
of the big wave that is both clapping
breaking at the same time it's that big
so for me the process was trying to go
deep and this is why the thing is called
deep code like go deeper and deeper
until you could find what might be the
more fundamental things that are showing
up as the generator functions or the
causes that are giving rise to what
we're witnessing on the surface you know
it's a bit like noticing it's raining
and then perhaps building meteorology as
a science so you can actually explain
why it's raining and maybe when it might
rain next it's something like that so
right right and and just for my
listeners I think your general thesis is
is what that were at a existential
moment in humanity all these factors are
going to talk about have come have come
together to create an inflection point
that's gonna lead to something entirely
altogether new maybe terrible maybe
wonderful yes yeah my the way I may be
making it simply is that if we almost
like a Richter scale of change you could
say like you have a category one event
that is a tenure change in a category to
attend then is a hundred year change
where I would say with confidence at at
least a
thousand year change right it's the kind
of change that happened between medieval
Europe and modern Europe or between the
fall of Rome and the rise of Western
civilization I actually believe that
we're at at least a ten thousand year
change so the shift from pre
civilization from tribal based human
level organization to city state
agriculture style human organization and
possibly even larger of course at that
point becomes very difficult to to to
think about it but you have the
transition say for example from homo
erectus to homo sapiens which is a
hundred thousand or a million year scale
change and it's not it if you look at it
if you take seriously the implications
of say artificial intelligence and
CRISPR the notion that we may be very
close to a threshold where we can we
cannot help but change ourselves and our
circumstances at a level that is at
least equivalent to the shift that
occurred when Homo erectus turned into
homo sapiens is actually not that
unusual the hard part I think is
actually digesting the reality dammit
you can grasp it then you're like whoa
well that's a lot what does that mean
and I think being able to in some sense
just go slow enough to allow the reality
of what appears to be the case to settle
in is the real challenge like just don't
go too fast and don't foreclose that
possibility so this is the proposition
is that we're right now faced with
something that is let's say a
thousand-year level change which is big
enough and it may even be all the way up
to a million minute your level change
which is you know quite big and so as we
witness what's happening in the moment
that gives us a context that we can use
to perceive it and it's certainly really
effective because this isn't something
that's easy for humans to manage is it I
mean I just got a puppy and I'm getting
anxiety over the fact that there's like
a new box in my life I live a group you
don't well yeah I mean think about it
we're we're
as individuals you know oriented towards
decades and we don't live longer than
about a hundred years so it isn't
sensible for us to have built capacities
to perceive changes that happened more
than a hundred years as individuals
which is part of my big thesis is that
that cultures have lasted longer than a
hundred years
and so maybe cultures have some capacity
built in over time to receive and
respond to changes of that magnitude and
of course the genome has been around for
a very long time so but now we're going
awfully deep so let's just zoom all the
way back to the practical 2116 all right
so let's take some some tools out of the
out of the toolkit okay and the first
proposition I would like to make is that
there are lots of different perspectives
and lots of different frameworks and
many of them are very useful none of
them are going to tell the whole story
so what we should do is we should sort
of pull out our toolkit be aware of the
fact that we're using a given toolkit
see where it seems to be giving us
useful perspective and and maybe pick up
other tools to do other things so I'll
start with one which is let's say the
relationship between technology and
culture and society I'm in a
distinguished culture and society
society here I'm going to define as the
institutional formal structures that
human beings used to get our needs met
and navigate reality as a group alright
so we currently live in a society where
we use fiat currency and interact with
corporations for example like I go to
the grocery store to buy food so that's
a social function and then culture I
will define as the the complex process
whereby individual humans develop right
so it's about human development going
from birth to death in relationship with
nature and in relationship with
humaneness
and by humanists I mean both other human
beings and society so you grow up and
you watch TV and you see stop signs and
you eat fruit
and these are part of your development
and then so that's that's the individual
and then what happens is as you develop
you then begin to output you begin to
have consequences on nature on reality
consequences on other humans and
consequences on society answers this
complex set of relationships that have
both sides of qu developing each other
so that's that's culture now then
technology which of course is a part of
society and a part of culture human
cultures produce technologies using the
instruments of society but then
technologies change the possibilities of
how we humans relate to nature how we
relate to each other and by the way how
we relate to technology which is that
last part bit tricking we have to really
hold on to that this is why we get
exponential curves okay so this is a
bunch I just unloaded a bunch but it
seemed part of one framework so the
framework here is to say let's just do
the blue church for example okay so we
find ourselves in let's say 1870s 1880s
and we had a set of technologies we had
the rollout of railroads and we had the
rise of steam engines and the beginning
of electricity and the Telegraph and
these gave rise these technologies gave
rise to changing conditions for how
human beings could do society different
ways that we could go about say for
example doing food now instead of having
to get all of your food from within sort
of horse riding wagon distance food
could be produced in Kansas put on a
train and shipped to New York City
probably not that far but you get the
idea so that shifted the nature of how
human beings had to relate to each other
and how we could relate to each other
and also gave rise to different
qualities of culture for example that
shifted massively shifted if we go from
the 1880s through the 1920s where we
lived human beings began to stop to live
less and less close to the land in farms
and rural environments and more and more
in urban environments rights a great
move migration of our demographics from
rural to
urban happened during that time which
changes the context of culture and if
you are growing up on the farm mostly
around your family and most around other
people who you more or less know for a
long period of time that's a context for
a kind of culture whereas if you're
growing up in say Brooklyn that's a
different context for a very very
different kind of culture so that
happened all right so this is what I
call the the Victorian consensus there
was a problem how do we manage this how
do we govern ourselves in the context of
these changes how do we deal with the
problems and take advantage of the
possibilities that arise when we can
suddenly move vast resources across
continental distances and we can
communicate almost instantaneously using
telegraph but by the way not yet
telephone or certainly not television
when printing presses have now reached
enough ubiquity that some people have
handles on the ability to mass
communicate but of course most other
people don't these are all kinds of
questions that arise and culture of all
right the culture is a kind of thing
like like a forest or a species where it
is responding to the context that it
finds itself in and has so many
different ways of you know because
individual of the basis certain
individuals find approaches that work
and those approaches spread to other
people who are trying to learn how to be
successful as individuals and culture
progresses in certain in certain avenues
and so roundabouts say 1910 1920 at
least in the United States England maybe
Western Europe we found ourselves in the
Victorian consensus say a way of
managing life but of course technology
didn't stay still we had moved from
trains to cars and planes were showing
up and we had moved from Telegraph's to
radio and record players and not too
long thereafter television and this
changes things
and by the way population changed to
where we went from
50 million people - a hundred million
people and we've started blowing towards
300 million people which changes a lot
and so as we began to move in into the
30s the Victorian consensus began to
break down and so the crisis that
emerged throughout the West in the 20s
and 30s was largely associated with the
breakdown of a mode of governance that
was no longer longer adequate to the
actual complexity of the real lives
circumstances that we found ourselves in
that a way of operating society that was
optimized for late 19th century
populations using trains and Telegraph's
just wasn't adequate to a society early
20th century society using radio and
automobiles and etc etc and this this
crisis and you're describing is it
analogous to the one that we're facing
out or is it just like miniscule in
comparison well let's start with it
being analogous the struggle is start
there
and we'll walk we can actually walk our
way up and now we're actually
interesting - really good space because
I've never considered that question
deeply so in a moment we'll move from a
place where I'm telling a story to where
you and I are actually engaging
collaboration thanks a lot which is by
the way the meta story so hold that ok
so what happens is is we begin to move
into the post-war environment we begin
the process of learning how to engage in
a new level a new kind a new quality of
governance which is very much using the
power of broadcast and here television
is the best example but it's not the
only if you look at the environment of
the post-war environment you notice that
broadcast is all over the place for me a
really good example of school school is
a form of broadcast by that what I mean
is there's an asymmetric relationship
which is to say there's a teacher and
there's students and there's one teacher
and there's many students and the
teacher does all the talking and the
students do all the listening and the
teachers in charge of what's right and
what's wrong and the students are
responsible for
figuring out how to give the teacher
with the teacher once all right so
that's an asymmetric relationship and
that's broadcast broadcast is that sort
of thing so you know if I'm if I'm
listening to the radio there's one
person singing and there may be millions
of people listening and I can't I can
seem back to the radio but nobody else
can hear me
and of course it's television is audio
and visual it's almost like reality like
it simulates our lived experience to a
pretty high level and yet in a broadcast
modality it's a very different
experience but the experience of
Americans in Vietnam was a massive
psychological shift because we found
ourselves in a context where we were
kind of like halfway in we live in
Vietnam was happening in our living
rooms halfway we couldn't have agency we
couldn't act on it meaningfully but we
could actually experience it to a
non-trivial extent and that's as you
might imagine
neither of us experienced that much
extraordinary climatic to the
individuals into the culture right do
you think at this time period is leading
up to Vietnam was there a level of trust
in this broadcast format did pepo a
dormant life people believed that they
were getting all the relevant relevant
information at the right time without
any sort of bias yeah well I wouldn't
say that it was naive I think the people
were aware of the fact that bias was
there but that there was a feeling of
become ruins that Walter Cronkite felt
honest he felt like there was integrity
I felt like there was integrity in the
in the medium and by the way in the
culture this is crucial because after
World War two we came out of a context
where the depression World War two were
intense was up and so people
went back to basics and learned how to
be at least to some meaningful extent
reliable trustworthy and so television
kind of grew up in that context and so
people who had fought in Iwo Jima were
able to have a way of relating to each
other across the divide of television
that was
there's a feeling of mutually shared
responsibility let's say anyway I think
that was a real ray and it's making me
think of this word coherence that I
think you've used plenty and the way
that mass communication enabled us
social coherence do you think that the
coherence was a ground-up phenomenon
here in what you just said they're sort
of made me feel like people believe what
was coming across the television screen
because of the way they felt on the
ground and then sort of they were able
to cohere socially because of that
rather than the coherence coming down
from the television screen and into
their living room and making them feel
trusted
I trust society at that plan it's going
to be both yeah
and that's how it works coherence is
actually a resonance phenomenon from
both directions so let's just walk
through how the blue church worked so
when I say blue church what I mean is a
a discovery and an evolutionary
discovery by culture of how to make best
use of mostly broadcast modalities to
govern and to make choices as a group so
one of the characteristics of the blue
church was this notion of vertical
meritocracy so if you're going to be in
a circumstance where most people are
going to have to listen and only a few
people are going to be able to speak it
would be best if the ones who are
speaking are really good and so there
was a I think well-intentioned effort to
find a way to actually deliver on that
so that the people who were in charge
were supposed to be meritocratic
li.selected you you put the people in
charge of NASA who were good at going to
the moon
you didn't just randomly pick people who
didn't what they're talking about you
put the people in charge of the FDA who
were good at figuring out how to make
sure that our food and drugs were
high-quality I'm still in the blank
write the whole notion of the period of
say the 1950s through to the night late
70s was a period of recognizing that in
fact there's a lot to that's right if
you if you do a good job of identifying
who are the smart kids and elevating
them into the prestigious universities
and do a good job of educating them well
and then do a good job of selecting the
most capable best educated individuals
to have the most responsibility
you actually get a quite effective and
adaptive governance system that does
things like takes us to the moon and
builds interstate highway system and
creates the green the second
agricultural revolution is a whole bunch
of stuff that happens in the context of
what that machine can do that kind of
governance system and then by the way
that was real like that the the the high
point the high-water mark of the blue
church was in fact actually on the high
watermark of human collective
intelligence thus far it did a pretty
darn good job and of course it also all
kinds of hairs but let's ignore those
for the moment and yeah they kind of get
to where we are we have to say okay well
two different kinds of things happen
many by the way many different kinds of
things happen but I'm gonna focus on two
in terms of the relationship between
where we are now and the blue church
okay one is once again just like the
movement from the Victorian consensus to
the blue church things have changed and
we've moved from a broadcast dominant
form of media to a symmetric interactive
which is what we're doing right now
the internet is a different kind of
thing and it gives rise to a very very
different way of entering into
relationship a way of forming collective
intelligence and then a kind of
coherence which we're still in the
process of learning we can mention other
things for example just to kind of like
show how these perspectives are nuanced
if you think of television is kind of an
extension of with the way the human body
relates to reality it's a massive
hypertufa keishon of vision and sound
which is to say it's like a like a
hallucination television is like a
really really effective massive
hallucination we all have the ability to
see I Love Lucy and yet it's not real
she's broadcast to us in a femoral
medium she's not really in the
television and so during the television
era not only were we living in a context
of broadcast we're also living in a
context of Fantasyland where more and
more and more of our lives or lived in
the content
of imagination the Internet has at least
one of its characteristics is memory the
internet never forgets their television
instantaneously forgets think about it
television is a flow you're in the
moment you're in the present what the
hell just happened I don't really care
actually what's gonna happen next is
what matters
whereas the internet never forgets
memory is intrinsically necessary for
this new medium and therefore is
omnipresent
so symmetric interactive memory is a
different technical substrate for the
formation of culture and society and
well okay obviously it's going to change
things and in fact going to change
things a lot because it's a lot
different and by the way a lot powerful
just so we can kind of get a little bit
of closure and the other thing that
happens is the kind of thing that
society is and I'll just call it a
complicated system and for those who are
interested we kind of double click on
that has a sort of a natural or
lifecycle to it complicated systems
trace s-curves
meaning in the beginning didn't work
very well and then they kind of get
figured out and then they're pretty
effective and they're really effective
and then they start should not be quite
so effective they break down and so
people figure out how to gain the
meritocratic system to figure out how to
simulate the notion of who is actually
should be in charge to figure out how to
massively abuse the privilege of being
the ones who are speaking as opposed to
the ones who are listening the ones who
are listening figure out how our
renderer
dumb by the virtue of the fact of their
developmental environment is teaching
them that the only thing that they're
allowed to do is listen and respond with
the quote-unquote right answer that they
actually are taught not to have creative
agency and a society where people the
mass of people are taught not to have
creative agency and where it's becoming
increasingly obvious that the thing to
do is to seize control over the
broadcast capacity and that gay
the meritocratic system is becoming
easier and easier to do is one that is
sort of poised for collapse and well
that's happening too so yeah I'm glad
that you clarified on that because as we
were talking about the meritocratic
system I felt like in my mind I'm
thinking well this all sounds awfully
naive in that the powers of our the
levers of power would be solely in the
hands of the people that deserved it
most but this notion of the s-curve and
then being able to game this system
definitely read that read that resident
that resident of course because that's
our lives like we you and I grew up in
the context of watching that happen in
real time so we were born when things
actually still worked ok by the time we
were young adults it was pretty clear
that things weren't working and of
course all you have to do is just look
at the wiki leaks emails to see the
inside of how the sausage was made
inside the DNC and say okay that's
late-stage corruption like it's not even
a there's like a kind of corruption
where people are sort of aware the fact
that they're corrupt there's a kind of
corruption where corruption is so much
the context the people are just thinking
well this is just how the game is played
like it's my corruption right obviously
you you cheat and it's not even cheating
it's just again how the game is played
so we were able to witness in 2016 in
this really interesting real-time in on
the in the Clinton campaign the late
stage called fragility and sclerosis and
what it's called fractal defection by
some of my friends of the blue church
and witnessed in the context of what we
call what I call the red religion or the
Trump insurgency the beginning of the
discovery of this new form this this
thing that is on the basis of what the
Internet can do figuring out how it's
going to play its game all right so both
were happening simultaneously so that's
kind of it like if you look at 2007 2016
my article in 2017 I just said okay well
here's a way of thinking about how the
tide is simultaneously going out from
the blue church and what that looks like
and what parts of it are still going to
have agency like the deep state and
sort of left hand the mass-media and
what parts are the tightest coming in no
okay there the red religion the trumpet
insurgency and what happens when these
two forces relate to each other how they
interact is I proposed a pretty good
explanation for what we're seeing and
now you're saying like the merit of the
meritocracy that was about the best
people coming to the forefront to lead
us in the best way and maybe the right
stuff right right and then people learn
how to game that system and so lesser
than the idea was then seeking power and
then they come up against people that
were born of the internet who are doing
what exactly are they seeking power or
are they seeking or are they seeking to
do things the best way well okay this is
a very good question so let's let's see
let's just explore that question so
first of all the answers gonna be a lot
of different things this is a lot of
different people so let's take a look at
a couple of different aspects one is
there's a lot of just exploration if
there's a lot a lot of people are
playing and I don't mean this
necessarily like frivolously but they're
exploring new possibilities for how to
have a level of agency now I don't mean
power I just mean agency being able to
have some sense of ability to do in the
world and a level of sense making in a
context where the old sense in making
frameworks are breaking down so asking
questions like this right you yourself
well the the news is clearly not
just not helpful but actively
destructive what do I do
well let me start asking questions and
mister seeking you start looking at
different already blogs I'll look at
Twitter feeds I'll try to do what I can
in a context where it's almost like a
Cambrian explosion of search because
it's not well understood yes there's a
lot of explore going on and of course
there's a lot of Express going on people
like to express themselves or net what
part of the things that humans do is
express themselves and in a context of
moving from one
gets to sing and everybody has to listen
to a context where everybody can try
their hand at singing there's a lot of
expression going on most of it terrible
but that's because we haven't yet
learned how to take responsibility for
the possibility of what's happening
which isn't that makes sense it's we're
kind of an ssin in the context to say
the qa9 phenomenon the metaphor of a
newborn infant is a pretty good metaphor
if you watch a child trying to learn how
to use its arms and legs it doesn't have
any clue what it's doing so it's just
sort of flailing about wildly but it's
getting better fast right so that's a
big part of it
and of course human beings have a habit
of avoiding themselves avoiding the pain
in their lives avoiding taking
responsibility for themselves in their
own context and so a lot of bells other
stuff that's happening is people
externalizing their agency and
externalizing their responsibilities
using the means of hand which happens to
be asymmetric interactive medium to to
do so so instead of sucking their thumb
and drinking in the the ambrosia of
television they're you know screaming at
each other on Twitter right you don't
when you say externalizing their agency
you don't mean in the economic sense
like of like putting the ramifications
of their agency outside of their uniform
of the universe you mean like you know
just putting it outside of themselves
yeah yes putting the outside of
themselves wherever they put it they put
it but the key is putting it outside of
themselves right Express that's Express
yeah yeah and so that's you can say like
people are working through their
now increasingly in public as opposed to
working through their with a bottle
of you know or six-pack of beer and
watching the NFL on on Monday night
complaining at dinner what shows up
differently right it's just a different
way of that happening in again in a
context where there's a breaking free a
breaking loose like the old structures
are simultaneously not working and our
best obviously coercive so there's a
whole bunch of people are saying hey I
can do stuff maybe I can do something
here there's an opportunity for me to
expand my local fitness my individual
capacity to proliferate
successful and healthy and powerful and
sexy or whatever or whatever particular
values are expressing themselves through
this individual because the context is
shifting it's a it's a gold rush it's a
Renaissance those things are Cambrian
explosion possibility hmm the gold rush
continues still right this is this is
still the Wild West right no none of
this is settled or or is it settled are
we still all just exploring and
expressing and trying to figure out what
the endgame is for this new technology
slash culture interfaces from the
internet or are we in the endgame are we
in the mid-game is this still are we
still infants well now we get into the
the part that gets actually tricky
because one of the things that seems to
be the case is that we're on an
accelerating curve so it's one thing to
be in a context of change and so we work
things have changed from the 1950s to
the 9 2010 to 2020 20s but it's not just
change it's accelerating change Wow well
that's a very different kind of thing
because we know we're now not having to
adapt to a new context we have to adapt
to the fact that our need to adapt is
itself changing meta adaptation that's
where gets incredibly well actually
interesting to be perfectly honest
so the oddities are terrifying and it's
less terrified a lot of these questions
actually start to become whether they go
through a really interesting thing where
they become meaningless and then they go
to a higher level when they become
meaningful again so we are at the end of
the beginning but in a context where the
beginning is itself beginning again and
new constantly so lots of things have
been settled but in the process of them
being settled they've actually changed
the context of the world such that a
whole new set of things are now
unsettled this is a real thing so let me
see if I can put this in an in a
language it makes it a little bit easier
to handle a little bit easier to grasp
so in evolutionary theory we have the
Conn the concept of a niche so say like
the jungle let's pick a particular
jungle it's beyond the Amazon rainforest
and in the context of a niche we have
Fitness the degree which a particular
style of being an animal or a plant is a
good choice so being a white furry
arctic style bunny and the Amazon
rainforest is bad and so they go away
and being a Jaguar is awesome so there's
Jaguars right so that's the idea you've
got it you got a niche
there's a level of fitness and then as
time goes forward the organisms in that
niche find out where there are kind of
relative Fitness's and it settles into
what the ecosystem happens to be and of
course the ecosystem creates is
co-created meaning that the presence of
Jaguars is part of the niche for the
capybaras and the presence of captain
berries is sort of a niche for Jaguars
right so it's not you have to be very
mindful of that now there's a concept
called niche construction so like say
Bevers Bevers don't just sort of sit
idly by they build dams they change the
niche with some effectiveness they they
make the environment that they're in
more conducive to being a beaver well
the notion of niche construction if you
think about that mean so that means is a
an organism that has the capacity to
change the niche in some way so as the
capacity for niche construction
increases you find yourself in a
situation where the changing of the
niche changes the fitness requirements
and if you're say I don't know a fish
it's in a niche that has beavers you
have to be able to respond not just to
the way that the niche changes from kind
of slower old-fashioned meteorological
like the
the river kind of stuff you have to
actually start being responsive to the
kinds of changes that happen when a
biological organism in biological
organism time can change the nature it's
a lot faster this gives rise to for
example the need for intelligence
intelligence is the ability to change
the way you're responding to your niche
behaviorally instead of doing it
genetically you change it real time real
time versus over time real time over say
well I call it evolutionary time or
biological time and of course before
that you had geological time and so of
course now we start to get an
interesting story because if you look at
the story of Homo sapiens the story of
Homo sapiens is that story it's the
story of becoming more capable of
responding to changes in the niche and
therefore also becoming more capable of
niche construction and therefore
changing the niche and therefore
requiring more capability of chain and
respondent changes in niche but also
therefore becoming more capable of
changing the niche accelerating change
so you might say the humanity mo sapiens
is the experiment of what happens when
niche construction meets intelligence in
an accelerating rate now I'm not sure if
that made it any easier for words right
I mean I mean it makes sense to me I
mean we influence our environment and
then the environment influences us and
then it is a feedback cycle and but
we're really good at trying to figure
out how to respond to that fact and
that's the key right we're we're this
special kind of animal that is that kind
of animal well that's we've created the
niche that favors our inherent ability
to Anish create I mean that sounds sort
of redundant thing to say but I think
that that sort of sums up for we're just
talking about well if that if you said
it well so that means to me that we are
actually speaking about the same thing
that's great huge advantage this of this
symmetric you know communicative medium
so so then what happens is we say okay
cool well what might be the right kinds
of ways to respond to that kind of
reality mmm-hmm and what kind of way of
being in the world what kind of what I
call a collective intelligence if we
think about the blue church is a form of
collective intelligence
what kind of collective intelligence is
in fact intrinsically most fit in the
context of this feedback loop between
intelligence and niche construction well
that's a good question mm-hm and
I think that is where we are mm-hmm
anybody who gets that as a good
question that could really settle on
that and go hmm Wow
I better think about that I think is
actually looking in the right direction
and so what what is the niche that we're
operating in where it's feedbacking on
to us and we're sort of immersed in this
this dance that's spiraling out of
control where where is that niche
actually play out in our day-to-day
lives well everywhere it's it's the
relationship between society culture and
technology so I'll give you a great
concrete example there's a very good
article written by a woman writing for I
think it blog called ribbons bomb and
she is making the argument that the
various entities that are trying to
figure out how to respond to cyber war
are not doing a good job and she uses
the Maginot Line metaphor which I of
course have used myself many times
you're not fair with military well I'm
going to assume that your listeners are
either familiar with military history
enough to get the metaphor or familiar
with Wikipedia enough to look it up but
the basic idea is you can fight the last
war and people often do might like
World War 1 suck but what do we do let's
build judge is rule is about trench
warfare oh I know oh we'll build a
really awesome trench and that'll
that'll be awesome oh the Germans
figured out that trenches aren't the
thing anymore now it's blitzkrieg in
blitzkrieg totally rock-paper-scissors
the trench and France loses in a couple
of weeks right so that's the idea if you
fight the last war then you're really
setting yourself up to be quite
surprised when the next war happens to
be at your door right further
proposition is hey cyberwarriors you're
trying to fight cyber war with the
notion the cyber wars a bunch of hackers
breaking into Sony's hardware and
stealing passwords but that's not the
story anymore the story now is meme
warriors hacking the zeitgeist by
shifting our ways of making sense
communicating with each other on
decentralized media okay you summed it
up right there having as soon as you
said that that like
take me right in the guts because I I
have I've lived it I mean I live I live
through external forces shaping the my
personal zeitgeist even like breaking it
down though there are people on this
information battlefield that are
distributing disinformation with the
express purpose of creating casualties
and I myself have been a casualty of
disinformation and people you know
willingly misinterpreting things and
weaponizing it and then using their
ability to rally forces online to not
just have a troll conflict on Twitter
but you know got me fired from my job
got me banned from coaching Little
League halves got me ostracized from my
local community and has you know
jeopardized my ability to provide for my
family and this is a very real tangible
thing that's happening through these
pipes right that are all connecting our
brains right okay so that's a good word
we're in a nice good embody like wow
first-person experience tough like i
sexually been live for real yeah alright
so so here's where she gets it wrong and
where we can actually start to move it
in the direction of getting it right she
then goes on to say okay so we're not
like the old war here's the new war and
okay FBI and CIA and NSA and Facebook
and Google get your together like
start figuring how to fight the new war
and my response is those are the wrong
kinds of tools those are instruments the
NSA the FBI Google Facebook that were
designed to fight the last war they're
kind of collective intelligence they
can't make sense fast enough they can't
make sense clearly enough to respond to
accelerating change it can't happen they
aren't able to respond to a pace of
change to a war that is moving this fast
this isn't a war anymore about bringing
force to bear this is a war about
bringing speed to bear to be able to
actually move faster it's called a
concept in military theory called the
OODA loop that's right this is a war
where strategy has become
Mehta strategy where you have to
actually abstract your strategic agency
into an increasingly sophisticated
capacity to do strategy not to have a
good strategy but to actually have the
meta strategy of always having a better
strategy which is tough to hold right
and know the loop is what observe orient
decide yeah so it's it's a might yes so
that that that's a jean board and good
stuff so if you take John Boyd and you
kind of plug John Boyd into John Boyd
and then you just keep doing that you
like to do a recursive loop on it you
get to an end point and if you can
perceive what I just said and hold it
you're now actually holding on to the
thing the thing that is the answer to
the question that you asked and the
thing that is the answer to the question
that she was pointing to
but again that's no joke like that is
not a trivial thing the notion of what
happens when you try to run a recursive
process on of you to loop on dude a loop
is the mind all right so I have to now
step back here's here's where we're
here's a problem we run into and we're
actually at the end like this is the end
of the story as far as we can go if you
happen to be an adult right now you
almost certainly grew up in the context
of the blue church you may have grown up
you may be if you're young a young adult
you grew up in the context of the
emergent decentralized environment and
so you've got to explore the Internet
firsthand and that's cool but
nonetheless most agree developmental
environment was still in the context of
this blue church which means that you
have a mind the way that your mind is
set up this the the conceptual tools
that you have to use the ways that you
intrinsically intuitively go about
making sense of your environment the
deep underlying assumptions of the
nature of reality were developed in that
context and it were responding to that
context you were a Jaguar in the jungle
well unfortunately that mind is itself
not responsive it is not adaptive to the
emergent context this is not a simple
thing because
you try to figure out how to build a new
mind you quickly discovered that what
are you using to do that while you're
using the mind
oh you can't build the new mind with the
old mind that is a that's kind of the
centerpiece of the whole thing so this
is where by the way I am so we are now
kind of all caught up with me
my personal Ark is the awareness of this
problem and then the endeavor to try to
find a way to let's call it build you
might have to call it discover a new
mind that is intrinsically the kind of
mind that is all these various things we
talked about responsive to accelerating
change recursive food a loop fill in the
blank you don't think that the human
mind is adaptive enough to sort of
overcome that problem on its own did I
do okay I do but the the late 20th
century Western civilization blue church
mind is not right now that's a mind that
we were handed but can we discard it and
find a new one now I feel like
personally I mean I'm able to operate in
this on these margins here that we're
talking about and sometimes I attribute
it to being Gen X and also like a real
early tech adopter as Gen X so I I
remember being analog and I remember
being digital and I remember sort of
evolved into the yeah I remember
them evolving both with me at the same
time and I don't I don't know if that
gives me a special leg up and understand
I think helps a lot
dandy yeah the notion that when you're a
kid your mind was actually taught
firsthand that reality can be simulated
and draining your reality simulator to
not mistake reality for reality
simulation is actually a really useful
lucky thing to have run into that's
funny my favorite part of Dungeons &
Dragons was actually just flipping
through the monster manuals and then
just fabricating characters yeah I
didn't want to have to play all those
damn games I just wrote down I was level
99 man and I was this and I had that
fancy well think about this in the
context of this notion of NPC it's funny
that we actually have we had the error
concept well if you're a human being
like a real live human being and you're
not aware of the fact that you're
playing a character most of the time
you're not aware of the fact that your
identity was something you fabricated
sometime during adolescence to allow you
to fit in and be successful in your
social milieu then you're an NPC that's
what an NPC really is if you are aware
of that fact and you can kind of hold
bad identity somewhat loosely and step
back or step down or up depending your
preferred directionality and drop into
another character so well I guess today
what I'll do is I'll play a female elf
and then tomorrow I'll be in work and
you can recognize it that's the thing
you can actually do that then what you
can do is you can try to step into the
place from which that is coming yeah
well that's it that's the mind that's
the human mind so not the late 20th
century blue church mind the human mind
is the place from which that is coming
strike strikes me is that I'm using air
quotes here traditional sort of mind
frame slash culture slash mores and
norms may not be best suited to
understand this emerging universe or
intelligence networks sense-making what
not because of that very lack of
fluidity that you're discussing alright
so how much more time do we have it I
want as much time as you want sir oh all
right if you're if folks are willing to
listen I'm certainly willing to try to
speak although I mentioned I've got
about 15 minutes before I get tired okay
didn't bring me water
okay so so let me let me actually
constants for both Gen Xers I'll use old
fashioned PC metaphors let's double
click on that let's open the folder
let's see all right so I'm gonna use the
word tradition in to give aways so I'll
speak to tradition in I would say kind
of a facile sense we should just say
like late 90s late 90s mind is
let's just be very clear there is almost
nothing of late 90s mind that is going
to be helping us out
but then we use tradition in maybe and
swim some sort of the mythopoetic sets
like the kind of stuff that's been
around for ten thousand years there's
some pretty good stuff there and things
like how to enter
- right relationship with your wife hmm
and I don't mean by the way trying to
run it as a script from some artifact
that's not going to be particularly
helpful but the actual tradition meaning
the actual thing that has been passed
down lived from generation to generation
which we Gen Xers are sort of barely
remember because the period of
disruption of the 60s and 70s really
threw a monkey wrench into those kinds
of things but things like no keeping
your promises and trying to speak
honestly like that kind of stuff
that kind of stuff is traditional under
the crucible of cultural evolution
meaning it shows up as being virtuous in
most cultures over long periods of time
because it actually works so let's call
it the basics so if we if we find
ourselves discarding the artifacts of
the nonsense of what late 20th century
mind brought up and settling into the
most basic basics and in fact the more
natural it is the more human it is the
more likely that it will be helpful now
this doesn't mean an archaism it doesn't
mean sort of uh
oh let's go back and wear feathers and
pretend like we're you know Stone Age
tribesmen because that ain't real either
that just that's the the worst case you
know that's late 20th century mind
simulating something but if we can
actually sort of listen to the stuff
that has actually been really handed
down painfully and carefully because it
is the most precious and most meaningful
and allow that kind of thing be the
basis of how we go about making our next
choices and very carefully do so right
recognizing that we are we're sort of
getting across that we're in a journey
for journey from Mecca from from Egypt
to use some good old-fashioned method
poetic language so we have to take each
step carefully we don't really know
where we are but we do know that we have
to take each step carefully so let's do
that and we can rely to the extent that
we can rely on stuff that is the oldest
and most shared because well that's the
best we have and it's actually pretty
darn good to be perfectly honest we just
have to be thoughtful be careful and be
thoughtful mm-hmm I wanted to finished
on that one you can see your eyes still
going I feel like I'm finished on that
one okay I wanted to I wanted to bring
into this conversation this notion of
sovereignty that I read of yours and
there's three and there was three
elements to it if you could lay them out
because my audience is predominantly
male there's a lot of women but
predominantly male and most of them are
24 to 44 and most of them feel as though
they lack personal sovereignty and most
of them feel as though they're
struggling against the society that
wants to strip their sovereignty from
them and also feels as though that
they're in a circumstance in which
they're detached from these ten thousand
year old traditional ideas that actually
work and they're floating in a sea of
this sort of confusion where they feel
sort of violated on a daily basis and
your your notions of sovereignty I
thought really were powerful and I'm
want to when you have to explain them
I'm gonna punctuate that relative to my
audience so I thought it was great so if
you could please explain that we can
wrap up after that okay so when you're
referred to the three things you're
referring to perception it's making a
choice making yeah okay all right so
what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna do that
one and then I want to do three other
that are are oblique like they're like
they cross like this and that that gives
you actually a the ability to have a
nice sphere so this three goes this way
the other three goes this way I
apologize
said seems absolutely absurd remember I
coveted the beginning that I'm just an
unusual kind of dude plus plus Jordan
and I can see each other on video but
we're not recording it so Oh even better
yeah so an audio it sounds like a circle
it's not a one okay so to begin with
sovereignty we have just this very
simple notion that we were kind of
discussing the very beginning you have
perception we have sense making and then
we have a choice making so in perception
we have the capacity to perceive what is
happening to us in the world and we can
notice that there's this can be very
little and it can be a lot you know so
does a simple experiment or is so your
perception just became less and you can
open your eyes
your perception became more and if you
say for example have learned how to I
don't know surf or to play baseball or
basketball or walk in the woods you will
notice that as you have learned how to
be in these environments what you see
changes you can see more alright so
that's the idea of perception that
there's a lot of practice involved in
expanding your perception and in the
context of sovereignty a big piece of it
is actually being able to expand your
perception in what I'm going to call
symmetry and what that means is that for
example having too much vision and not
enough sound or hearing creates a bias
that creates a kind of like a
saber-toothed tiger or a zebra trees
tiger is something that is leaning too
heavy in the direction of long teeth and
so it's very fragile to changes where as
a human you're Homo sapiens is actually
kind of well poised and balanced and can
kind of go in different directions and
big metaphor in sovereignty is that well
for your audience it's the middle
linebacker right the ball is snapped
just drop your hips chop your knees put
your head on a swivel so that you can
respond to what's happening and that
basic sense of symmetry this sense of
balance is crucial across all these
dimensions so in the context of
perception it means things like really
being able to unlock all these wide
varieties of perception that are
available learning how to listen to your
entire emotional manifold and allow
anger to arise and that
notice what your anger is actually
telling you because it's telling you
something it's telling you something
that some part of you feels like you
need to fight that's what it is right
angrist fight and fear is flee so okay
what's your fear telling you and
actually listen to it don't avoid it
don't repress it
find out what it's trying to tell you
and allow that wisdom to percolate
through you and then as you can expand
your perceptive capacities in all kinds
of directions and really learn how to
perceive nuance and subtlety well and
make your perception broad diverse and
subtle you are increasing your capacity
for sovereignty so then we move into
your sense making and here we run into
the problem that only a small fraction
of what you're perceiving is going to be
able to be something you can make sense
of so here a lot of what we're actually
talking about instead of the latter 2/3
of the conversation shows up if you are
wedded unconsciously to a given
framework or to a given identity if you
respond with knowing meaning that you
aren't NPC you're running a script you
have a bunch of stuff that you very
quickly use to identify what is really
happening from what you're perceiving
you for clothes inquiry and
inquisitiveness and curiosity in
exchange for knowing quickly then you're
trading short term narrow effectiveness
for sovereignty and again you're
becoming a saber-tooth tiger if you
happen to be in the oxford debating Club
this might actually be effective or you
can say a pity thing and you can get the
the other boys to laugh but you will
find yourself actually not being able to
be in relationship with what's really
happening you will not notice the
important stuff because you're knower is
trying to fit perception into its
preconceived frameworks rather than
actually perceiving perception
perceiving reality and allowing itself
to shift and change or unlock a
particular toolkit and drop in a new
toolkit
so here's where practices like
mindfulness and meditation and slowing
down and playing Dungeons & Dragons are
very helpful because they allow you to
actually just have what I call liminal
mind a way of being in relationship to
curiosity and to inquiry first and then
bringing toolkits to bear second so then
you have choice making which is
combining both selecting that set of
actions that seem to make the most sense
from those actions that you are in fact
most skillful of engaging in so here I
mean in choice I mean both the kind of
the conscious notion of choosing but
also the embodiment of doing so it's
both choice making is is is an embodied
it's a thing in the world so I have
chose right when I chose to be on this
podcast it wasn't just something that's
happening in my mind it was already
showing up as a determination that I
would secure the time and space to be
present here not elsewhere so when I say
choice I mean choice and commitment are
the same word Millennials I'm talking to
you we extras really refer you think of
you guys as being flaky because for some
reason you have this weird habit of not
doing what you say you're gonna do I
don't know why but you do so choice then
is this very interesting dialogue
between the dispositional potential of
what you could do in the world
your skillfulness in the world and your
sense of what's happening all right and
so to make a good choice to make the
most effective choice is the last part
of sovereignty and this of course
involves the discipline of again
allowing your liminal mind to come into
fluidly so the phrase slow is smooth
smooth is fast
like allowing the time necessary for the
right choice to actually emerge
and then taking the care to build
skillfulness so that you can actually
deliver on that choice all the way
through to the end with the least amount
of unintended consequences and with the
least amount of effort it should be
effortless you can think about the
difference between say a let's try Bruce
Lee is a good example if you watch Bruce
Lee he brings an enormous amount of
force with no excess motion so become
Bruce Lee is the last and he is
sovereign in the context of at least
come true and actually he was sovereign
in a lot of contexts so then we can say
is alright you did seem three pieces all
now are connected to each other they're
they're all proper the same thing and so
you have to be very thoughtful about the
fact that it's the whole as integrated
with each other if you over bias in any
one of these three directions you're now
once again becoming a sympathies tiger
you have to be able to actually step up
and then we can be aware of the fact
that all of these are contextual so I've
mentioned for example that Bruce Lee was
sovereign in the context of kung-fu he
probably wasn't sovereign in the context
of surfing but I imagine it wouldn't
have taken him too long - you have to be
aware now of meta aware of where you are
I'm aware of where you're showing or how
you're showing up so I might for example
be sovereign I'm walking down the street
and my ability to respond to what is
happening is allowing me to make
effective choices by which I mean merely
I can make choices whereby I am at least
as well off in the next moment in my
ability to make good choices as I am now
and ideally better that's literally an
effective choice is nothing but that it
just means that every choice I'm making
is making my sovereignty better at least
a little bit so I'm doing that I'm doing
well I am observing I'm learning from my
environment I'm walking and everything's
working out fine and then gunshots break
out now let's say I've never experienced
that in my life
well I'm probably not sovereign to that
environment you can imagine like this
sphere of sovereignty either collapses
or you can imagine that
there's like a dot inside my sphere and
suddenly the dot moves way out and it's
outside of my sphere of sovereignty
well at a meta sovereign level there's a
an ability to be aware of where you are
oh I am NOT sovereign right now well
what do I do now we get back to him at a
linebacker
well you better drop into liminality you
better drop into doing the best you can
to open up not think you know what's
going on and listening and poising
yourself in balance to be able to do the
best you can to respond to what's
happening which made by the way I mean
doing what surfers do with a huge
 wave is just question which is
to completely relax you know if you're
an absolute chaos you can't possibly be
savage or that context that's almost the
definition of chaos and so the way to
respond to absolute chaos is to actually
go into a completely liminal state and
just not even try to make choices until
something has begun to show up that
gives you some orientation so that's one
part of the story so let me now go to
the other part of the story this is
sovereignty and by the way at this point
I'm afraid we're gonna have to stop
because I am actually losing my
sovereignty I'm getting tired so here's
three other dimensions integrity
discernment and embodiment so integrity
is bringing all aspects of yourself into
right relationship with each other if
you're a man in the ages of 20 to 100
well eight four actually
let's go with shortly after birth and by
the way also a woman but was talking
about right now this is not easy right
this notion of okay well how do I become
aware of all the different aspects of
myself and how do I bring them into
right relationship with each other
that's a lot that's a whole lot and it's
all the whole life's journey by the way
it never ends so the question of
sovereignty is actually almost a
question of choice are you choosing to
go in that direction are you choosing to
decide that you're going to take
complete responsibility for how you're
showing up in the world
recognizing that quite often you will
not be adequate to what's happening but
you're gonna take that you're just gonna
step into it and you're gonna always try
to dust your ass off and get up and do
better next time and with love this is
the thing that men have a hard time with
that bringing all the aspects of
yourself into right relationship
actually requires that you oftentimes
allow those aspects to be held with care
not with harshness men be beat ourselves
up a lot so you made a mistake how do
you not beat yourself up because that's
just an ineffective way of learning it
just shuts down learning it's not a good
way to learn how do you would actually
say okay wasn't the way I don't learned
it to show up how do I do better next
time I just did a better just imagine if
you were trying to be a really good dad
to a young son like a four year old son
that's the idea so come into
relationship with yourself from that
perspective and slowly but surely learn
how to really allow all the different
aspects of yourself to come into
relationship right relationship with
each other
integrity okay second discernment well
discernment is kind of like tuning your
instruments if we say that yourself all
the aspects of yourself are your
instrument how do you allow now how do
you learn how to listen to all those
aspects how do you attune to how you
yourself as a singular kind of being are
able to sense what's going on in the
world and this involves a lot of doing a
lot of practice like it's it's very much
okay let's go into the world let's do
stuff let's surf let's talk to women
let's say challenging things to our
co-workers in boss and then notice
what's happening what felt what ended up
being a good choice rather than it being
a bad choice with a curiosity and a
gentleness but also instead that
fastness and a perseverance which by the
way is just called learning and
recognized by the way that as you do
that and as you recognize that you have
there's always more options than you
think you have it's always a bigger
context than you're aware of
and every other human being in the
history of ever is just as up and
limited as you are so okay might as well
just start where you are and start going
you can begin the process of discernment
and really learning how to listen to the
instrument who you are and you know I
for me a lot of physical metaphors work
shooting a bow or a gun a rifle shooting
a basketball if you like of a metaphor
skateboarding or dancing these are all
places that many men can be familiar
with that notion like learning how to
shoot a basketball that when you're a
kid it takes a certain way of listening
to something that you have no idea and
then you just try and then you listen
and you try and you listen and you try
and you listen and suddenly you start to
get ahead the hang of it
I'll just imagine extending that out to
all of reality and you're in the
prodding or the process of discernment
and then the third is embodiment the
third aspect of sovereignty what I mean
by embodiment is very much to
distinguish knowing from mastering so
when I grew up in Texas and I remember
actually in college being interested in
learning how to play roller hockey so
what did I do
I went to the library and checked out a
book I sort of liked the Soviet the guy
who invented the Soviet hockey system I
read how to play hockey well as you
might imagine that's not particularly
useful there's a pretty obvious
distinction between book learning and
embodiment when it comes to things that
are very much of the body sports but
what I would like to suggest is that
that same distinction is true in all
things mathematicians and physicists are
kind of aware of this that if you were
to ask say Einstein where the process of
his insight comes from he may very well
like point to parts of his physical body
like yeah that's my elbow it's the back
of my neck it's he's really allowing the
mastery of the math and the physics to
seeing
in until it is intuitive until it is
fluid until it is natural and these
acting from naturalness and being aware
of the difference like being aware of
where you are
skateboarding no no well mm-hm
almost all adult males will find
themselves being very stupid when
they're skateboarding they say for some
reason don't recognize they have no idea
that it's hard and so they hurt
themselves but it might be wise to
consider the fact that you don't know
how first and then allow yourself to
learn the process of just fluidly and
slowly taking the time to allow your
discernment in this context to build
until the process of being a
skateboarder has become embodied and
doing no more that is in fact precisely
at what might be called your
evolutionary edge okay I can stand in a
skateboard and I can write it down a
hill and I can turn and I can stop
awesome now I might try to learn how to
ollie not before after and that's the
idea right and I'm keeping it really
simple but it's it is actually that
simple you know Jordan Peterson says
clean your room I'm saying the same
thing and by the way if you want to
learn how to start sovereignty start
with yourself then start with your the
people who you love the most
right if you can get past that give me a
call right well that that is an
excellent description of a lot of the
things that I've been driving out over
the last couple of years and I and I
brought this up because of the way that
I think men are feeling sort of confused
by all the misdirection and
misinformation that's out there also
feeling attacked as the American the no
the APA just comes out and actually
pathologize his traditional roles of
masculinity and I think that we're all
sort of grasping for a sense of what
does it mean to be a you know a
positively masculine male and the
culture today and and when I started
reading about your sense of sovereignty
and especially now when you add
integrity discernment embodiment to it
and I realize these are applicable to
women as well but really I don't know
that I've come across a better summation
of a 21st century positive masculinity
and how guys can can take these sort of
all I mean man there's a
in each these elements the air but then
begin to apply them in their own lives
and use them to work their way through
this information battlefield that's out
there and the the disinformation and the
ongoing sort of information warfare
that's out there the traditional
masculinity the attack on on sense
making and information and all this
confusion that we have and yeah I have
always advocated for guys to you start
with yourself first you put yourself
first and you take care of your family
and maybe you can take care of your
community and maybe your city and then
maybe your nation and maybe the world
but you know first first start with
yourself it can I can I just catch up
more thin yeah yeah just think something
something really showed up so I wrote an
essay because I was really really
curious about the question of courage
and I was trying to really contemplate
it and I don't know if I did a
particularly good job but something
showed up for me they were useful the
courage to storm Normandy Beach is real
for sure that obviously none of us have
done anything vaguely like that nothing
the curb the courage is what you're
talking about it's a different kind of
courage right people aren't just firing
bullets at us so we don't get to watch
our best friend's head explode they're
firing different things so it's a
different kind of courage but it's still
courage that's the ability to stand in
front of the slings and arrows of the
you know the AMA pathologizing
masculinity is what I call infinitesimal
courage
it's a courage that actually requires
that you be able to stand and not and
feel it it hurts right if you hear
there's pain there for sure and it's not
just pain it's harm it's real threat yes
but you can't respond in it in the same
way you can't shoot back and so what was
coming up for me as you're talking about
it is that 2,000 years ago and this is
going to come very odd coming from me
because my background is vaguely
religious but 2,000 years ago we were
given an opportunity on occasion to be
more christ-like I would say right
that that is in fact mandatory yeah it
is no longer a matter of that might be a
neat thing to do for a few folks the
kind of sovereignty were talking about
the kind of courage we're talking about
is precisely the kind of courage that
Christ represents that is a amazing
point that you brought up in something I
could probably talk for hours about but
we'll put it as they say a pin in that
one yeah and and on the the last note
that I just I want to touch is that we
didn't really get too much into the read
read resistance or the read religion or
as you very aptly and John rabe also
described and I put in my book how the
blue church and the the ideas that
they've spread have created a situation
in which the only people left to resist
it are those who are actually now immune
to the tactics of the blue church and so
when people ask me what can we do my
point to them is always start with
yourself what we have to do is actually
build real communities and it starts
with individuals and it starts with
having an inner strengths and it starts
without as low strikes and it starts
with this this the notion of sovereignty
and then expanding it as you can to
around to the people that you love and
the people that you've now elect to
commune with and to me that is the
answer to sort of combating what's
happening and again there's so many
topics we could have covered and I'll
just in very two seconds touch on you
were you mentioned in social media
making weak affiliations versus strong
connections and social media presents us
with opportunity to replace our strong
connections with these weak affiliations
and so well I will commend my guys and
the community that I work in and that we
specifically create real time real-life
events where we commune together in
person we see each other we look each
other in the eyes we give each other
hugs and we like actually get to know
the other person and make and use social
media to create strong actual real world
bonds to transmit many of these messages
that we're discussing here and so to my
guys out there you know after we listen
to this this podcast over and over again
because there's so much rich information
in here just remember that the
commuting in person and in real time in
creating the communities actual physical
communities with strong bonds rather
than relying on the weak affiliations of
social media is the way that we're going
to move forward positively into the
future Jordan I could literally talk to
you for six or eight hours it was a real
honor and a pleasure to have you on I'm
honestly I'm fanboying a little bit I
cited just so much and like the peak
chapter in my book that this has been
intellectually really rewarding for me
and thank you so much for taking the
time really you know I just emailed you
out of the blue and you agreed to do it
I couldn't believe it
so thank you thank you so much and you
know we're definitely mium and my
listener gonna listen to this one a few
times there's tons of information I
would love to do it again I'm sure I'll
have more of a succinct direction to go
in the future if we can talk again so
really thank you congratulations on the
new addition to the family and you know
really thanks for coming on I really
appreciate it well wonderful I enjoyed
learning about what you're up to and I
appreciated the last bit of what you
said there so I could not agree more
that you guys are focusing in the right
area and yeah I do truly hope that those
folks who decided to listen for last 90
minutes have found the time well spent
I'm sure they certainly will thank you
very much I'll let you get on with
everything and I hope that we can touch
base again and do this again sometime
soon yeah sounds right all right thank
you Jordan
[Music]
you