[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we were
continuing our examination of sacredness
the experience of sacredness the the
Schirrmacher side of things and I was
trying to develop an account of what
symbols are at least symbols insofar as
they are distinct from signs in a way of
trying to understand the roles that the
role that symbols have in our
understanding of sacredness so I was
presenting to you the view that symbols
are a participatory machine I that's not
the right word the symbols are that the
word I want is there they're a
participatory act that's the word I want
they're participatory act and that that
participation is has a connection to the
activation of a profound kind of
metaphor by activating that metaphor we
are reaching backwards through our
exaptation and reactivating that
material so that we can re exact our
cognitive processes and re-experience re
appreciate resi we understand some
aspect of reality and that reacts apt
ation makes the use of a symbol a deeply
participatory transformative thing that
we do and that with a symbol we're
activating all that reactive machinery
in order to hold something in mind so
that we can see more deeply into it be
more in contact with it and then I
argued the point of that is ultimately
to set up an ANA gaagh Express by which
I am transformed so I can see through
the symbol into reality
and so that reality can speak through
the symbol to me
and that we get an Anna Gaga flow
happening and I'm becoming deeply
integrated the world is becoming
disclosed and that mutual reciprocal
realization feels deeply sort of like
love coupling to reality in a profound
way and so that symbols are in that
sense designed to get me into a
trajectory of trance framing they're
designed to in wonder open up the world
and also grow me so that I can be in
that larger world and that points to how
symbols are ecstatic they're
participatory they're integrative
they're complex because they help to
complexify me and disclose the
complexity of the world in a coordinated
fashion and then I suggested to you that
we understand symbols as mythos that
it's always a symbol and a story
together and that the story points to
the ritual and the ritual is also right
there because the mythos is always
enacted if it's going to bring about the
transformations that it wants to bring
about or that we want to use it to bring
about I think both of those are right
we can use mythos to activate accelerate
articulate and appreciate religio
religio is inherently valuable to us so
even that alone is going to be very
valuable to us
but in addition the act of seriously
playing not only is it development of
what we are what we find intrinsically
valuable because it's constitutive of
our ability to value anything else or
interact with anything we consider
valuable because it's primordial not
only is that the case but relevance
realization which is at the heart of
religion of giving your argument for
that is constituted to it it functions
it is structured to function it
functions by being interested in itself
correcting itself transcending itself
developing itself so that's why we we
love the flow state right it mark not
only not only is it a optimal in the
right this playing with religion like
the flow state is not only optimal in
that it's getting us to be our best we
also find it to be an optimal experience
because we're seriously playing with
this intrinsically valuable machinery in
a way that is constitutively
intrinsically significant to us
and I propose that when we are using the
symbol to get us to play with the
machinery the meta assimilation the meta
accommodation or sacredness or the least
the meta assimilation the meta
accommodation of the higher order
relevance realization within sacredness
and that's what we deeply mean by the
experience of sacredness and then I
propose to you a proposal I need to
return to now because I only initiated
it last time I propose to you that we
move off of sacredness and on to the
sacred in a particular proposal as to
what is the cause or the source of
sacredness the sacred and again I'm
using that term because it's as neutral
as I can find and the proposal which
again you don't find in some accounts of
sacredness the sacred that is the DAO I
do not think is supernatural or absolute
the sacredness of Shunyata is definitely
not right
so when Prince Wu asked Bodhidharma what
was you know what was wholly about his
doctrine and he keeps pressing
bodhidharma he keeps saying no no not
that and then the Prince gets upset says
well what is holy about your doctrine
Bodhidharma says nothing holy vast
emptiness Shunyata is in that sense
sacred but it's not holy at least not in
the sense of you know a supernatural
source of righteousness
so
I proposed an alternative to that idea
born from a critique the critique was
there's something wrong about trying to
essential i's sacredness in the sacred
right to say that that what that the
source of sacredness is something that
is essentially relevant to us absolutely
unquestionably undeniably relevant to us
and that it is the the culmination in
and the the or it is the origin and the
culmination of relevance and then I
propose to you that that just struck me
ultimately and I do mean this with as
much respect I mean this is I hopefully
regarded as a respectful criticism but
nevertheless it's a Christmas I regard
that as a category mistake relevance
realization right is not about detecting
finding something that's inherently
relevant in the sense that it absolutely
commands our attention relevance does
not have an essence it doesn't work that
way
relevance realization is in trinsic ly
an evolving process it functions by
evolving and it evolves in its
functioning does that mean we should
just dispense know because I proposed to
you a couple well I propose one thing
and then I want to add another thing to
it I propose to you that there's a
different way of thinking about
sacredness that comports well with this
idea of right the sacredness of
sacredness there's an idea a way of
thinking about the source of sacredness
that comports well with the picture of
sacredness that I've tried to argue for
which is namely the idea of sacredness
as the inexhaustible
the inexhaustible aspects of this
reality it's kind of a turning conte on
his head this reality is always a source
of wonder for me not because there is an
object that is specifically or
absolutely has the claim on me of being
the source of wonder every object
everything is calm editorially explosive
vast emptiness ultimately there is a no
thinness to reality because everything
is combinatorially explosive in terms of
what it is
but my processing precisely because of
the way it operates has an inexhaustible
nough stew it - and no thingness to it
the I that is never reducible there is
always the framing that is never
capturable in the frame because the
process of relevance realization is
ongoing its inexhaustible because it
can't stop it's like a shark that if it
stops swimming it drowns and there's a
deep transactive 'ti there's a deep
participatory identification between the
inexhaustible no thickness in me and the
inexhaustible no thickness of reality
vast emptiness that now they can be
spoken is not the DAO
and so I can return again and again and
again to the world and again and again
and again there is the real potential in
the world of sacredness now why might
people now this is a conjecture on my
part I'm trying to offer an explanation
and it is not intended to be a
justification because that would be
inconsistent with what I'm saying
but why is it that we might get this way
where we we we get this this is where it
is to be found and this is where I think
we do need to be more charitable oh man
and I don't want to sound condescending
there is a real sense in which
particular symbols particular mythos is
indispensable for people it might be and
in fact it's highly plausible if you
think about it given my own personal
history the way relevance realization
has unfolded the way religio is for here
now me that certain symbols are
indispensable for me to activate
articulate appreciate accelerate my
religion those symbols may be
indispensable for me because of the way
my relevance realization machinery is
evolving they may be indispensable to my
religion because of the Kairos that is
always part of my on my on going see the
problem with religiosa sit sit down
right but my ongoing religio if even
saying my is wrong right because that
makes it sound like something I possess
the religio that my world and I part
dissipate in and Co emerge from it maybe
to a certain set of individuals that
these sets of symbols are indispensable
that makes sense to me
and that that is how relevance
realization works you may say that only
through this mythos do I get the access
I need to activate accentuate appreciate
accelerate articulate my religion I
think that is a completely plausible
hypothesis I think therefore it is it it
makes sense to say for example that
given the way this person's evolved
fitted miss as unfolded and the
particular timing the historical context
that only this mythos gives them the
access they need and in that sense it
may be it's a Christian mythos maybe
it's a Hindu mythos that mythos is
indispensable to them
but here is what we shouldn't do we
shouldn't confuse indispensible to an
individual to a community to a group to
a tradition we shouldn't confuse psycho
cultural cognitive cultural
indispensability with metaphysical
necessity
metaphysical necessity
English is indispensable to me
I cannot communicate you to you without
it given this time this place my own
history where we are the timing of
things English is indispensable to me
that doesn't mean that English is
metaphysically necessary it didn't exist
and it will not exist at some point and
it is not some final complete or
absolute version it is not the perfect
language it is not the final language in
fact it performs precisely because it's
continually evolving as a language so
that it stays at least to some degree in
touch with the world
I don't think we should confuse these
they are not the same
I do not think we should understand the
sacred we shouldn't do this
of course these are linked
the inexhaustible source of respectable
participatory procedural and ultimately
propositional intelligibility
we may have I think it's reasonable that
in fact I think it's highly plausible
that a certain mythos is indispensable
for an individual a group a community a
tradition but that should not be
confused with meta physical necessity
nor should it license the idea that that
adheres in some supernatural entity or
thing
the shark being the way the shark is is
indispensable to the Sharks capacity to
survival but that doesn't mean that that
is the final finished absolute form of
fitted nurse the world and the capacity
for biological adaptation the process of
evolution means that there's an
inexhaustible Ness to life's capacity
forfeited miss that to me is a
reasonable alternative to understanding
sacredness than to think of it as in
hearing in some final absolute so if we
could give up the confusion of
indispensability with metaphysical
necessity if we could give up
identifying the sacred that which
generates sacredness as the supernatural
then we would not have to be committed
to a two worlds mythology for accessing
sacredness the deep connectedness of
religio
now that and of itself is not well
that's not the response like to the
demeaning class that's insufficient that
is and I mean the sir this is the first
step the first step is to try to
understand the machinery of
connectedness and understand it in a way
that allows us to disconnect it from a
metaphysical essentialism disconnect it
from the supernatural and its commitment
to a two worlds mythology instead
understand it in a fashion that is
completely integrated with science
because if you remember this is all
grounded in a naturalistic
interpretation of relevance realization
this would be an account that we
situates us back within that scientific
worldview well also giving us a way a
deep way of talking about experiencing
sacredness deep connectedness deep self
transcendence deep transformation etc
now I need to do a lot more work and
that's why this series is not yet
finished I need to show how this model
of relevance realization does address
the historical issues I vote but already
suggesting that to you but how does it
help to address where we got to
historically the historical factors but
there's another thing that I've been
alluding to that we also have to address
and they are integrated together and now
that I have this theoretical machinery I
can talk about it better because we now
have I think a more careful way of
understanding the meaning crisis
this marker is good
so we have and we did this in the first
off the series we have the historical
factors that basically have unhold us
thwarted worldview tune meant all the
stuff we've been talking about and of
course they need to be addressed and
part of how we can awaken from the
meaning crisis is we have to respond to
these historical factors we have to wet
and we have to come up with a way of RER
tickle aiding our worldview in which we
can get back that sense of deep
connectedness what I've been calling in
the last couple of lectures sacredness
that kind of deep connectedness that
affords the satisfaction of our sense of
being in contact with the world affords
self transcendence affords meaning in
life in a profound way so can this view
give us something analogous to what the
three orders we got to get to that
that's how we respond to the historical
factors but you're starting to see how
it might do that we're starting to see
how we can get an account of sacredness
that can fit into the scientific
worldview and fit us back into it we
need to do more on that but you're
getting a beginning of that but there's
something else now that's come that's
coming to the fore that we need to
address which is right the structural
functional analysis of meaning making
what I've been calling the scientific
analysis because I think that's fair
in contrast to the historical analysis
there's also disclosing something out
and that we've seen this all the way
along and I've been hinting at it
because the machinery of meaning making
of course also is the machinery that is
going awry
when people are experiencing a sense of
meaninglessness
remember the core argument that the very
machining that makes you adaptive is the
machinery that makes you vulnerable to
self deceptive self destructive
processing the very machinery of our our
relevance realization that is making all
of this deep connectedness possible for
us it's also the machinery that can go
horribly wrong we've already seen that I
want to start talking about the
perennial problems you've seen examples
along the way but I want to bring them
out more I want to develop that thesis
about how the very machinery that makes
us adaptive is the machinery that makes
us prone to self-deceptive
self-destructive behavior
here's what I want to argue I want to
argue that all cultures all all people
in the sense of being participants in
their culture not necessarily every
single individual but all cultures
across time place history right people
are prone to perennial problems these
are ways in which the machinery of
relevance realization can drive them
into meaninglessness despair so the idea
is that inherent in the machinery that
makes us adoptive is inescapable
vulnerabilities to self deceptive self
destructive patterns that can deeply
undermine our religio the agent arena
relationship such that we experience
meaninglessness absurdity alienation etc
we fall into despair these are perennial
because they are inherent in our
machinery now cultures and individuals
communities and multiple scales what
people have developed is they have
developed sets of psycho technologies
the colleges of practices that help
alleviate the suffering of these
perennial problems so for example in
India you have the rise of Buddhism
right as a set of psycho technologies
for dealing with dukkha etc dealing with
modal confusion
this is broadly we have practices for
cultivating wisdom right and pursuing
enlightenment or salvation
the meeting crisis emerges I would argue
when historical factors have undermined
and that's what I tried to show you in
the hit into history have undermined a
worldview a tradition D legitimatize a
language a cognitive grammar made
obsolete or made dismissive practices
sets of psycho technologies so that this
undermines this the historical factors
lead to the undermining of the whole
ecology of practices and psycho
technologies and cognitive cultural
grammar that people have created in
order to respond to the perennial
problems
so we need to do two things and now
that's where we're gonna start drawing
the historical and the and scientific
together is this account that I'm trying
to argue for for relevance realization
as our meaning-making machinery and for
understanding sacredness in terms of
religio a higher order form of relevance
realization can I also use that
machinery to give and I've tried to
suggest how this is possible to give a
response to the historical factors I'm
gonna try and do that in terms of what's
called right
third generation or four II cognitive
science and I'm already doing that and
I'm also I'm already been exemplifying
it to you throughout this course but
right now I want to do something else I
want to take all this machinery of
relevance realization and religio and
sacredness and I want to use it to talk
about how we can address the perennial
problems
I want to do something that's at the
core of a scientific ocular scientific
project this sounds pretentious and
maybe hubristic and I hope it's not I
want to read and I want to
reverse-engineer enlightenment I want to
understand what the perennial problems
are and using this machinery what are
the practices what are the processes we
can use in order to address the
perennial problems that that's what I'm
going to take enlighten meant to mean
the enlightenment is the set of
practices that ameliorate the perennial
problems and alleviate us from the
distress and the suffering that they
inflict upon us I already suggested that
possibility of that when we talked about
higher states of consciousness and
trying to give a cognitive scientific
account but now I want to take that
deeper because to awaken from the
meaning crisis is not just to have a
theory it is not even to have a good
scientific historical theory it is to
have an understanding that helps afford
and facilitate the process of
transformation that we need to undergo
in order to awaken from the meaning
crisis I have failed if what I'm doing
will not ultimately lead to ways in
which you in your life can respond to
how the perennial problems might be
gnawing away at the fabric of meaning in
your life
so I want to concentrate on that I want
to concentrate on trying to
reverse-engineer enlightenment and then
if I can take that and situate it into
this account of sacredness and relevance
realization and show how that fits into
our scientific worldview and you can see
how this is start pretending together
then we have a way of awakening from the
meeting crisis not as an absolute final
answer that's ridiculous but it's a way
of maybe getting the process of
awakening from the meaning crisis
started
all right
let's think of relevance realization and
religio we can think about there's a
functional aspect a structural aspect of
course and a developmental all of this
has been seen throughout this series
of course the functional aspect is
ultimately the relevance realization
there's sort of three central features
the way it's which its self-organizing
right and then there's aspects of self
identification and self reflection
the structural has to do with the whole
meta meaning of the agent arena
relationship
the developmental right I'll come back
to because I need to unpack these more
before I can talk more about that but
we've already seen how an intrinsically
developmental relevance realization and
religio are okay
the self-organizing aspect how can that
go awry well I've already made I think a
very good case for that for you
that's parasitic processing when we get
into those complex cycles that take on a
life of their own and take life from us
complex patterns of self deception and
self destruction self identification
when we know what that is that's modal
confusion
what about self reflection well I
haven't talked about that very much so I
need to talk about that now this goes to
some important work done by bellman and
others so we have to go back again to
the work of Harry Frankfurt and
Frankfurt's notion of a wanton a wanton
is a being who acts in a wanton fashion
that acts completely impulsively and so
the idea is if I just knocked completely
impulsively I'll actually lose my agency
because my impulses are often in
conflict with each other they undermine
each other we'll think about Plato and
the inner conflict right so what I need
to do is I need to step back and reflect
in order to try and get the coordination
and integration and reflection actually
helps reduce my wantonness see when I'm
in meshed in a perspective here's a
particular perspective right I am a
meshed in its salience landscape how
it's making me care how it's motivating
and arousing me so when I'm thirsty
right when I'm thirsty I'm seeing the
world thirstily right so things having
to do with water and kindig um salient
I'm drawn in right that's to see the
world thirstily but I can do a
transparency opacity shift I can
actually step to a different perspective
in which I'm aware of my thirst
now I'm not this perspective is not
thirsty this is thirsty but this
perspective for example is curious oh
that's what thirst is like now my
motivational machinery is not driven
just by thirst it is driven by a carrier
perhaps curiosity and what happens is I
start to gain some relief from the
compulsion of immediacy and urgency of
my thirst I'm using thirst by the way
cuz that's also a metaphor in Buddhism
for craving
right so at the right if you're at the
bottom and you don't you if you don't do
any self-transcendence your are you're a
wash and impulsiveness and
self-destructive wantonness and as I
start to move up away as a self trance
and I start to regain agency but as you
may expect you can't simply maximize
this and this is Velma's point it's an
excellent point as I open up this is the
reflectiveness gap I get in a gap by
reflection as I open up this
reflectiveness guy gap I'm gaining
agency but if I keep opening it up do I
keep enhancing agency no because then
you get into the problem that is typify
beautifully by the way in one of our
great tragedies namely Hamlet Hamlet is
always reflecting and he's always
reflecting on his reflection and so he's
always stepping back and looking at are
we stepping back and looking at and so
he becomes incapable of acting his
tremendous because he is gifted right
his tremendous powers of reflection and
self transcendence are actually making
him incapable of acting she get as dumb
and says he becomes disconnected from
the motivational machinery of
interacting with the world
he loses agency see as I open up here's
agency here's the reflectiveness gap as
I open it up I gain agency but as I push
it too far
I lose it now of course you're tempted
that you know the Canadian response oh
I'll just stay in the middle and
remember that never works right because
how much I need to be towards this end
and how much I need to work be towards
that end is going to be very
contextually sensitive the problem is
the problem with this is how do i
optimize this how do I get the
involvement the immersion of the wantin
how do I get the flexibility the
self-correcting capacity of Hamlet
how do I get them together how do i
optimize them together so this is the
problem of the reflectiveness gap but of
course the fact that it's an
optimization problem tells you that it's
immediately a mashed with relevance
realization because another way another
trade-off that remember there's
trade-offs we've saw between exploring
and exploiting there is trade-offs
between generalizing and specializing
another trade-off is you're constantly
trading between right stepping back and
looking at your cognition to monitor it
and stepping through and being involved
with intervening in the world there's a
trade-off relationship between them it's
also part of relevance realization
what about meta meaning well there's
three I want to talk about absurdity
we've talked about some of these this
one already anxiety alienation all of
these of course show up and Dom aside
because Dom aside is the loss of the
agent arena relationship so alienation
of course is when the connectedness
between you and other people is lost
absurdity is when the connectedness
between you and the world is lost and
absurdity can be pushed into of course
horror when you're finding a particular
mystery when you're finding a particular
absurdity deeply mysterious so it's
drawing you in right as such that your
your ability to make sense and get a
grip on the world is being deeply
thwarted that's horror and of course
anxiety remember it's not the same as
fear anxiety is ultimately when you are
disconnected from yourself in an
important way
the to the problems we face down here
when we've talked already before this is
existential inertia when you're trapped
in a worldview and you can't get out of
it you can't activate an agave and move
to a new worldview or existential
ignorance right you're indecisive you
can't you don't know what you're gonna
lose if you go through the
transformation you don't know what
you're gonna miss if you don't right
this is existential entrapment
so let's talk a little bit about I've
talked a lot about this and this I
explained this we we know a lot about
the anxiety the inner conflict we've got
aspects of the alienation I've been
talking about I've talked about this
already but this which I've alluded to
many times we need to talk about this
because it points to something really
central and important a very important
article on this is by Thomas Nagel it's
called the absurd it also talks about in
his book the view from nowhere and what
I want to try and show you is how much
absurdity is a perspective of
participatory all of this is at the
level of right respectable participatory
knowing but this in particular
first of all Nagel does something very
very important in the absurd he talks
about how we behave as if the absurd is
a result of our inferential processing
and we purport to give arguments that
lead to the conclusion of absurdity so
we give an argument like well what I do
now doesn't matter because it won't make
any difference to people a million years
from now so I made insignificant by that
you know the vast expanse of time a
niggle points out that argument doesn't
work because if what's happening now is
irrelevant notice my language to people
a million years from now the symmetry
applies their opinion of me a million
years in the future is it relevant to me
it's complete asymmetry if I make no
difference to them they also should make
no difference to me
it can't matter to me because I can't
matter to it well you know what people
are pointing to is you know they they
you know they're so small they're so
brief
well natal says well if you existed for
millions and millions of years would
that make your life more meaningful in
fact isn't it the very real possibility
that existing for a very long period of
time would make your life absolutely
absurd
if if your smallness in reality makes
you feel absurd makes you insignificant
then would your life be more meaningful
to you if I blew you up to the size of a
galaxy why would that do anything and as
wolf has argued in her book meaning in
life of white matters being can be this
sense of being bigger is actually a
metaphor for being connected to
something larger than oneself and that's
ultimately a metaphor for being
connected to something that has a value
independent of my valuing of it and
we're going to come back to that because
that's at the core of sacredness because
there's a there's a problem sort of for
all of these
so what's going on with absurdity right
if it's not really being generated by
these arguments what are the arguments
doing well he's basically saying the
arguments are after the fact expressions
of absurdity not before the fact
generators of absurdity well I might you
know oh my life is made up served by the
fact that I'm gonna die you can't
experience being dead how can that be
relevant to you well I won't exist you
didn't exist a million years ago is that
particularly relevant to you now notice
what I'm doing I'm not trivializing your
experience I'm trying to say that the
arguments aren't generating it because
the arguments are ultimately invalid so
let's drop out of propositional knowing
and we don't we know that that's right
we've had this whole argument that
relevance realization the meaning making
processes are below the propositional
level below the level of our inferences
and our beliefs is at the level of
procedural and ultimately perspectival
and participatory no but let's take an
example
so Nagel gives an example now he wrote
the article in the 80s and that was way
before cellphones and like people had
voice recorders which is very different
time very very different time but he
gives the example of what he calls
everyday absurdity an example goes like
this Tom on the phone and he calls he's
been all day just I got to do this I got
to do this I'm gonna call Seuss and I'm
gonna tell her that I love her I gotta
do it I've been working on this all day
and working himself far up and it's oh
it's good ruling we sort of we got a
friendship but I might be losing a
friendship but I might be
gaining a lover and oh and he's oh this
is happening right right so ah
he picks up calls Susan picked dials he
hears her here's the phone picked up
click kid he goes Susan don't say
anything don't say anything at all
before you can say anything I have to
tell you I love you I love you Susan
and then he hears Susan is not here
right now please leave a message at the
tone beep and it's kind of funny and
it's kind of sad at the same time and
humor has humour can overlap with
absurdity in fact you can get a lot of
humor by playing with absurdity Monty
Python you know was those guys that
troop was talented in that because
what's going on in humor points to
what's going on an absurdity what's
happening is a clash of perspectives we
have Tom's perspective and from within
his perspective his action is deeply
meaningful but the Machine gives us the
perspective but an impersonal mechanical
perspective in which his actions make no
sense they have no meaning
absurdity is a clash of perspectives
because of course that's why it overlaps
with humor because in humor what you do
is you play between a clash of
perspectives and then you resolve it by
a trick by an equivocation right you
play with two different perspectives
that's what's a punchline you were in
this perspective and then you're
suddenly shifted to this one but not in
some incongruous way but in a way that
you can ultimately make sense of but of
course absurdity doesn't always and very
often does not overlap with humor
because the perspective of clash can be
one that we can't ultimately resolve
with humor and make sense of the clash
instead is a raw clash of perspectives
and we experience just the incoherency
just the loss of connectedness so
absurdity is this clash of perspectives
that's why it can become horror
because this perspective the perspective
that I'm looking at if I look at this
perspective from the perspective of all
of time in history what's relevant and
here is undermined there there's a clash
in these perspectives
so
what do we need to do we can see how all
of this machinery all of this is ways in
which the adaptive nature of religion
relevance realization is also making us
prey to vulnerable to losing our agency
to suffering distress to experiencing
horror meaninglessness absurdity being
trapped right being deeply confused
overwhelmed by parasitic processing
these are perennial problems because the
very machinery that's making adopt
making us adaptive is making us always
susceptible to them we can't jump over
our own shadows now what I want to do
next time with you is can we use the
very same machinery of relevance
realization and see how we could
engineer a comprehensive response to all
of these perennial problems because I
would propose to you that any
developmental change any development of
our perspectival participatory and
procedural knowings
that affords a response a reliable
response that ameliorates and even
alleviates the perennial problems that
is a good candidate for enlightenment
instead of making enlightenment as this
unachievable superlative that only the
super human beings in the distant past
can achieve what's the use of that
let's make enlightenment what it it
might be difficult but let's not do that
let's acknowledge the difficulty with an
understanding that actually facilitates
us being able to respond
let's I'm going to stipulate that
enlightenment is the developmental
process that gives us role
i of all amelioration and alleviation of
the perennial problems and i'm going to
show you next time how that can be
explained with the theoretical machinery
of relevance realization and religio
thank you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you