[Music]
the last time I talked to Zach he quoted
his I think it was Rastafarians friend
who said that school makes you stupid
the money makes you poor and the
medicine makes you sick so so Zach
Zach's been probably I would say Zach is
more of an activist than you are John
but you're both working on different
levels maybe of trying to figure things
out so can can you both can you both
sort of give a short view of let's say
education in the meaning crisis and and
your philosophies on education in
general okay Zach do you want to go
first or sure please
totally thank you John it's actually
great to be here
and Andrew thank you as well it's thank
you Kevin honor and so I you know I
think about the meaning crisis in terms
of a broader meta-crisis that has these
four factors the meeting crisis is one
and isn't perhaps the one that is the
most dire and painful in a sense and so
aside aside from it though the other
three you also have what I'm calling a
capability crisis all right so this
isn't necessarily about meaning-making
it's about people can't do the work that
needs to be done is too complex or
because of the meaning crisis they never
gave a about it I've never built
the skills ability screens right right
they so they can interact as what you're
saying yeah and that's and that's a big
deal the capability crisis because if
you can't do the stuff it needs to be
done I don't like a logistical level
like maintaining infrastructure and that
kind of stuff fighting disease you just
don't know how to do it could you
ability crisis and then there's also
what I'm calling a sense making crisis
or
Johnathan rawl so-called after me
something like an intelligibility crisis
mm-hmm which is again distinct from the
meeting crisis but related and has to do
with this sense that outside of the
meaning-making there's also just
intelligibility we can't
everything is illegible we can't read it
too hyper objects are kind of like
looming over us and the descends making
crisis so that just like in terms of
what's the case objectively with the
world that's up for grabs in the sense
to the post truth and that cascades into
the meaning and then it's also cascades
in the capability because if you can't
think straight rather we'll began
operating on it and then the fourth one
is what I'm calling the legitimation
crisis yeah which i think is really
important for the jedem Asian crisis is
in the aspect of the political it has to
do with basically who gets to wield
authority and why and so and again
they're all related but this one's
distinct insofar as it makes it so that
we can't even decide who should be in
charge and how the leadership should
function and we don't believe in the
forms of political justification that
have been given misogyny so things like
the breakdown in the belief of democracy
in America is an example of legitimation
process that'll turn me on so you said
that political but you also oh sorry you
broke up I was saying that that term
comes specifically from hotter boss
legitimation Christmas you know yeah
Zach just a clarification question so
you said it's largely political but you
think that the disenfranchisement is
also in cultural institutions as well
like established religions things like
that is correct yeah precisely and it
links in with my notion of teacherly
authority right right very much a crisis
and the authority structure of the
Society of the whole it's most acute
often in politics but the university is
a huge issue
yeah yeah our our expertise to be
respected or not
so I wanted to ask you one question
about that as you mentioned this before
and I thought this was a well this way I
sort of perked up when you said there's
not the other ideas aren't good but I
realized last time you spoke to me about
this I it's made me think quite a bit
about it I was wondering if I'm part of
this so this is an open question
I'm not framing a cryptic position here
it is the idea that it's not only that
we're getting disenfranchisement is we
don't know how to adjudicate between
various institutions when they come into
competition with each other um is that
also part of what you mean by legit like
so there isn't an overarching shared
normativity that allows us to adjudicate
you know when because harbor mas seem to
think that right you know you have these
can he you know these autonomous spheres
and there's nothing that transcends them
that decides how conflicts between them
are supposed to be resolved is that also
part of what you're thinking as well
yeah in essence yeah that's what I was
seeing it was a as a complete fracturing
yeah he was writing that I think is like
72 legitimation crisis and so it was
just that when post-modernism most
beginning which is what in a sense this
is all about really it's not all about
but it's a big factor with the breakdown
in hierarchical structures and
breakdowns and things like teacherly
Authority and political authority
normative Authority parental authority
all kinds of Authority and power are
become question power itself becomes
problematic as from any sense have good
connotations becomes hard to even think
about and so under those conditions when
you have that fourfold venner crisis
meaning crisis is in there then you it's
encapsulated also in this notion of
intergenerational transmission being
profoundly disrupted and that's what the
matter is this is an educational crisis
at its foundation only Worm those follow
from a certain kind of failure in the
dynamics of intergenerational
transmission mmm-hmm
at least that's part of it and why
there's that failure why the generation
gap becomes the way it is that's
interesting question but it's hard for
me not to see these as at their
foundation being part of an educational
meta-crisis so that's my that's my and
your view on medic on education I think
is larger than just schools right mm-hmm
I think that's very important like how
you talk in turn how you talk about
magic education and so maybe we can
think about education what what how is
education operating today in terms of
schools and then education outside of
schools like education that's happening
like right now and in our conversation
and education that's happening in
subcultures and everywhere else so so so
John what does how does how does that
ring that that fourfold kind of current
crisis how does that match with your way
of looking at things well I've always
said that I didn't think the meeting
crisis was exclusive I thought the
crisis was interacting with the orphans
idea of the meta-crisis and so I think
Zac and I are already on convergence on
that point as I just mentioned I think
Zacks idea that he's taken over from
Habermas and he's he's connecting it I
think in really important ways of the
legitimation crisis i yeah
I think that that makes total sense to
me I haven't said anything about it just
just because I haven't had it's not an
area that I've devoted time and work do
I so my neglect indicates nothing of
value
it's what I'm saying about that and so
that's why it's a pleasure to talk to
Zack Bowden on the sense-making and the
intelligibility issue that I think that
might I'm not sure so this is maybe an
open for discussion and it might overlap
with an aspect something that I often
pair with the meaning crisis although
they're not the same and it would also
relate to education so I often I also
talk about the wisdom famine in our
culture
and it seems to me when we're talking
about sense making if we're moving
beyond just sort of the accumulation of
information that's been sort of
institutionally vetted I think we're
talking about you know the ability to
make judgments the abilities of
discernment the ability to properly
self-regulate in the face of information
and problems and I think therefore there
might be deep connections between wisdom
or the wizard I call the wisdom famine
which also has to do with some things
I've just mentioned the loss of
intergenerational because part of what I
say is we we've lost our wisdom it
traditions or wisdom institutions and
the connection to education is there's a
way in which I think you could
understand wisdom as you know the
project of educating sense-making to
reduce self deception and manipulation
by others and so there might I think
that Jack and I might be talking about
related in similar things there mm-hmm I
excuse me they drop I also want to tie
into Zacks notion of Education and
relate that to religion in a way and so
you mentioned wisdom and so so you add
John has a notion of religio right which
is a bit distinct from religion proper
and and I've heard that speak about the
importance of let's say or we've we've
talked Zack a little bit about how a
kind of there's a gonna be a kind of
religious Renaissance going on so so I
found that that John speaks about how
we're not able to take religion
seriously anymore and and and Zack has
been saying that religion is becoming is
it's coming back kind of in spades or
this is religio or religion or whatever
you want to call it seems to be coming
back and that that has to be somehow
fused with with education does that ring
true I think that's I think that's a
very opportune connection you just made
for having us the three together three
together I'd like that framing that you
just gave
I I guess what yeah I think when I'm
using the term wisdom although I
mentioned discernment and you know
judgment wisdom also has it within an
aspiration and self transcendence as as
integral to the notion and that that
brings with it immediately
I think together these two notions of
Education broadly construed Plato set up
the first school the first Academy
literally right and it was for the
cultivation of wisdom and it was spoke
it was a place where you were supposed
to be able to receive the affordance and
the guidance for the Socratic the
project of aspiring to Socratic wisdom
and I think that's very clear but that
also brings in something that was also
too pointed to by Plato which is that
that self transcendence makes very
little sense if people do not have a
reverence for an order that transcends
their ego centrism
if they do not have a sense of where I
mean by reverence a sense of being
connected to something that is in some
it it has a it is greater than them from
which they can view their previous
perspectives in a self corrective self
transformative manner so I think if
you're talking about wisdom wisdom we're
talking about not just discernment and
judgment we're talking about aspiration
or they're talking about aspirations to
self transcendence and that links us
simultaneously on one hand to education
and on the other hand to getting back
that sense of connectedness to what we
consider sacred that which puts us into
connection with you know a greater
reality the inexhaustible nature of
reality and so I do I think that those
things are all tightly bound together
tunneling I couldn't agree more and you
know the I mean there's many many things
to say I mean the the first schools or
wisdom schools really yes you know
and it was only much later that we got
this thing we know him as a school
before that most of the
intergenerational transmission was
religious family based etc but the first
things that were built like in these
places between worlds like outside in
the wilderness between civilizations
like on road when there wasn't code and
there wasn't norms you at this mystery
school and yeah it's interesting it's a
very very important concept education
and of course it's easy to misconstrue
it alive I really appreciated the way
you construed it but much of the wisdom
research I find kind of disappointing
you know you know there's it's
interesting to that that sense making is
tied into the wisdom and that you can
almost think about the different each of
the different of those four crises as
having some resolution and certain
learning them in the realm of sense
making it seems to be wisdom and it may
be that wisdom operates on all of them
in a helpful way but besides making in
particular because right right now one
of the problems is that we're facing
situations where it's not something that
needs to be fixed
in fact that the sense making needs to
us to confront something that can't be
understood perfectly in an objective way
and so therefore we have to take the
forms of discernment and self
transcendence in decision-making in the
realm of objectivity and causality right
and this is Borden's point without the
hyper object embarrasses the cognitive
function and we're we're left to be in
community with one another facing
problems that are actually intractable
from a purely causal we have to think
about choice and the basis of choice and
the weight choice works then you're in
the realm of wisdom and as I said last
night with your Andrew yeah you don't
get an education without real living
religion that's what I call them I
actually met religio not like
Catholicism that's working or but isn't
that's working but this actual
transmission of wisdom yeah but we don't
teacher-student that's the only way it
happens and right now that's what holds
the education system together
despite the education so I get a sense
that you have you have more maybe I'm
trying to think of the right word that
you have more affinity for for actual
religion than John does or something
like that or for the let's say the the
mythopoetic aspect of religion or the
the wilder aspects of of religiosity
that's the word I'm looking for
I'm not sure if that's true I don't know
John well enough to know that but I it
maybe I mean I I really think that the
religions are quite a remarkable
cultural resource and so in that respect
would never take the view that you find
among the New Atheists and people of
that nature who think religion was a
huge mistake I think it was not
interesting I'm not saying John thinks
of this agency no no no yeah totally and
so but the question of how you bring it
in to contemporary contexts is super
loaded because it's very difficult in
some rooms and in some cities and
cultural niches to use religion in a
constructive way in fact it can only be
perceived in a usually like a in a
destructive way and so so I'm sensitive
to those dynamics but but I do think
that there's a there's something that's
like there are typically loaded they're
like are in terms of their over
determined that like there's so much
saturated with meaning and so I think
they're going to be continued to be
useful to humanity for an extremely long
time and we need to come to terms with
that well we'll never forget Jesus will
ever forget but our Socrates for as long
as what we know of as civilization
continues in any kind of way and for as
long as we think that we can some have
overcome it entirely and create this
conflict between let's say science and
religion
that seems to me to be really weird like
why are we doing that like for ratings
or something you know like it doesn't
make actual us that's the way that
there's a conflict between science and
religion so yeah so I you know I'm not
suggesting again prayer in schools but I
am suggesting that part of being
educated is grappling with the key
symbols and practices of the great
traditions with the kind of world
spirituality that's Daphne and Oprah
called it or a new perennialism as a way
to think about this which is some of the
work I'm doing at the Center for
integral wisdom Wow new perennialism
yeah yeah so this is Gaffney's term that
we've been building out as part of cosmo
erotic humanism and the perennial list
was an amazing movement and it was like
all of a sudden taboo you know ken
wilber was a Mentalist um there were
many of them of course Huxley and so org
and T Lee are having Louis goes on and
on but looking for those under key
underlying dimensions and is part of the
reconfiguring of education that's
necessary it's one of the key themes in
my book it's like we need to deal with
this a new form of relaunch
excuse me religiosity and spirituality
need to characterize the educational
institutions of the future yeah
especially if in one piece and meaning
and other things so do you agree with
that John did I did I misconstrue
something that you said or let me try
and say what I don't know if you do I
did Andrew first of all I liked what
exact just had to say although I want to
I want to talk a bit of a perennialism
in a bit I want to I want to know what's
new I want to know what's new and Neil
perennialism differs it from I like
Huxley and perennialism for example so
we can come back to that I have a set of
conference that I was just talking about
you know that I was giving a argument
that you cannot go through self transfer
you cannot you you cannot use
inferential computational procedures to
go through self transcendence there's
some very deep arguments
and so I think I clearly articulated
this goes towards your mythopoetic point
entered that I think two things are
really important for aspiration and
self-transcendence serious play and us
symbolism where symbolism doesn't mean a
culture a cognitive ornamentation
symbolism is a particularly of relating
to the imaginal that allows us to move
between John with this identity in this
frame to that John with a new identity
in that frame which is what taught what
we need to be talking about John is
talking about he's aspiring to how to be
and to write and to be in a world
because it's always existential that
he's not in now when he talks about
things like wisdom I mean or rationality
I'm aspiring I'm aspiring to an identity
I don't have and a way of seeing and
understanding things that I don't have
now I'm aspiring to a more comprehensive
frame and I need something that's Jane
is faced in that liminal place between
so that I can keep I can write it can
reach me in this frame but it can lift
me towards the next frame so I think
symbolic activity is really important I
think serious play is really important
and my prototypical example of serious
play is ritual serious play is how we go
into and play with that space between
identities and worlds so that we can get
a taste of what it would be like to what
it would be like to be in that world and
have that identity without fully
committing to it then I was in my toe in
the talk I just gave I was pointing out
about all these emerging forms of
serious play and ritual like Jeep
forming in Scandinavia where people are
doing live-action role-playing and what
they're doing is they're trying to
create a situation where they're you're
not doing Dungeons & Dragons what
they're doing is enacting a real-life
situations
and the Dungeon Master is actually like
the director that will get them to cut
scenes and switch roles and give them
various props and the phenomena that
they're seeking is the phenomenon called
bleed and what they're after and bleed
is that the distinction between what
they're doing in their pretense of game
and their real life that boundary bleeds
so they're getting a taste on what this
could be like in their real life well
that it took for me is deeply deeply
analogous although it's taking place
formally with in a secular discourse and
people who consider them suck that is so
similar to what people do when they went
into church right that kind of serious
play that kind of ritual I mean you're
going in like the you know you're
playing with identities you're playing
with alternative frameworks other than
your your own and you're doing this all
within active symbolism think about
baptism for example within the Christian
complex so I thought oh what's the
difference then sorry to interrupt like
what's what's the difference here
between well you know is it who was it
who said everything is religion in a
sense like well well then Dimity I don't
want to do that didn't become a useless
category right I don't think everything
is what the difference is and this comes
up and I want to address that point you
know the new atheist assumed that most
of the people that are the nuns the enno
nes are basically they've been convinced
of the falsity of religion and they're
all atheists but that is overwhelmingly
not the case only about 10% of those
people self-identify as atheist many of
them you know have you know really crazy
worldviews and they have you know
hodgepodge of spiritual practices the
hunger for self transcendence the hunger
for serious play the hunger for ritual
all right and the hunger to get outside
of the the prison of the ego these
disease all use X terms these are
perennial these these don't go away but
what's different between the nuns right
and people who would identify as
religious has to do with commitment
right two particular institutions and
particulars of propositions I think I
think we should pay very careful
attention to their religions
in terms of how they can be valuable
sources for ecology keys of practice
that we should pay very careful
attention to when we're trying to
cultivate ecologies of practices but for
me those religions are off have been
often bound up with and that you know
and there's a spectrum here from liberal
to fundamentalist so I am acknowledging
the spectrum right now but right
they've been but let's but they have
often been bound up with adherence to
particular sets of doctrines about the
metaphysical structure of a worldview
and I find the metaphysical structure of
many of these worldviews well first of
all speak on behalf for the nuns because
they have brought it up they find that
metaphysical structure and the
institutions that identify with it they
find it my enviable they do it just it
doesn't catch them it doesn't resonate
with them for it feels to me that it's
kind of a no-man's land
it's like either you make it all up as
you go along or you're you're trapped in
some kind of formal structure well well
you can understand why they're
traumatized right they're they're
traumatized by the fact in fact the
secular alternatives drench the world in
blood and so they don't want to belong
to put you know big political machines
but they many of them have seen the
various religions traditions fragment
around them and be admired in
controversy and scandal and also too
often many people myself included have
you know have suffered personal psycho
psychodynamic trauma at the hands of
established religions and so they feel
they make a mistake I think it's a
mistake but I want to explain what well
I think it's an understandable mistake
they think allegiance to any group or
any tradition will automatically make
them vulnerable to all of these kinds of
terror
once again what they don't acknowledge
enough and I think what you put your
finger on is that that autodidactic
fragmented thing is really really prone
to self-deception and all kinds of you
know which you see if you
actually look at sort of the things they
espouse and the and the practices they
try to cobble together yeah I'm thinking
of Zach's term a teachable Authority the
crisis of teacherly authority as being
maybe I'm a key right here like we need
teachers right we need hmm do you want
to comment on that
so yeah I mean I agree with with John I
mean I think the the issue of what to do
with the religions is a big one because
they've been massively problematic
they've also drenched the world in this
drama that has many many many people and
and so yeah it's really interesting
because I think it's easy to compare
like the worst religious discourse to
like the best scientific discourse well
correct we need to look at the best
religious discourse yeah and we could
look at the worst scientific discourse
where you're getting a lot of the same
 you find in religion except
what it's called science that's a lot of
what's happening right now in the world
that's causing many of the problems that
are drenching the world and blood is the
religion of scientism let's call it sort
of a freezes in lab coats or well that's
a whole complicated conversation that
has to do with critical theory and
political economy and nature of the
military-industrial complex a whole
bunch of other things they ratified as
wrong bhaskar showed related to
positivism certain kind of worldview and
so at this point I feel like you know if
you're kind of like beating the kind of
like this dead horse
these pre-modern religions like those
have been passing away and it's been a
death throes but the largest to Germany
implanted right now terms of power is
the one that's run by science and
engineering
and that's interesting to me then you
look how that's become an educational
thing that the largest reforms in
schools in the United States were on the
back of the Cold War and that they were
not motivated by religion their remote
or I even ideology they were motivated
to get scientists working to meet the
Russians since right after Sputnik has
massive influx as all the STEM education
began and they used to run you know
whether that's been handed off not to
some kind of economic god is interesting
but part of me wants to look again that
the things we used to worship before and
think about how we can get
self-transcendence
as you're describing Jon like how do we
actually have the archetypes to step
into the mystery schools were theaters
right to your point about the role
playing and the seer display their
mystery schools were theaters and so
many is the initiation rites that went
down were theatric and the ritual being
like the mass being the living symbol
then right up to Steiner who actually
resuscitated some of those it's the
attrex to encode a new kind of
initiation ceremony and so yeah I'm
seeing some need to find a way you know
some needs to work with these symbols
and to kind of grapple with the
resurgence of religion which could be an
invitation to refine it so again and the
difference between the theatrics of non
religion and the theatrics of religion
let's say if we want to call it the at
record through kind of ritual right
would be something to do with the
historicity of the religious right when
I chant Hebrew chant this has been
chanted for thousands of years when I
make up a chant with my friends and we
chant then we take it very seriously and
we can get into an altered state that
the chant has not been chanted for
thousands of years by humans mm-hmm and
so that's the transmission that you are
speaking about it's something to do with
transmission
it's something to do with La Scala more
for genetic fields if I can bring
Michelle Drake into the room which is
perhaps controversial at least to the
scientism ground but it has so it has to
do with the insole meant of humanity as
an ontological factor which is to say
that even in a whitehead Ian sense we're
moving through a sequence and there are
patterns that remain and so we step into
temples in space and temples in time and
so the ritual can create those you know
this is one of the notions of the
Sabbath right that it's not a temple in
space it's a temple in time and it's
been made for thousands of years so
that's different from creating a focal
space to do Improv Theater and as
amazing as that is as important as on
this to do in that space a ritual that's
been done for thousands of years it's
different and so so yeah and can schools
plug into that in any way right schools
the United States don't plug into that
we plug into your additions that are a
couple hundred years old at best and we
don't even really buy them like the you
know saluting the flag and on defense so
the question of how to unite humanity
again around things it's an interesting
one and right now we're desperate for it
we're super longing for like the Super
Bowl and other things these spectacles
we put in made-up holidays Valentine's
Day other things we put so much
attention into these things because we
want something that's what we must
remember together that's meaningful also
the virtual Exodus how much how often
people are willing to spend most of
their time and invest most of their
identity in these virtual worlds right
because they're they possess the orders
of intelligibility that these people
many people feel are lacking in the
so-called like and I think the properly
called real world there's there's a
narrative in which you play an integral
part there's a normal logical order of
rules that make everything clear and
intelligible and makes problem-solving
understandable and then there's also
which you level up you transcend and all
this is very well understood and and you
and your actions directly contribute to
success on in those three orders and I
think I think the hunger for for this
stuff the spectacle you you you
mentioned the the theater who are Chris
Master Pietro and Philip my civic and I
call the earth SATs religions like
comic-con where you get people I don't
believe in religion and they dress up as
people and they spend a whole day a
temple in banja and they're giving the
archetype like strong he's in the
superhero started to Ark typical
Pantheon city is fascinating we had a
weird replacement for religion Paul
Jones for what oh sorry we we you you
cut up for a second I think I spoke over
I didn't mean to no well I just said
like it so I think that does point I was
just strengthening your point about
there's clearly a hunger at work so I
guess there's there's two there's one I
guess two questions I want to ask and I
want I want I mean I want to enter into
good good-faith dialogue about it
because that's something I deeply
believe in so one of the things I mean
so because I followed the debate the the
perennial list constructivist debate
quite quite deeply you know and it's
it's even showing up you know in carbon
science and the debate between like for
men and cats I won't burden the viewers
with all of that but there here's what I
want to say I guess I see perennialism
as pointing to what's importantly
invariant and I see the constructivist
pointing to what is importantly varied
and deep learning actually cycles
between those two you you extract what's
invariant and then you have to know how
to vary it so that you get appropriate
fitted it to many different environments
and you need to be able to move very
effectively between you know compression
for what's invariant and generation of
variation I mean that's how evolution
biological evolution for
simple works and of course I think
ultimately that has to do with things
about relevance realization so that we
might bring this up as I can explain
this idea with Jordan Hall and some of
our discussions that maybe could we get
past that that way of thinking the you
know perennial list versus
constructivist and instead of go to a
dynamic model where what we're trying to
do is not say no what people should be
doing instead of trying to get a stable
set of doctrines what we should be doing
is teaching people again an ecology of
practices that allows them right to
extract what's invariant but also then
run right to learn how to make run the
variations off of it so they actually
get this they actually instantiate the
adaptivity rather than trying to see
through the my criticism I like Huxley
by the way we have a family okay you
know I mean how can you not like right
and you should and I and what I might
say next might be a little bit unfair to
actually because you should read the
doors of perception alongside the
perennial philosophy but if you read
just the perennial philosophy it's very
it's and how could it not be again I
don't want to be unfair to because it's
a book but you can get the impression
that it's about trying to find the
shared doctrines their shared
propositions and tomorrow in mind
um this is this is this is still a
problematic way of thinking that what
what we need to be doing is not trying
to find the perennial propositions what
we need to do is affording people like I
said that process of well can you can
you look at all these traditions then
draw out what's invariant and then also
can you go back and in this context it
becomes this way and this context
becomes this one you see my model for
this is Socrates what's impresses about
Socrates seems to be like he's a you
know what it looks like his although
he's looking for his definition so
that's not right there's a there's a
part of what Socrates is doing is he's
trying to he's trying to get what's
invariant but you know it's also
masterful about Socrates how he buries
that to whomever he's talking to right
now
that's what makes him the great teacher
not just the abstraction of what
Sumerian
but the generative the creative ability
to vary it as needed and those two are
constantly cycling right when you're
doing engaged in deep learning so that
that's why I don't I sort of don't
identify as apprenticed or a
constructivist I think I'm trying to I'm
trying to try to break out of that at
least how I see that often argued about
and discussed and I wondered what this
what this might say how it could enter
into dialogue with what you're talking
about the document you're talking about
sort of a new perennialism Elena and I
kind of let the cat out of the bag
because that was that's gotta mean it's
work he's been working on this for about
a year and I've been in close
conversation with him Ken Wilbur's been
in close conversation and but there's a
very real need to get beyond that false
dichotomy and to see that even the
staunchest constructivist admit that
there is some commonality and even the
staunchest people looking at
commonalities are the first thing they
say is that what different engines are
all different so it's it's actually been
a false debate for a long time again one
of those things that's like it's is it
for ratings or why why are we making
this such a big deal why can't we
actually agree here because there's a
tremendous amount of there's a
tremendous amount of important work to
do in that domain and so I'm loving what
you and Jordan are saying we share
Jordan as interlocutor and yeah there's
a sense in which I'm at you know in a
friendly way and there's a yeah there's
a sense in which what you're getting out
to as a developmental issue that there's
a ability to work at a level of
abstraction and complexity complexity
with domains of practice and
propositions that does allow like the
Huxley like move of pulling out things
for one's own making one's own personal
synthetic perennial tradition for
yourself basically no and so but that's
a quite a hefty task demand on the
individual and what's interesting about
the
when you start breaching the
constructivist view with the prettiest
view and you start to see what it would
look like to have both somehow you end
up with that as the educational
recommendation so outside of what it
looks like theoretically it's like well
I'm not in the fury anymore I'm actually
about in ecology of practice I'm trying
to create yeah we write informed by the
informed by this new neo perennialism
there's a whole bunch of other things to
say about it which I'll leave for one of
the books basically you know but one one
of them is basically that there's like
there's a common sense there's a kind of
what we call an anthro ontological
Givens and so these are the things that
in socrates epitomize them these are the
kind of natural working of the human
that moves into the realms that would
create a religion right and like what is
that dynamic of the human being that
leads up and through those are very
complex stack to create these things
which you're identifying John which are
like the underlying structural features
of religiosity and so being able to
distill some of that and saying that the
result of that in almost any domain
you've started to see things like first
hand for like life matters I got this
interesting proposition
let me first is about right that third
is right and wrong these kinds of things
like not not here's what's right here's
what's wrong can't say that but that
there is right and wrong right so you
start to get to these anthro ontological
Givens and you start to be able to look
to work with them in different contexts
and at you end up getting something that
looks like a set of propositions
eventually but also like a way to craft
Ecology's of practice after that people
can have a refined perception and those
become things that they could prove
basically instead of things they have to
believe and so so yeah so I think we're
working in it from similar angles we're
coming in from different sides of the
mountain to some three in the middle
and you know maybe we're taking the
faster longer route but you're taking
like this direct route and the yeah so
so I think yeah we're talking in similar
similar vein here that feels like a
convergence in the sense that you're not
talking about Commandments or rules of
behavior but you're talking about some
kind of that something more dynamic or
something more something edgy or yeah
it's educative and yeah sorry did I cut
you off that couldn't mean - no I please
well I was just gonna say I yeah I think
so and it comes back to this notion of
serious play yeah I think if Sinclair's
work on we actually watch how children
learn you see if you see you see this
dynamic process let's say they're trying
to learn something for solving a set of
problems to achieve some goal they'll
come up with a strategy for it right but
what will they do is they will they will
they don't stick with that strategy
initially and this is what happens in
play they will generate all kinds of
variations on the strategy and then they
will put the strategies into competition
with each other and then they'll until
they get one that sort of wins that out
and then they go with that right and and
so what I'm saying is you see this
movement of they'll update here's a
situation they abstract some invariant
thing they come up with a strategy but
then they don't stop there then they do
this generative variation right and then
they keep cycling and cycling and
cycling and cycling and I want I want I
guess what I'm trying to say and you see
the same thing in you know in Hinton's
deep deep learning that's how these
things work they they cycle between
compression and particularization I want
to put an emphasis on keeping the
cycling going rather than trying to
stabilize it into a complete set of
propositions that have sort of resolved
you know the the baffle between the
constructivists and the perennial list
but that's what I'm trying to advocate
sounds like you're saying something
similar Zac am i right yeah I mean and I
think it's that focus on the theologies
of practice
allow for the self-transformation that
allow for the personal synthesis like
that are you each end being able to have
for yourself a set of propositions many
of which will be in overlapping
consensus with the propositions of
others and pedagogically it's
interesting because you do end up
needing simple lists of propositions to
tell kids and so when I think of the
free play and I think of the way rituals
spontaneously emerges actually think of
P Piaget is the moral judgment of the
child when the kids are playing marbles
and so it is a completely free and it'll
actually talk about Jordan about this
there's an employee up in space like
literally the kids have like the
teachers are there but they're not
teaching the kids how to play marbles
the kids literally create the game of
marbles and it's a very serious game in
which there are right and wrong and
morally good and bad and they have the
young kids don't have rules but the
older kids give the rules basically but
the rules are flexible often they know
that can change them at the beginning
when you ask a kid who invented the
rules of marbles he says basically a god
dad some of that but by the end by the
adolescence planning marbles when it's
my very high stakes because they're
taking the marbles home they should get
marbles to take away if you win you get
a bunch of marbles they know that they
created the rules and the play there is
both physiological with the marble they
would also die illogical we just say how
do they without parental intervention
without the teacher coming in how do
they resolve a conflict either is the
rule being applied or is the rule a
problem and then how do you know if
rules a problem is it fair and then you
go right up and into the rosianna
Kohlberg in developmental sequence but
yeah so there's the there's the creation
of the free play in these different
realms and the free play in the realm of
the inter subjective and specifically in
the realm of let's say fascicle is
what's interesting I think
pedagogy and hard to create those
environments because and so this gets
your point about we can't count if I a
list of rules that makes those
environments disappear right we need to
create environments precisely where
young people and young adults and adults
probably find a way to resolve their
disputes through dialogue and through
the creation of norms together as
opposed to the procedural application of
a norm to a situation like legal for
example or force and so yet with the
disappearance of the playground and the
retreat into the digital the total
intermediation of that and you know
they're developing a conflict in
asynchronous text-based exchange is
given then doing so I mean in you know
there's so-called real-world experiment
we don't know what the consequences of
that going to be exactly the
disappearance of the playground can join
to the virtual exodus we're running this
huge social experiment that's gonna have
I think some pretty nasty consequences
or that are kind of unforeseen by us
right now I I think you mentioning that
zach is I just want to put a pin in that
because I think that's something
important that needs to be brought more
into the public discussion as something
that we need to be thinking about more
much more carefully can I ask you
another question then sure because you
said something more provocative and I'm
gonna really I'm gonna really commit to
trying to stay open and relaxed here I
mean I I am a scientist by a profession
and I also think by vocation I love
doing science I don't just do it for a
salary I do it because I believe in its
capacity to make things better I'm not I
think I get what you say about scientism
I'm definitely not a positivist I do not
think that meaning is based on our
capacity for verification of our
statements i I think positivism is a
self-defeating
epistemological view so I completely
reject that I think I know what you mean
by scientism I think I've said something
similar along those lines and that I
talk and Kris and I talked about you
know propositional tyranny that we think
we've tried to reduce all forms of
knowing
to inferential computational
propositional knowing and a generation
of theory and belief and that has cut us
off from a procedural knowing
respectable and participatory and those
which are much more embodied and
embedded in inactive kinds of knowing
are the main locus of where religio and
meaning is made and so that that
propositional tyranny which I've tried
to trace the history out I think is a
significant cause of at least the
meaning crisis part of the four fold
crisis so I'm deeply critical of that so
I guess I I guess I'm also dealing with
a bit of cognitive cognitive dissonance
right now and myself I'm trying to my my
like I say my vocational allegiance to
science and my rejection of Puppets I've
sort of found a way I think of holding
those two together consistently but I
want to know what you think about that
and and then of course and you I think
we should pursue this because I think
this is directly relevant to how we see
the Academy right now because I do agree
with Zack that we've tried to scientist
the Academy in wait that's inappropriate
I was talking about this today that you
know that this this fixation on stem is
removing the training of imagination and
serious play and symbolic and the
imaginal and
in all the process despite and which
owes also with the disappearance of the
playground i do i those are all right
those go together which were the places
where we really cultivated respect
cobble and participatory transformation
so what do you like to look yeah i mean
which is sort of a blob of words but i'm
just trying to sort of lay out at no for
me this isn't obviously what i'm saying
this is not just a theoretical issue
this is an existential issue for me and
i have great respect for your thinking
so i want to you know enter into some
dialogue here totally and I may have
said a little estoppel but do you
remember I was saying we sometimes
compare the worst of religion to the
best of scientific discourse now saying
we could compare the best of religious
discourse to the worst a scientific this
person I call the worst of science
victus for scientism right as if it was
a religion capitalist right then I said
something like military-industrial
complex and a couple of things and
another way to talk about scientism is
something like techno industrial
scientific reductionism which is the key
is because I I couldn't say I couldn't
say I actually haven't spent enough time
to hide it maybe but it's it's much more
running at it's not an obsession with
propositions that's true it is in fact
an obsession with applications
specifically for renumeration and
capital gain so after Beth's car wrote
its philosophy of science he then went
on to a dialectical period where he
cashed in the check that he had written
to the positivist about the fact that
there was something and this that had to
do with the nature of how the economic
system was wrong sure so basically
scientism the reason scientist some
holds strong even though it's actually
not great for us has to do with messed
up incentive systems in the production
of scientific knowledge so that in many
cases it's not the unforced force of the
better argument and it's not even the
thing that makes the most scientific
sense and so that is one of the key
vectors there that's had down downstream
impact on I think leading us to these
forms of propositional obsession and
kind of reductive way of thinking about
right motive knowledge and wisdom
doesn't make sense there's no interior
or dates and all that stuff but mostly
the stuff that worries me has to do with
the places where we can't even really do
some I love science I also consider
myself a scientist and I want to save
science from scientism and I want to
save specifically from the techno
industrial opportunism and
instrumentalization of science which is
different than science right like is
that a good place to bring in the AI
autre genic plague that you talked about
last time yeah I mean that's the most
scary place where it happens but happens
I I I don't know what you're referring
to with that term can you cancer genic
has to do with injury caused
medical care basically oh I should
insert the notion being that if we have
a medical system that runs not ons not
for science right but for profit you
could say it doesn't run for profit well
in America it does right and the
pharmaceutical industry's retur
multinational which make more capital
than almost any other industry or for
profit I'm not reducing everything to
the profit motive but I am talking about
an incentive structure if that makes it
so that advertising revenues
direct-to-consumer advertising revenues
occupy most of what's a pharmaceutical
spend its money on not a research and so
the question of also how to bring to the
public attention things that are
problematic with the medical
infrastructure from a scientific
perspective when they've been so encoded
in the social fabric that it becomes too
hard to even talk about them but this
happens in all fields right so there's a
there's scientific discussions that we
had about fossil fuels which can't be
had their scientific discussions we had
about solar panels and the fact that can
we create net positive energy production
from solar panels or not that's actually
a scientific debate it's not clear you
know if you put them in space we good
for right now it costs more energy to
make them then they can pull so that's a
scientific debate for example it's not
being had that needs to be had but
because of certain motions in the
culture and specifically in industry and
economic growth and incentives of those
nature will you get scientism which is a
set of propositions about what's true
that set of propositions about what's
true about the objective world or about
your own body or about your own mind
that proposition becomes the thing that
regulates all these institutional
domains and interactions and ritual
spaces and question them it's very hard
alright how do you question it you
actually have to become a expert PhD
expert and so you're at the whim of the
propositions wielded by sign to some
future capture that's like the most
negative way to paint scientism now
that's what I was asking for
yeah I think that's you're doing a great
job so I actually know somebody like
personally here in Canada who's working
very hard to address the the plague you
were talking about we're trying to bring
a lot of transparency into and we're
getting like legal success on this into
the funding of pharmaceutical research
medical research this is a big movement
that's gaining steam largely due to
environment one individual and because
we Canada has a different culture
towards healthcare it gets more traction
here so ideally appreciate what you said
now that I understand the play you're
referring to so I was talking with
Johannes about you know the high
daguerreian idea about science and
technology being and did some framing
and a way in which it sort of traps us
into you know a cultural having mode we
see we see the world as Heidegger's idea
as a standing reserve and it exists only
in its service to service that it can
provide to us and that we lack an
ability to even ask how we might matter
to it or how we might be in service to
it or that it might how to what degrees
it transcends our grasp of it and that
we should therefore respect it precisely
because of that this is or the high
daguerreian critique and it meshes back
with what we were talking about earlier
because I think of Thomas björkman
argument that as we've lost as we've
lost sort of you know religion and
perhaps science at least in the in the
way maybe you and I Thomas are all using
attack we basically what's the market
has been left as the default authority
we don't have anything that represents
values from the being mode we don't have
anything that does that we don't have an
institution
and I'm just wondering because you know
we used to have we used to have three
things that played off against we have
to the market and we have the church and
we had the king right and you could
always play them off against each other
and so there was this tremendous
capacity for you know self correction
and self constraint and not just in
action but also in theory and so what
I'm trying to put my finger on is it
seems like we've got this homogenization
of power down to the market and then
we've got right hamato were like we're
getting into deep moral confusion the
only mode is the market mode following
from which is you know the having mode
and modal confusion and then this lines
up with perhaps what I think I hear
you're saying we're where science is
understood or I would say misunderstood
as the halving of propositions and then
all of those things would line up like
they would mutually reinforce each other
in a powerful way is that does that land
with you does that does that sound like
it's it's connecting with what you're
talking about
yeah I mean very precisely and your
canons point about the fact that all
authority the so the crisis of authority
that we were talking about legitimate
doctrine
the result of that is that well it's the
market now that's the only thing that
can serve and so that means that yes
science you can apply the commodity form
to science itself yeah did you put the
scientific finding on the shelf and you
actually occlude everything that created
the scientific finding actually applied
to the line so that it speaks to you as
as a commodity almost like second nature
and then you just accept took your head
and so yeah it's and that's the weekend
the worst scientific discourse right but
there is science going on or poor we'd
be dead back amazingly so somewhere
there are institutional niches where
there's been a preservation of the kinds
of interpersonal relationships and
personal practices that actually allow
for science to exist and doesn't
everything to remember about science is
that where I should talk about
scientists right here are people and
their capacities and their meaning
making nation and all of that stuff and
where are they and how did they get
trained and
and so yeah it's it's interesting
because as much as I am trying to I'm
critical of stem and the over emphasis
on stem but I'm also like we really need
actually better scientists and so it's
not that I want stem to be dialed back
instead I want somehow there to be an
understanding that you can actually do
stem if you don't have the human figure
now that the scientists won't be able to
work if I can't make meaning of their
lives like this is just what's going to
happen and if that's the case then we
actually have to handle these other
dimensions of education or to prepare
scientists actually be able to value
truth for example as opposed to value
renumeration which is the default value
that decides what you should value
exactly and so yet the call for the
humanistic education is actually to save
scientists and to save scientific
civilization it's not to pull the
funding from science it's to say no
actually look at this world we've
created with your pure scientists who
haven't been trained holistically as
let's say Plato or Socrates would have
demanded they would they were trained
and so yeah that's interesting kind of
confluences of where the conversations
led and I think it's very important
right because who's the wise scientist
where's the wise well yeah I think we
need why scientists I've actually made
that argument I just wondering then if
because we've now circled back again to
our educational history because I think
part of the problem has been at least
I've made this argument that provides
historical reasons we separated two
educational institutions I think it's
fair to call them this given their the
broad notion of Education we both were
all all three of us are using here but
you know when we separated the monastery
from the university in the Middle Ages I
think that has had that has sort of
reverberate it and it it's let I mean
because then then the university touches
to the state and then the university
then attaches via the deconstruction of
the state to the market and that that's
well I think in a very powerful way how
we ended up where we are right now I
mean that's incredible
what you said to me because that's like
that's like the thread through and it
has to do with what happened when the
Enlightenment got going right and the 30
Years War and the fear of religion right
and the needing for yep that's two
separate these things and eventually the
separation of church and state but yeah
you get the powers of truth and beauty
and goodness if you if I can say that
attached to the state as opposed to a
chance to the church so there was a
deadly the University gotta hand it over
to eventually the state apparatus and
then eventually the market yeah and and
so yeah the question of how to pull the
Academy back into the sacred and make
and the the places that make the person
which are you know traditionally the
religions whatever as we've been saying
that needs to be rethought so now you're
imagining academic knowledge production
know what did with the kinds of
apologies have practice that that
produces and look that way you just said
that I like that idea about trying to
make the creation of a person within a
community of persons the central task
that we're talking about because we're
not we're not oriented that way right
now I mean we're not oriented that way
we wanted to towards you know making
making consumer producers as effectively
as we can but I think I just I what you
just said there I think that's a real
gem in the dialogue trying to make that
you know that that that awesome and I
mean that in the sense of filling us
with all that awesome project that
sacred project of making persons within
a community of persons that the central
thing we're trying to were we're trying
to do I I think that that I think that's
a beautiful thing to have said yeah
thank you
I was as well also Bonita said the same
thing when I talked to her it's just the
redefinition of the human being or going
back to another vision of the human
being right as not being some kind of
end product or or but a process and that
that should be the the main thing
yeah main main main point of Education
it's it's just it seems like an almost
uh overly obvious thing which every
missing out completely right right and
the way you articulated and the slope
what you're saying Andrews correct and
it's because of what what John was
saying about Heidegger's notion of
technology right that we don't we asked
what it can do for us basically we don't
ask but we do for it yeah even in school
we're thinking about it I'm gonna go get
this job so we can get that money and
then do that thing right or whatever if
you're they can conventionally or
something but you're not thinking about
we'll wait a second if I get that job
how much of my labor time will actually
contribute to the wages that go to that
guy and if I buy this thing how much of
that goes to so you're not thinking
about how you were actually needed by
the system you're um and so if you flip
the script and you realize now that the
school is actually making me so I can be
useful to that as it goes through a lot
all right so then if you flip it as we
discussed and you and put the tempo of
learning at the top of the whole
economic stack and then you end up
saying oh no what it wants from what it
wants for me but the whole technological
civilization alabbar at us once for me
is for me to be me there me to develop
that seems to be a deep complexification
of everything because one of the reasons
why we're in this state when I think of
my students is is weird entirely
confused about that question about what
it means to be to be human is that it
make it I don't know we should ask that
question Oh Andrew I think the question
we had before is a is is a little bit
more precise question which is what does
it mean to be a person in a community of
persons because I think that's what
we're what we're pointing to with the
word human the problem I have with the
word human is its nebulous and it shows
up in multiple domains you can get into
all kinds of equivocations
but when we're working right whereas I
think this notion of person making and
and and and I keep I keep healing
Tillich in my mind you never have a
person without a community of persons
around it and that's just a
developmental truth right persons not
made in an individualistic fashion
they're made in a communitarian fashion
always I hope you don't feel like no no
worry no no worries I just I'm also
maybe a human is something that's we're
all human but a person is something that
we become well that's but that's what I
want that's what I want ever you want to
say right yeah I want to emphasize your
humanity is something you have but I
want to talk about to go back to what we
were talking about I want to talk about
this you know that to which you aspire
right right which is the being mode
there's an element of transcendence
there yes yes exactly
what we're saying and if for it carries
with it it carries with it it carries
with it the deep connections to well as
we said the deep connections to
education and to a sense of reverence
for something that is possess the
sacredness for us don't actually like
the reframing of the question from what
is a human to the question of what is a
person or what does it mean to be a
person in a community of persons and the
question what is a human is one that I
asked a lot and I realize I'm actually
asking that question that the human is
perhaps the only thing we know that can
become a person right and different from
being sentient different from being
intelligent as being a person and this
is part of the AI problem is about the
making of a person and the being of a
person is it's actually interesting
because it's part again that talked
about the best of worth of justice for
us right we're very very interesting
stuff about the nature of personhood in
the theistic tradition it's like it was
to get Corbin's work on the book
angelology and the notion of the
imaginal and that it's populated with
the person's then you get all of these
possible transcendental operators that
can we do through the imagine but it's
with the cosmic person not human which
is very interesting so thing is the
human also something to kind of
transcend it in a way or am I going too
far here that's the thing like you're
from zero like if there's like a
human nature you know like there's this
question of limitation right but the
person is kind of playing an infinite
game if I can say that my cursor and
because you're lifted up into this realm
of person making which is something like
this communicative realm it's
linguistically mediated it's imaginal
and and so again now we're back to the
Hebrew tradition but that notion that
we've each got a letter in the Torah
right that sense that the person lifts
the human into something deeper than
just material reality and yeah the the
new etic and the imaginal basically are
the qualities of the person you don't
find in material or the animal arguably
now animals have personality personality
is different from personhood vegans
that's you right we sort of misused
ended up misusing that term and in
psychology and when we talk about
personality theory because that's fine
we we need to talk about sort of
dispositional traits I get that but we
when when we when we started using the
word personality for that we didn't
replace it with personhood as another
phenomena that needed to be talked about
and so we got a neglect because of an
impoverishment of our conceptual
repertoire that I think has been sort of
disastrous for us so this did I mean I
don't know if you guys know but I got to
talk directly to Tom at Thomas Cheetham
about Korbin and all the work he's done
on it we're gonna talk again about it
and about Korbin so this this brings me
again to something about maybe I want to
move questions about a reformulation of
the notion of person in some way I don't
think I don't think it's a degradation
of concept so Zach you talked about you
know carbons you know in geology and you
know I talked about the sacred second
self staying talks about the divine
double and
talks about us not being individuals but
being dividuals that we're there there's
all it's like Apple Annie's idea that
attention is always a from - it's not
just a single thing we are always from -
we're from this self right to the sacred
second self right and so and we and and
Angliss Keller talks about that and
about how you have that weird structure
and aspiration that I'm the cause of the
future self but it's actually the
normative authority over me and if we're
gonna really wrestle with that we can we
this is a difficult question and because
we have a long heritage of the self
being just the secular version of the
soul and then again you guys both know
I'm deeply respectful to the mystic
religion so I'm not I'm not trying to be
insulting here but there was the idea of
something encased or at least it's come
to be understood that popular cultural I
think that's fair for me to say that
it's something that's you know encased
inside of me in my head right and and
that's what that's what my self is and
then I understand personhood in a
completely interior way and it
completely almost like you know brain
centric way such you know well you could
like the matrix you could so much just
download me somewhere else right and you
know you know the the kind of cognitive
science I practiced sort of calls all of
those assumptions deeply into question
and says no no you are you you know your
body isn't clay your your cognition is
constituted by you being embodied you
being embedded you being like I say
enacted and now you know I even want to
add this extra component that your your
personhood is constituted aspirationally
it's right and so you're you're you're
much more you're much more distributed
then you are sort of isolated and
compressed and locked in sort of a brain
centric notion of what a person is did
that make any sense it was that
yeah that's beautiful I mean I have I
completely agree and there's a few
things the same in that notion of the
divine double is just beautiful yeah I
just love this notion end there's so
many ways to I think work with it in one
of the ways I think about sometimes is
with regard to like someone like Hillman
it's only actually probably many right
that you're you don't want to be
monotheistic about your divine yep
double but actually they're probably
instead of trajectories that you're my
divine double as a museum as a musician
like the pan architect on okay it's
completely different from my divine
double as a scholar Metatron or
something and say I mean they're not the
former community yeah for Helen what's
evolving and in a sense what presents as
the personnel is is a conversation that
the self is actually a core conversation
between the many divine doubles that you
have so the self is inherently
biological to inherently dialogical
precisely and potentially the self is
witness to a divine dialogue between the
arc types that are basically living
within it oh oh oh that's tasty so this
goes back to you know sort of well you
know the antilog lived in the Augustine
framework of the you know the the psyche
instantiates some of the you know the
form of the Trinity but what you're
saying is like the dialogic itself you
know has participatory knowing it
actually instantiates right the features
of the dialogue in is by through action
which is not just your head the whole
the whole body the whole body becomes
basically like a it's what I forget may
have been korban according someone said
it was the imaginal ship of death and
it's and so that that sense that you
have and so in this there's a movement
tradition actually the Rasta who told me
that quote practices spatial dynamics
his name is hunter Turin he with spatial
dynamics is a movement based practiced
in the Rudolf Steiner tradition
essentially if you've gone to a Waldorf
School and done games and your games
teacher Walter School likely trained in
spatial dynamics possibly was unturned
and the whole movement the most one of
the most incredible things ever said was
that every gesture begins in the future
yes that there's actually but there's
any imagination when you're doing
movement practice of any kind
there's actually a you create an
imaginal shell around the body and
actually move into the psyche of the
imagination yeah it's very it's very
much like he works with Tai Chi guys a
lot and so yeah so there's that notion
that yeah actually when you're holding
the divine double correctly you're
holding the full image of the body and
in a sense it's the way of thinking
about the resurrection of the whole body
or even define the actual matter of your
body through exercise of an imagination
it doesn't mean you're not material it
just means that you're in this imaginal
ship of death instead of being in some
bag of skin it's also that how's it good
I'm glad we got up and into that what
the logos project that I'm engaging in
right now right because I'm trying to
get what's going on India logos and
dialectic as you know an ecology of
practices for trying to afford dialogo
so know how it's something much more
beyond
dialogue as we where we use that as a
synonym now for discourse and you know
so this kind of stuff we're talking
about here is exactly you know and you
see aspects of this in the Neoplatonic
tradition around dialectic I'm so I'm
just I'm just saying I'm just think I'm
sorry I don't want to waste everybody's
time I'm just explaining why I find it
very helpful and I know and it is I mean
I found it I found reading Hillman and
Corbin and looking into these ways of
thinking about the imaginal realm within
basically has extremely therapeutically
because once you understand the divine
Devils
one then you get that there's going to
be internal tension between your divine
elements basically that even the best
parts of you could be in conflict for
time and attention let's say in your
life and that's going to cause emotional
tension and so then you can actually set
up internally and sometimes you can put
it out in front of your constellations
which I've seen done we create you
actually create a dialogue in the
constructive imagination between your
two divine but that's an interesting
addition to this dialogue Louis idea too
isn't it that you're not just dialoguing
with another person you're dialoguing
with all your different sub
personalities and that was always here
that was always there yeah I just
hearing it for the first time popular
republic write it all through the
Republic and young young also has it to
some degree too but what I what what
came out for that for me was what the
this move of of taking that sense of the
sort of the intrapsychic you know you
know dialogue and also putting it out
into the aspirational dialogue and then
so there's sort of this dialogue and
then there's a dialogue out and then
there's a dialogue between all of the
angels right if you get all out with
that symbol
so there's actually sort of three
dialogues that need to be brought into
consonant together that's what's sort of
lighting up in my mind right now Andrew
that's what I'm sort of like aha yeah
and I've never seen all three of those
I've seen a couple of them in isolation
tonight when I think of the divine
double I think of this one thing I that
so I'm very not what's lighting up in me
is is is is it just makes total sense
then it's the pagan Gloria it's the
pagan glory of polytheism right it's
also the HOS the Elohim a right right
right yeah beautiful it is the other you
know and yeah and that yeah so there's
that there's the refinement of that
conversation within which helps to get
the actions basically correct and Hannah
dog it becomes this much more
multi-dimensional process that's what
I'm thinking which is a really really
interesting
that's very cool I've got to go soon
gentlemen because we slotted 4:30 to
6:00 and we it is almost 6 o'clock we
have II have I would very much like to
do this again I found there's a well as
you just saw with my enthusiasm I know
this is namely insightful and helpful to
me I hope you guys do not able I would
much like to do it again and I want to
thank Andrew for putting this together
oh I I feel like I've just wandered into
an amazing place and and this is you
know fantastic for me I'm so grateful to
you guys and I and I have the sense that
other people would be very interested in
this conversation too so so I'm really
happy to put this out yeah yeah I mean I
would let Andrew of you if you don't
mind sharing the files with me I'd like
to put this out on my channel too
because I think it follows up and you
know I released our first conversation
on my channel recently too so yeah you
know it's all of a piece I think in an
important way
and I I would also very much like to
introduce Zack because I've mentioned
him multiple times but it did to be a
wonderful way of introducing him to my
viewers mm-hmm his amazing gasps this is
like an anticipation to this almost like
it was going to be a music jam that sort
of felt like kind of nervous
there's gonna be a jam because it's a
triple it's a triple it's not a diet I
think it would I think this went
extremely well and you I think it feels
like that to me is they're pleased I'm
extremely pleased yes if anybody has
some closing thoughts they want to state
I I'm still here and willing you know
happy to listen did you have anything
else to say
exactly no I mean comunist gorgeous
right now
[Music]