good morning I just remembered that I
actually don't have Twitter open another
tab like a normally there's a lot you
just it's open oh I have been binge
watching some Netflix shows on
well-known cults cuz that is one of my
special interests so I'm sure they will
be coming up today you know Twitter
democracy can follow the streamline yard
link if you want to participate here or
the links also in the description on
YouTube I do so believe it's perfect so
I bend watched Waco and right now on the
other tab I have children of God which
in the last like three minutes I decided
to come on on time instead of watching
last three minutes of it sorry because
they're both called David they're both
called it's David Koresh and David Burke
David Burke is the leader of the
children of God I don't know if he's
still alive was it like paying attention
so much to it but I have heard a lot of
stuff whoa chuckling oh God
I also remembered that I've only
partially watched the Netflix
documentary the family and they changed
the name of the children of God to the
family during so I don't know if they're
the same church I sure hope not
cuz so maybe that's why for whatever
I'll figure that out after because now
I've found the family on Netflix and
will watch more of the episodes I wants
disturbing because it's all about like
the politicians and the people all over
the world being involved in these things
and yeah like the leader of the family
those pictures that come praying with or
the leaders then prayed with like the
Clintons and the bushes so it's not
quite what the topic is but it is what's
the word like it's informed its what's
sitting in my subconscious cuz it's what
I'm putting into my conscious so it's
it's very much there also I highly
suggest watching Waco because
I thought I was like this is my John rah
I like call stuff I like um like how
other people watch stuff on mass burgers
I that's not really something that
interests me but but there's something
about a cult that really does from like
how does this happen how do people have
their life over to someone else I kind
of grew up in a cult that wasn't known
as a good my parents got married in a
cult I don't think it was called the
children of God 90 percent sir but it
would sound something very similar what
the ass company makes up what was that
called CEOs are married in my parents
weren't allowed to date they basically
were like in order to date they
basically had to get married and so like
the first time they kissed was when they
were engaged or I don't even know but
they got married had three kids divorced
when I was like 13 12 13 so didn't last
level hundreds of marriages but they
were also is it's weird to think that
because if somebody if some elder of the
church had matched them together I mean
my brother and sister wouldn't be here
and we all very much feel like we are
supposed to be here and yet our parents
coming together is so antithetical
because of just who they are
today's topic is everyone is doing the
best they can
it's it true I don't know but it is a
much more compassionate lens to view the
world from it was something that Bernie
Brown said one of her interviews was
something along the lines of if you knew
they were doing the best job they could
they couldn't do anything better than
what they're currently doing would that
change your viewpoint of them and
basically no matter what the situation
or the person yes it changes my
viewpoint of them if I think Trump is
doing the best job he could possibly be
doing I'm gonna have more compassion it
doesn't actually change the job he's
doing right it doesn't change that when
is the actual metric but it changes my
assumption that he's a bad person right
that he's he's he could be doing better
and he's not I could be doing this job
better and I could do the job of the
presidency better but
it doesn't change that he's doing the
best drama he can I have this revelation
and as most of my revelations I'm not a
cult leader I'm not like and now it's
from on high and this is now the
proclamation to everybody else it's like
I don't even know if I feel I mean I
don't really fully believe it
but it's a lens of which to view the
world that makes my worldview better and
it's that when you see somebody else in
their life would I do it like that
yes yes you would because they're you
and you're them
we are the incarnation of the same soul
7.5 billion times and way more than that
actually because every every soul every
point in history is you and me so not
only would you like we are all of the
good and all the bad we are part Luther
King we are Hitler we are and Frank
we are genghis khan we are all of them
because that is what our humanity has
produced that each so I don't need to
think what I would I do if I was in your
shoes what I act in the same way because
I know you're me and your shoes on me
I'm you in your shoes and it happens to
be luck it's like the wrong word but if
you consider winning the lottery that
you have those six numbers usually the
649 at least you Canada you have to pick
six numbers out of 49 numbers and that
doesn't sound quite so hard when you
look at the actual probability of it
it's one in like 10 million or 100
million the chances of you winning that
if you have five out of the six numbers
you can win we less money but it's it's
the six out of the six numbers that
gives you them the big jackpot and that
is basically what it is to be a human
except instead of there being six
numbers there are thousands of numbers
and it just so happens we're where are
you on that trait what where does your
slider land and so I'm actually going to
share a screen here because I wanted I
in my mind this is always there and
other people who see a graph and turn
off I tried to find the least graph like
graph I could find but this the is this
the normal distribution it happens in
sure it happens with nearly any
continuous trait that we can measure so
not something like a light switch being
on or off because that would be a binary
it's either on or it's off but something
like height where you can be anywhere
from you know like two and a half feet
tall to seven feet tall and mostly like
the people who are at their height at
their full grown height really short
would be along this this spectrum and
those that are really really tall would
be along here right people that are over
seven feet tall at their highest point
but most of us are in the middle at like
five five and a half feet right five
almost five to five and three-quarters
feet weight follows a similar
distribution grades follow a similar
distribution sometimes because we make
them look like this we give this as a C
we let some people get the a or the
hundred-percent some people have to fail
but generally speaking if you give
people a hundred question test and it's
general information in a population
you're gonna find a score like this and
so not only does this is all of traits
that we can visualize and measure fall
along this this distribution my
well-informed hypothesis is that
everything falls along nearly everything
that could be a continuous trait falls
along the same distribution and I should
have had another one open but this thing
can be shrunken and higher or or pulled
out further but this this bell to the
curve exists in nearly every trait so
not like our intelligence overall falls
along this but our intelligence is also
itself many different traits so our
physical intelligence falls along here
and where you fall is the lottery it's
the luck of the draw it's your genes
it's your circumstance it's your skills
and so saying with any particular skill
that we are only what is acceptable
right is this the acceptable line and
everyone on this side is a criminal or
dysfunctional or disabled and everyone
on this side is okay well what if you're
like one take over this way or one take
over that way sometimes the allowable
spectrum is
is in between so you have to be between
this height and this height for society
to work for you if you're smaller than
that then things aren't going to work
for you if you're taller than that
you're gonna hit your head on everything
so a point of the normal distribution is
that although we absolutely look at
people who are tall and give them more
so many studies are on someone's taller
they get more leadership roles they get
promotions more even though they had
nothing to do with right we don't think
someone is a better person logically
because they're tall but subconsciously
we do so consciously we give them more
power and so if we do that with traits
that we actually can see everywhere in
the population right height weight what
do we do with traits that we actually
can't measure and can't see right things
like the intelligence well you might
know what your IQ is but a human is a
very small bandwidth of intelligence it
doesn't measure the whole thing and so
for me looking at this is bell curve
there's four points really for every
trait but like it's so if this is this
is let's say my ability to speak Spanish
and I'm somewhere down here
I'm not quite I can speak some words in
it but I'm not I'm definitely not fluent
I'm I'm down here I don't actually know
where I am on this spectrum right I can
only assume is where do I assume
everybody else is to know where I'm put
there's this this line is everybody in
the population it is an actual curve but
I do but because we can't actually
measure it we don't actually have a
picture of that curve so I have to guess
where I am so in any trait
there's where there's the actual trait
the actual curve and where you actually
are but although it exists it doesn't
actually so I know point we actually
gonna measure the spanish-speaking
ability of everyone and get this curve
and know what my spanish-speaking
ability is to put me on it but how I
interact in the world is going to be
based on where I think I form on here
right if I think I'm really low in my
spanish-speaking and there comes a point
speak Spanish I'm gonna look for anybody
else who's higher up than me too
speak it but if I think on the way up
here even though I'm actually down here
then when somebody comes along and
speaks Spanish like oh I can translate
don't worry
super fancy toid you no wait that's
German um still German habla
espanol there we go see look I'm fluent
but I'm not and this it doesn't actually
change where I fall on this it's just my
assumption of where I fall on that so we
all have where we actually fall on the
graph where we think we fall on the
graph and there's people who
overestimate it and people who
underestimate it then there's also our
everybody else thinks you are and that
also can be over underestimated that um
Trump thinks he's here on basically
every trade when he seems to be lower
than average on a lot of them that's
again my assumption on him but one of
the other traits that that this thing
doesn't deal with generally in math but
is I assume its own trait is your
ability to move along a trait so I land
somewhere on here with Spanish right I
don't know where I land because we
haven't measured the entire population
but assuming I exist somewhere around
here and I put in three hours of work a
day at my Spanish I and I move along
this curve so now I'm here I improved
but somebody else could have put in an
hour a day starting from that same point
and be way over here someone else could
put in five hours a day and be Vince
less along it so your ability to move
along and improve on a trait is its own
trait so some people put in very very
little time and get to improve really
really well at it some people could put
in nearly infinite time on there need a
new skill and they're not going to
improve very much on it depending on
your innate ability for that skill so
what does this look like under the topic
of everyone is doing the best they can
this informs me because I know but this
isn't something no matter where you
follow along is this normal this is our
population this is what we're supposed
to be and yet we penalize people who are
really high or really low in a trait
depending on the train
or sometimes both ends of that spectrum
and we have a very narrow view on what
is acceptable and thought of as the best
when in actuality we are an infinite
combination of thousands of traits and
it is that combination of traits that we
are as an individual that is who we are
supposed to be and in not owning that we
are losing most of human capacity
because if as an individual you think
you're here on every trait it doesn't
actually matter where you are because if
as a society we say only people on from
this is the line and only people on this
side of the line are is at the right
side this is this is a little computing
of them here on this side of the line
only people on this side can can be in
this profession can do this this
specific task then we're gonna miss out
on everyone on this side but but these
people who are on this side are gonna
feel like they're less than because
they're not here
well everyone nearly everyone has some
traits that they excel at but we spend
so much of our time trying to improve on
traits that were low at not even knowing
that that trait in and of itself is its
own spectrum so we can put all of our
time and effort into trying to improve
this trait that we are sorely lacking in
meaning that we're not looking for
although all the areas we naturally fall
to be we're good in that trait where we
excel at that trait or even a genius in
that trait and so I know for me I'm just
going to turn off this now for the
pronounce that you can see the full
picture by the way there's a still a
link in the description if anyone wants
to join me but this diversity in our
planet this diversity of human traits is
exactly what we are supposed to have and
so not only is the individual doing
exactly what they're supposed to do even
if it's annoying me even if it's like
they're really low in this side of the
trade they're really unintelligent
they're really not compassionate they're
really not there are things that they
could be that are going to be something
that is going to perk me annoy me make
me angry but them doing that is exactly
they're supposed to be and be reacting
that way right now is who I'm supposed
to be what I'm trying to do is no
truthfully where do I fall along these
trades because part of it is that when
you're an underestimate er and I am an
underestimate er society says you're not
supposed to be an underestimate er right
so an underestimate er is somebody who
thinks they're lower on nearly every
trait than they actually are there's
other people who are over estimators I
would definitely put Donald Trump in
that category and he thinks he's the
best of the best all the best things
right America kind of falls in that
category
we're number one on what what are we
talking here what are we talking here
what are you number one let's actually
measure it and see and it's not the
over/under estimator it's that society
props up the over estimators right we
give people political positions of power
we make people CEOs when they say
they're good at something when they have
that confidence to say I'm awesome at
this then when we compare under
estimators to them it's like we assume
everybody's an over estimator so
everybody has to have 10 percentage
points out off of them when in actuality
the under estimator is the stuff added
to there's the over estimators needs
stuff subtracted from theirs because the
the solution to me being an
underestimate err in society is to just
stop being right well stop under
estimating yourself let's find the
actual where you are on there let's
let's find out where you are so you can
know where you are and you can react
accordingly isn't really his solution
because one we can't do that and - it's
really hard metric to measure especially
like even for height and weight that we
know we know very little let's go hide
more than weight because we have a lot
of ableism around weight and a lot it's
like this is acceptable and this is not
acceptable we have that around height -
but we also understand that nobody
chooses their height nobody you don't
have you're not morally lacking because
you're short and yet we treat people
like they're morally lacking because
they're short even though we we know
that logically that doesn't make sense
we still treat them that way well what
about all the traits that we think like
weights that we think someone has actual
control over well there's still that
ability to move along that scale
it isn't even right some people let's
talk about losing weight some people can
do diet and exercise to 80 and still be
what is considered overweight in society
other people can eat like literal
 like junk food all of the time and
look like they're they're healthy that
is not fair
right like it's not because nature is
not fair that we can see but she is fair
in the fact that this is exactly how
we're supposed to be if we understand
proper graph again if as a society the
only people who succeed are the 1% the
people who are on this side on power on
privilege on money on beauty on
intelligence on you have to be win the
lottery you have to win the genetic
lottery either your actual genes or the
circumstance of your genes in history
right that you your parents are rich and
you inherited that or even even people
who come from poverty and manage to make
it on their own and we look at those
people as what's the word they got there
themselves I can't think of what that
word is even them they had the genetic
lottery right they have the intelligence
these circumstances the things that help
them succeed we don't look at it that
way we look at it like oh look that
person tried really hard they had all
but right the tried really hard piece is
in and of itself right there probably
someone who who is maximized in their
ability to improve on a trait somebody
else who's who's minimized on their
ability to improve on to trade does it
matter how much time and energy they put
into learning a new skill they're gonna
be very have a very small amount of
growth in that ability and so as a
society if we only allow these people to
succeed and all of these people are like
abject failures or maybe these people
are abject failures and these people we
just point to don't you want to be these
people if you tried a little harder
you'd be these people you don't want to
be these people on one slide down to
that sides
you better you know if you help us
vilify these people that'll help you get
to this and in actuality what we need to
do as a society is realize on every
single trait this is this is our
diversity this is who we are as a
species and so we need a world that
works for this not a world that works
for this tiny little group of people we
need a world that works for the vast
majority of us and maybe we never get
the full tales in there because that's
it's a hard thing to do right make a
world that works for everyone from 2
feet tall to 7 and a half feet tall
that's a lot that's a heart that's a
word but we could make a world that
works everyone from 3 feet six and a
half feet tall right that includes 95%
of us that includes the vast majority of
us we have to start somewhere so
creating a world that works for 1% of
people not great creating a world that
works for more and more of us the better
and so when for me anyway owning that
one I can't even know where I fit along
that I know I'm an under once a
underachiever I'm an underestimate err
so I think that wherever I am on that
that unless I'm in the 1% even sometimes
then I feel like I'm in the like bottom
percentage right so even though I know
that soft truth I know that in almost
every treat I am average or better where
on average I feel low and when I'm high
I feel average so society's remedy to
that is to just not right well don't
underestimate yourself project an air of
confidence unlike my lack of confidence
though isn't my lacking confidence of
self it's do I there's a benefit to me
in society that I've been under it an
underestimate er and not an overestimate
er the cost to society that I'm an
underestimate or overestimate er is the
societal cost that we only prop up over
estimators and our vendor estimators and
we're losing everything that under
estimators have to give because we have
a lot to give because we underestimated
I because I underestimate myself I know
that I push even harder because I think
that I'm low so I'm pushing so hard to
be average when I was always over
average
but that push that drive is part of what
makes me who I have it's part of what
it's the reason I have what I'm here to
give to give that I felt I wasn't a good
enough housekeeper means that Oh like my
house could be condemned to ninety
moments right like like I'm so horrible
at it and disorganized everyone's better
than me means that my house is average
whereas if the same exact distribution
of all over my house I felt I was a
good housekeeper right I'm like I'm
actually the best I don't know what
you're talking about
I'm the best at keeping my house I'm not
gonna try this hard it's gonna fall
apart even more and so the over/under
estimator portion of our population we
need both but what we don't need in
society well we need actual metrics I
need to know can you actually do this
task where do you fit on the spectrum
how good are you actually at math not
where do you think you are and where do
I think you are where he can actually
fit along the spectrum and how can we
measure that because then I know I'm
getting the best person at math and I'm
paying you or giving you resources or
whatever doing at that time period
accordingly it's and and why why am I do
why do you get millions of dollars
because you're good at math or good at
basketball or good at this when it's
just luck in genetics it's just winning
the lottery and yes people win the
actual lottery and they get to be rich
but we don't look at those people having
earned it in the same way we look at
over estimators win in the world right
i'm--you're estimators lose in the world
yet I can guarantee you as an
underestimate er I have more to give to
this world than over estimators because
like I can see in my life where because
I've underestimated I have overly
produced I have a friends we haven't
spoken to him in like about seven years
since my daughter was born but we were
better friends before and he's a he's a
chef he cooks really good food and so
when I cooked for him one time I like
made this like five course meal I went
over the top I already know how much
money I spent on the ingredients but if
I
underestimated my cooking skills I
wouldn't have over produced the results
and that happens time and time again
when I have to make a party when I
release what a party's supposed to look
like and just make what I'm supposed to
look like both the party's more fun and
and it actually is okay it's mediocre
right it's not the best it's not a
Pinterest party but it's not the worst
either it's not a Pinterest fail party
it's somewhere in the middle but because
I feel like I'm the worst at throwing
the party I end up creating a more
Pinterest worthy party than if I didn't
live it up in that in that realm of
being an underachiever being it
cohousing it's funny because one of the
biggest blessings yeah under estimators
and it's like society validates us right
it's like well what is supposed to be
the remedy as you're supposed to not be
an aggressor they're right like I know I
could help the planet more if I
projected an error of confidence and yet
that's not truth and I don't want to
because I don't want to I know what
power there is an underestimation and on
top of that like society needs to figure
it out more than the individual needs to
figure it out because if I just turn
into an over estimator one I can that's
not actually something I can do right
it's like okay like when I I have a
serious lack of trust in the powers that
be in our medical community in our
governments in some way because I think
I can do it better right there's a bit
of ego and a bit of I think I'm better
at this than you are less so with the
medical more the government but there's
there what it actually comes down to is
I know nobody has the the amount I know
how much information I would need to be
able to do your job properly and I don't
have that information and not only do I
not have that information you don't have
that information
nobody has that information so unless we
can create that we can create the tool
that gives my doctor access to all
medical information at their fingertips
I can't assume they're the expert unless
we give our governments or whatever that
that entity becomes access to the
economic the environmental the all of
the info they need they
don't have the info they need and start
pretending they're over estimators right
to pretend me they know what the
they're doing and they don't they don't
know and I know they don't know and I
know I don't know but I know more than
they know like and that is like my
underestimation because I thought I was
so low on all the trades then when you
wake up to the fact you're not actually
low on the trades you also wake up to
the fact that everyone who is that you
think is high on traits and actually
thinks they're high on traits is
actually low on a lot of them it is
overcompensating them right like you
can't fake actual competence in
emergency see what's unfolding Swift
Trump luckily people he's also been the
presidency for a while and people know
he's kind of been copied and have picked
up the slack a little bit people
Americans were like we're gonna stay at
home even if you don't tell us to stay
at home and then some of them are like
working a party on the beach so there's
a spectrum of people but there's to give
the under estimators the ability to
succeed in the world is how we create a
world that works for everyone is by
allowing that our human population
exists along the spectrum on every
single trait and so if you we know this
we have to design a world that exists
for that for that whole trade instead of
making people have to be have to be this
right and this exists literally for
every single tree how much sleep do you
need I only need two hours of sleep I
need 12 hours of sleep most of us need a
good seven eight hours to sleep well if
you only need two if you actually
actually only need two hours of sleep a
night you have 22 hours a day in which
to get done that's not equal right
because the person needs 12 hours a day
now only has 12 hours a day and actually
up here would be more like 22 hours a
day right this person needs 2 hours a
day this person needs 22 hours a day and
there's honestly people who need almost
24 hours of sleep people with the
similar condition to me and then there's
people who I did not need 20 Frances Lee
but I do need a good 10 hours of sleep
in a 24 hour period and so if I'm being
graded with the rest of the world right
if you don't know that then you
it's even everyone has 24 hours in a day
awesome make the most out of it right
but you don't have 24 hours of the day
someone who needs only two hours sleep
that's 22 hours in a day and someone who
needs 22 hours of sleep has two hours a
day to do something and then on top of
that the amount of energy it takes to do
any given task being a spoon II you
start to realize the actual cost of
every single activity brushing your
teeth doing it having a shower creating
a meal cleaning up after meal all takes
energy if you have a surplus of energy
as most people do you don't have to
think about those things but if you
don't think you do if brush if you have
to choose between brushing your teeth
and having a shower which one do you
choose
most people don't have to make that
choice but from that position it then
becomes okay but if you only have if
you're me let's go with me I get any 10
hours of sleep a day I have a Spoony
disability but I have a lot more spoons
than most people with do any
disabilities like I don't have to choose
whether or not to brush my teeth I can
basically always a first friend to you
but a shower does actually cost more
more intellectual energy and there's
some days I don't shower you'll see oh
you're in the same clothes is that eye
for Mike yep the door the energy yet
have it sparked my interest to go do
that that finding that needy and myself
to be at a certain state to work because
that's what you have to do right no
one's gonna hire you and keep you
employed if you can only do 15 minutes
of work a day no one is gonna hire you
for that but if you have 15 minutes of
mental physical whatever energy that you
can give to something if you find where
you are the higher percentage to give
that 15 minutes to then your 15 minutes
is worth a hell of a lot more than
somebody else's 8 hours and so all of
this comes into play in that leg this is
a population it doesn't exist without a
population this does this graph does not
exist in like it kind of does in my own
body like some
at nighttime I'm down here and sometimes
in the morning when I've had my cup of
coffee I'm up here but generally it's
the community like this is my day night
generally don't expect my up here is
generally a year but that's a whole
other what they say but this like this
is the diversity that's supposed to
exist and so everyone is doing the best
they can is like everyone exists along
this making them wrong for where they
exist is costing us all a hell of a lot
because we're saying oh you could only
work 15 hours a day well then not only
can you not work no one's gonna end you
can so no one's going to pay you
you are a gonna use a Nazi to turn here
a useless eater right you are just
taking and not giving anything because
you are disabled and you cannot work for
more than 15 minutes a day might as well
let Koba 19 come and take you out right
you're costing us you're not giving us
anything I can tell you my 15 mi 15
minutes is more than 50 minutes day it's
more like an hour a day I've given more
during this hour any hour that I gave
that I have in any time working because
I found my highest calling right I found
what maybe it's not my highest calling
but it's something I can do during this
time period to have my highest impact
and that's a very big difference is like
and this is what was coming to a while I
was sitting in a bed last night working
on something was it's not that I'm my
brain is better than everybody else's at
this he's the reason I'm focused on it
it's not that I'm the gold medal athlete
it's that this is the sport I play the
best and those are two very different
things right that out of everyone in
society I'm at the far end of the
spectrum and I'm the best of the best of
the best at it versus out of all the
traits I am and everyone is this is the
one that I am the best at so it's the
one I'm choosing to focus on when my
brain I let it do what it wants to do it
wants to save the world it wants to
create Omni win solutions so I let it
and I let it do what it needs to do and
the more I get out of its way and allow
it to and don't need it to look like
anything
because I'm still I'm aware of all this
stuff and yet I still play it right like
I'm still like oh I'm not high enough on
the spectrum I'm not we need to push
harder I need to try marker no I don't
need to honor where I actually am and
that I'm an underestimate her and in my
underestimation it's basically a
superpower and I can see that
overestimation is a superpower actually
in in society that it gives you more
money and privilege and power to be an
overestimate er but actual skills actual
traits that we actually look up to come
from under estimating come from like you
want the strongest people in society to
actually be in charge choose the ones
who look the weakest not the ones who
project the weakest but the ones who we
act like people who have disabilities
people who we don't think of as strong
they are the strongest people inciting
that's where cope in nineteen is
actually gonna take from us our best
hope of creating a better future if we
allow it to run amok in our population
because we think of it as weeding out
the weak right that's what our
politicians it's like well the economy
though the economy but if you want to
help the 1% who's told me whoever you're
going to look after you're not looking
after the 99% you're looking after the
1% and you're sacrificing the people who
actually have the solutions because when
you've had to deal with hardship your
whole life whatever that hardship is
that's where your magical eyes it
doesn't lie in the overestimation except
it does look advise in all of that right
it's like you are a miraculous genius of
a human being in that you're you you
have all of these different spectrums in
you and where you're where they all
combine to make you you is the you you
have to give to the world and it's your
highest calling to be the US you you are
like there is no better thing you can do
and so anytime you're trying to be
something you're trying to be a
different point on this graph
whether it's projection are actually
trying to move you along it it's nothing
wrong with improving there's nothing
wrong with learning but when you're down
on yourself because you don't learn fast
enough or you're down on other people
because they don't learn fast enough and
they're not learning the things you
think you should be learning that is
it's like truly honoring our spectrum of
humanity nature gave us this diversity
God gave us a diversity universe gave us
a diversity we have this diverse because
it's exactly what we're supposed to have
we're not supposed to maximize our
trades to be a perfect human being so we
can be the 1% of the 1% of the 1% at
least that's the truth I've tapped into
we're here to be our unique individual
self because we we are a piece of the
whole we're not supposed to be the whole
and it's in allowing ourselves to have
pieces to have like we're a puzzle piece
there's pieces missing pieces extended
out and he says it's finding those
matches finding the team that prevent
has the skillset that we don't have so
we can be in our genius and in our
purpose because we don't have to do
anything else and this is my life has
both fallen apart and falling together
in a lot of real ways over the last five
years to a decade it I've allowed what
doesn't serve me to fall away and just a
society that might look a little chaotic
but like there's AI both simultaneously
know there's that I'm not doing my best
I could always be doing better in every
area and yet I am absolutely doing the
best I can
I had my me and my upstairs neighbor you
share bills right so they pay the
electricity bill and I pay the gas bill
and they pay 60% I pay 40% so we kind of
figure it out every honestly she figures
in turn every month and there was a
point so it's so every month or so she's
like so what's the gas go and every time
I'm like I have to find it and then I
will send it to you yes you are a
superhero Shilo you really really are
and so is every and that's that's what
society needs to learn and they don't we
just need to write if we can honor it in
each other we can honor it in ourselves
that my lack my actual lack isn't elect
a society it's a gift and so is
everybody else's then nobody's a burden
on me and I'm not a burden on anybody
else it's like what do I have to give
and how can I give it in it doesn't
matter everyone does have 24 hours in a
day and it doesn't matter how much of
that time is actually or hers right how
much you like every activity you have to
get accomplished every day costs
everybody something different we all
have 24 hours in a day we all need
different sleep we all different food
requirements we have different like
physical needs and social needs and so
how much time you're left with at the
end of all of that is different but if
you can find your highest Colleen for
whatever time is left that is going to
be the world's highest Colleen right
you're gonna be giving from your highest
space and the world is gonna gain the
most they can if we only allow 1% of
people to give their gifts because
they're giving it from a space that we
allow their over estimators they're
charismatic they can communicate well
they have symmetrical faces you know
like all of these weird arbitrary things
that don't actually get us the best they
get us a tiny fraction of society being
the best but if we can unlock individual
humanity how do we give you the best
life and it's not by dictating where on
the spectrum everyone has to live right
this is what society does this is okay
if you're over here get better if you're
over here
you're acceptable that's beautiful okay
and I'd like if you get an F you fail if
you get an A you get a scholarship
everyone in the middle yeah okay you're
acceptable you can go on to the next
grade it's not actually helping wait why
are you here how what are you interested
in where are you here when we unlock
human human the individual human
potential it's not about everyone
becomes a gold star athlete everyone now
can be compete in the Olympics and win
the goal that's not feasible you can't
like that's really not everyone can win
the gold it's designed for one person to
do it and so individually we have to
answer do we would you rather be
and this is an athletic example even
though I'm not an athlete not in any way
and but it applies everywhere would you
rather be your highest self but win the
silver so you know you gave a hundred
and ten percent but you only won the
silver because there happen to be
someone better than that year and they
won the gold or would you rather know
you only gave 60 percent of what you had
to give but man you lucked out you were
the best there that year and you won the
gold is it internal that your strength
that you're competing with or the
external world that you're competing
with because the external world only
ever has one winner and unfortunately
with over and under estimators that's
not really true over estimators almost
always feel like they're the winner or
are these project that they feel like
they're the winner and underestimate us
almost like we could win the gold and be
like right and be like why we gave 60
percent it's like actually do you know
if we gave a 60 percent no you don't you
don't know that because how do you know
that it was your 60 or your hundred I
stopped the thing my anyway my upstairs
neighbor has this Bell and every month I
have to take a find it and take a photo
of it she's like understandably with her
her understanding of the world he's like
well you could just put it in the same
place every time and take a picture of
it or take a picture of it right away
then you have it really good solutions
right both of those things are an actual
solution but in order for me to actually
do that I have like where and the rest
of my life is gonna fall apart
right if I everytime I get the bill that
is my highest priority for her so that I
don't have to look about and she is
ready for her the second she asks for it
then the rest of my house is gonna fall
apart and so when so it's like right you
might have a solution for this little
thing but the rest of its gonna fall
apart and so I could eat perfectly I
could eat a really amazing diet but then
I'm not gonna be able to do the rest I
could you know be a probably I couldn't
even be a Pinterest parent but I could
spend more time with my kid more you
know like I could up that but then it
would cost everything else and
so it's like finding the rate of
diminishing returns I'm doing the best I
can overall and yes every area of my
life could be improved but it would cost
the rest and finding that space of like
okay I have this capacity in the day
what is my highest ability to give from
that space it's very different then what
is the most profitable what will society
give me the most benefit for or I mean
anything external there's the internal
reward versus the external ward
no one's going to give you a sponsorship
ad because you're the best you at skiing
right you have to be the gold medal
athlete to get the sponsorship ad but to
just know you gave your best and you're
at your peak is a different internal
reward and everyone can have that right
there's no shortage to the number of
people who can be the best they can be
at skiing or the best they can be at
math or history but we have diversity
because not everyone is interested in
skiing everyone's interested in that and
so it's a combination of where are you
on that trait are you interested in
improving it you don't have to improve
anything do you want to you don't have
to learn anything besides what you
already know do you want to learn it
then learn it there is no if we can
minimize the external rewards and
minimize the external need to learn it
right that why are you going to school
why are you learning this skill and this
trait is it because you want to have
that knowledge or is it because you
think society you need to have this
knowledge right society needs me to have
this knowledge sometimes it does right
if you want to be a doctor you can't be
a doctor without learning biology and
Anatomy so you can't be like I would
talk to her but all I'm interested in is
history button you can be a PhD and call
yourself a doctor she's gonna be an
actual doctor but you could be your
highest ability to help heal people and
never get a medical degree and that
could look like whatever interests you
with healing right
that might be history might be
linguistics it might be I don't know why
those things with equal healing but I'm
not you right and it's like it when you
follow your own internal drive of where
you're supposed to be
it starts proving itself to you and you
start truly loving the diversity because
when you realize when I realize I have
something to give because of an
underestimate er I can see the beauty of
all the underestimation in society and
the overestimation it's that we only
prop up the over estimators the problem
I see the beauty in this entire curve
and that we are his life isn't even fair
it's not even an RPG it's not like you
get a certain you get a hundred points
and you get to dole out where they are
in your intelligence in your look seer
in your privilege power your charisma
like that's not how life works some
people are low in nearly every trait and
some people are high in nearly every
trait that looks like to me video games
video games most of a lot of them have
the ability right you sign up at the
beginning and you say do you want the
easy do you want the medium or do you
want the hard I think we all did that
before we came to this planet some of us
I and and you don't even know you know
how hard your life is but you actually
don't know if you signed up for easy
medium or hard you can only say well
like I can look at my life and I can
look at it as either easy or hard I
signed up for fairly easy
I can't move around a lot I have like a
fairly easy disability compared to other
people with them also I've had brain
tumors and I have a disability have
disabilities right so it's like well I
could I I could look at my life as drew
as a I try I but what I do look at is
every time we go for the harder setting
it's because we're here to give more and
so when we look at people who have the
sliver of the the far of the normal
curve they have all the power and all of
the privilege and all of the money I'm
like right you signed up for easy you
got all the cheat codes that doesn't
make you a better player
someone who signed up to have the worst
of everything and they managed it like
they found their place to win that is
truly winning because it's not about I'm
the only one who passed the game
the point of the game is actually to
help everybody pass it is to find the
like Universal cheat code which is our
diversity what you lack I have to give
and what you lack I have to give and so
together we are better and stronger but
if what I need to be on a team with you
is for you to look like me and me to
look like you we're not gonna get to
diversity and that's part of diversity
right if what I need is a team of
everyone to look like me in whatever way
that means to me physically emotionally
mentally that's gonna be a different
team than somebody who's like actually I
want diversity
I want different types of intelligence
different types of world experience
different types of talents and
challenges because I can see that where
I lack you you make up for it in
vice-versa
that's but forced that right if you have
people who want to be on a team of
people who look like them and whatever
way that looks like and you force them
to become a diverse team they're gonna
do nothing but be triggered right all of
these people are not acting the way
they're supposed to be acting right
because you and you don't appreciate
that you need to be able to appreciate
it before being put on that kind of a
team right I truly can see how and I'm
not always there in fact I know that the
closer I get to it the closer I get to
truly loving and accepting myself a
hundred percent for Who I am because
there's always layers I know I'm like oh
that doesn't feel like I'm loving and
accepting myself for it whenever I feel
the need to treat to improve on or or
change a trait to be more acceptable it
falls apart and I don't that trait has
taken away it's like oh you thought you
were messy let's give you more messiness
you thought you were disorganized let's
take away all executive functioning but
the more I'm like right because I have
the level of executive function I'm
supposed to I know everything that I am
supposed to the more it opens up that I
can learn new things that I can have
some more executive functioning and it's
like the greatest irony in the universe
if you try it's taken away and if you
accept it's given to you I don't know if
it's everybody's universal truth because
I'm not living everybody's life and I
mean my life and I know from my life I
am here
to learn love and acceptance partly
because I was put here on the planet
being the opposite my natural is to
judge my natural is to like plan
everything and get to perfection so it
falls apart and I'm able to see the
beauty in as it is and not how it's
supposed to be and the more and I know
that I'm not doing that with the world
and the closer I'm able to I can do that
with me I can do that with I have
exactly the level of everything I'm
supposed to have because I can see how
it all comes together and how other
people film pieces even though I'm like
if only I was this piece I can feel it
all but we don't do business piece I
could complete the whole picture no you
can't nobody can you need the other
puzzle pieces to complete the picture
fixing your piece means you no longer
fit the puzzle right like I'll just fill
in this gap oh now you don't pick the
puzzle and so truly knowing that I am
the puzzle piece I'm supposed to be is
about not needing to fix me at all and
yet they're still a part of me who's
trying to fix the picture right trying
to fix what the picture could be again I
can't fix it I am the piece I am I can't
change what picture we're making
together and so needing the world to be
different than it is makes it fall apart
in a whole new way but allowing it to be
what it is allowing every single
individual to be who they are makes it
better
and so that is that is where I am
choosing and living my life from and
again my Epiphany a few weeks months ago
now who tiny words differently that I
don't have to worry and wonder about
whether or not somebody's doing a good
job in their life or and whether I could
or what do a better or worse because
they're me and I'm them they are me
living out their life I'm them living
out my life and so from that position
it's a weird position to live in because
it's like I'm doing the best I can and
so are they and I've been given a really
weird puzzle piece in this society and
my piece is supposed to be weird and
someone fell asleep on YouTube that's
cool the way you
comment for fines honor but well sleepy
fell asleep on busy keyboard doing the
best you can
are they they're doing the best they can
finding it's just such an easier
position to be in we are all trying and
it's like not even the trying it's them
for me anyway it's the accepting because
in my 20s and my teens it was like there
was this perfect ideal I was supposed to
be right up steep perfectly exercise and
get in the perfect body whatever that is
and that I could like learn everything
and I'd there was areas I was good at
naturally science and math and there
were areas I was not great at geography
history names and I would try to cram in
the stuff that I wasn't good at and a
lot of the stuff that naturally happened
and then the stuff that naturally
happened fell away a bit because I
wasn't able to do it in the same way and
I was not in any way a pible of cramming
and information I didn't have before
before I could learn geography in
history and names if I needed to I could
like force it into my brain whereas now
I find I can only just allow I can only
just allow what comes to come and it's
because of brain damage just because of
neurological changes I'm supposed to
want to heal that I'm supposed to need
it to be different and I spent so much
of my time needing it to be different
and try like what went wrong how do I
get back to where it was how do I fix
this that I wasn't seeing what wasn't
accepting what was and once I'm now able
to accept what is most of the time again
not perfect magic happens
like it's like even my brain not knowing
words and I can't pull them out it's so
frustrating when I allow it to just be
and my brain works around it I
communicate well enough when I need to
take out that word it's been everything
falls apart and I'm not great at
linguistics I like every time I've tried
to name something I want someone else to
name it except for my kid who I knew her
name but I didn't know her name if she
was a boy it was like Oh God and if you
miss person you're you're choosing to
hang out like why do people do that you
don't you can leave
you're fully allowed to leave person on
YouTube Husain Xia that like if you
listen this for more than ten minutes
it'll kill you in all the best ways I'll
kill your ego kill the other
about his like society gives you exactly
the lessons you're supposed to learn as
you're meant to learn them and if I now
that I anyway it's so sort of the
Linguistics part but there are times
when I can't think of a word where my
brain will come up with the perfect word
I'm like oh my god that is it's like if
you let there's these memes that go
around if like letting kids name things
and it's like a you know they name like
a raccoon a trashcan de or something
like that it's like that's so perfect
and there's times where my brain does
that will like put two words together
I'm like that's not the right word but I
know what you're trying to get at and
how perfect and it's like the right my
memory in certain ways has never been
good but I was able to compensate for it
and now it's exactly what it's supposed
to be it's like people like oh you
forgot that I'm like cuz I was supposed
to forget it
like it's weird because my world like it
feels like every time whenever I am
right now is how I've always been so I
don't feel like I've come very far
because this is how I've always been
because it's what I remember but I also
can see how far a cup like it's weird
because I can watch old videos I can
watch things and be like oh it's so
different than how it was before but if
I remember that then it wouldn't be how
it was it wouldn't be what it is like
it's it's my memory my communication
skills as much as sometimes I get really
frustrated with them and I want them to
be better I want to be at the highest
end of the spectrum like if only I could
communicate then we'd all live a better
world because I know how to create a
world that works for everyone if only I
was able to communicate it I get into
that state constantly all the time and
it's like but from that state I'm not in
my genius and people to figure out how
to communicate better in fact my
communication falls apart even more
whereas when I'm like this is where you
are you're not supposed to be this piece
other people will come and be this piece
or you will naturally be it eventually
for CNET is never the way and yet other
people foreseen is exactly what they
need like other people do seem to get
knowledge and a bill
and talents and things from trying
really hard and pushing through it it's
like if you have fear to speak on a
stage and then you go and speak on a
stage right you're staying your heart
out and it feels really good and like I
want to do that again that's the key and
you only know it afterwards right do you
want to do it again or afterwards so you
like never again right I bungee jumped
and she was on my bucket list and after
I threw myself off that bridge it was
like done never happening again other
things I've pushed myself to do like
going down a waterslide or something at
the bottom I'm like again and then I go
on it again right it's the same fear but
how do you know if you push through it
whether you get a never again or again
most people only know by pushing through
it I know by pushing through it again
and again when other people have gotten
these again and I've gotten the check
never again that I'm not supposed to
push through it if I feel terror to be
on stage I'm literally gonna faint I'm
going to like my nervous system will
fall apart so I'm not supposed to push
through it despite the fact that other
people are and it's I've been given such
ridiculous rules to live my life by not
because other people are just to live
them right as I said at the beginning of
this I've been binge-watching called
spoofing binge-watching Wako which I
highly suggest because it's it's you do
see their side of it in a hole like I
did I didn't know David crash was he
appears to be in the Netflix one I
thought he was a bad guy doesn't come
off as a bad guy or the Netflix one in
fact the government comes off as the
only bad guy um but having was my point
of bringing up cults I don't remember
acceptance they just accept oh that if I
was a cult leader right I'd be like well
everyone says to live their lives by the
tenants I've been given everyone's
supposed to not exercise and let their
heart rate go up that's really bad
advice it's really bad advice for the
regular everyday population that's gonna
cost you something in cardiovascular
health but for me it's what I've been
given so far right I my heart rate goes
up I crash for days right as if I live
my life without my heart rate going up I
generally can do okay
I was given the advice to
to eat what I want to eat and not obsess
over it because of that was that was a
leap up now I'm kind of figuring out how
to eat within this within the sphere but
these aren't things I can give to people
right they aren't tenants they aren't
things like here's the new here's how to
live your life it's listening to your
internal guide not listening to
scientists that say you eat this many
vegetables and as many the tenth and not
listen to my inner guy that's like sure
you can eat a bag of chips per dinner
whatevs it's listening to your inner
guidance just your inner guidance tell
you can eat a bag of chips right now
it's your inner guidance cell you should
be eating a salad right now like what
what is and you can tell by once you've
eaten it does it does it nourish you
does it feel good after right it's like
the fear part pushing through the fear
did that make you feel better or did
that make you feel worse and it's
constantly checking in on your own self
it cannot be done externally and again I
was putting this planet with a real need
to UM hone my compass to someone else
and yet not I have oppositional defiance
disorder and I can't say look for like
leaders that can like teach me the next
the next piece and that trait they like
underestimation piece of me the looking
for leadership yet not accepting at
peace is exactly who I'm supposed to be
I'm like to do my piece in the world to
be my puzzle piece because my puzzle
piece is never going to be the central
cult leader
it's about finding other people who are
the pieces right let's start putting the
pieces together and then we keep seeing
a bigger and bigger picture and the more
people we invite to be part of that
puzzle more the better and more
intricate it can become and the more
we're able to help everyone find their
piece right if your puzzles in the wrong
box you're never gonna find your puzzle
and whatever piece you usurped isn't
gonna be here if we can help each other
find where we belong in our highest
purpose that is our highest purpose we
get the most out of our individual
selves when as individuals we're living
from our highest highest cause right if
everyone is whatever their version is
I've not again not everyone can win the
gold of the Olympics for skiing but
everyone could be their best skier self
and yet not cuz not everyone wants to be
on skis I really could have access to a
CEO that everyone
to begin the cold right whatever your
sport is what is your what is yours
what is your higher-self in that and it
doesn't ever mean get into the Olympics
we could all from day one be on skis and
work our absolute hardest and that could
be our school and eight hours a day we
have to ski you know there's a day every
day this is this is how we're gonna
decide on everything in society it
doesn't matter how hard you work you
might never you one person gets the gold
and there's gonna be people who in that
in that version of society are gonna
frickin suck at ski even after eight
hours a day they'd be way better than I
am at skiing because I can maybe spend
12 hours on the hills in my life and all
of that was over two decades ago having
that about like to maximize people's
capacity without society saying schemes
the thing right everyone must do skiing
that is what society does everyone must
do must do school how do you fit in
school that's how smart you are not
where are you smart how can you spend
your time what interests you how can we
help you learn in what who are in so
that's where the five questions come in
that which I'm just going to quickly go
into and then I'm gonna get off because
it's been an hour is who am i it's all
about this normal this this where do I
fall on any of these and Emma I know her
an underestimate her right it doesn't
actually matter where you fall it's not
that this sides good in the sides about
it's like who are you where do you fall
all of it is acceptable who are you what
diversity do you encompass and then part
of that is also who are your people what
pieces of your puzzle can be filled by
other people what's the picture you're
trying to create and which goes very
much into what's your purpose what
solutions are you here to solve what art
are you here to work on because everyone
has a calling if society's like skiing
is the thing and you're out of skier
you're gonna always feel like a failure
but if you're like we all have we have
physical things I again not so she bring
my heart rate up and beyond a certain
point at least right now in my life if I
get different guidance I will and I have
gotten different guidance in different
parts time it's like run okay I'll run
my heart rate goes up and those are the
times I don't fall apart and that does
not make sense under science
I get it but then when I'm like good so
I can run and then I run when it doesn't
tell me to I stuff all the parts it's
it's proven itself to me in a way that
the outside world can't because it's not
in my body proving itself to me when
it's like when we help each other answer
Who am I where do I exist and nothing's
wrong everyone's doing the best they can
but I don't need to be at a table with
you right you are wherever you exist on
that spectrum might annoy the out
of me and I might not be able to hang
out with you because I'm at a different
point on a different spectrum that is
fine we don't all have to get along but
the more we can help each other answer
Who am I who are my people what is my
purpose we get people who have
connection and purpose and we get what
comes out of that and that is ingenuity
it's art it's just like magic all around
because what we need is people living
from their highest place finding their
genius and contributing from that
without it being forced without it being
everyone's a skier now who's our top
skier they're gonna save the world with
ski that's interesting how do we save
the money with the top economists didn't
they create the mess that's weird um but
fine helping everyone find out who they
truly are and I get all of these
questions or perpetual questions they
are never answered and the answering of
them is the point
you don't answer Who am I and then
you're done it's a constant process you
don't answer my people and then you're
done because just like you're gonna
figure out yourself even if you have the
same group of five people and you ate
together and played together work
together and every you're still not
gonna know them by the end of their life
right they're still gonna be things that
are uncovering just like I mean I hang
out with me a lot and I still uncover
new things about me and what is my
purpose and then what do I need we have
common needs but we were all so diverse
in them right we all need food what food
we need is different and in that
diversity gives us the ability to feed
everybody if we all need in rice all day
every day and be hard to make enough
rice on this planet if we all needed
corn but because we have a different
amount of needs for those things we
actually can produce enough food that is
nutritionally adequate
I mean nutritionally amazing
and delicious and there's enough for
everyone because of our diversity in
both the land they can grow it not
everywhere can grow rice but everywhere
can grow something not everywhere and
this is like why diversity is the
solution and then the fifth question
that was that we added last week is what
am I willing to let go of and in all of
those areas right what did I learn about
me that I'm holding too strongly to that
actually isn't serving anymore what
people in my life are like not actually
my people anymore they tell me what
they're here to teach me and I'm I can
let them go or they're letting me go and
that's okay what is my purpose and what
am i cleaning too strongly to write I
mean as much as I named this channel
Jubilee saves the world on the entering
through life that is it it's the whole
thing
Jubilee saves the world by meandering
through life I don't get to save the
world and be the superhero and get to be
like just handed out to everyone and I
can't do it if I'm not meandering
through life if I'm not just following
the next thing and the next thing and
the next thing and letting my passion
guide me letting my internal ability
within my very limited capacity of my
disabilities then I don't get to save
the world and I might not get to save
the world even doing it because it's not
me that's you know it's us but what I
and I'm answering those five questions
I'm never gonna fully answer them I'm
not gonna get ride to here's who Jubilee
is and now I can give you the full map
to figure out who you are here's who my
people are now here's the full map for
you to find out who yours are because
it's gonna be constantly evolving for me
I'm gonna be in a deeper and deeper
level every hopefully every day and
every and it's its cycle of a noun and
so in answering the five questions I
know you answering them and me answering
them is gonna benefit each other I don't
need you to answer them my way and I
don't need you to answer god yeah I
don't need to dictate who you are who
your people are what your purpose is
what you need and what you have to let
go of I can allow you to arrive at those
things cuz it's the only way they're
gonna be meaningful to you and CEO and
the more I answer them for myself and
I'm shocked by what comes up right it's
like I don't even know that about
oh hell am I supposed to tell anyone
else how to live their life I didn't
even know why people were here in my
life and surrounding me constantly the
universe keeps providing more and more
until I walk into it I'm like Oh looks
like you do have my back looks like I am
and and the dichotomy that exists in
everything I do of like I am alone in
this I there's nobody kind of helping
you save the world me at the same time
the universe is doing nothing but
providing people that are helping me do
it and doing it without me involved in
like all of it at the same time and it's
like okay I have to like have faith the
right people are coming at the right
time Oh someone I don't know what that
means
I'm interested I'm gonna stop that first
to see how that goes okay I have been on
for an hour Tibet tomorrow I might not
be on because I'm single crochet
shopping at some point I'm trying to
figure out if I should go for the see
your hour in the morning because
medically qualified um but looks wise I
do not so yeah anyway I may or may not
be on tomorrow I will be missing one day
this week and I can't miss Wednesday cuz
it's the solution raising and it's why
I'm here and what I'm doing so I will
see well maybe tomorrow maybe I'll come
on tomorrow at some point even if it's
not at 8:30 in the morning I'll come on
when I get home from broken that gives
you permission to do both all right