[Music]
welcome back to awakening from meeting
crisis so last time I tried to make some
tentative suggestions as to what this
religion that's not a religion would
look like and how it can make use of and
be integrated with an ecology of psyche
with technologies for addressing the
perennial problems and a cognitive
scientific worldview that can legitimate
and situate that ecology of practices
and then I made some suggestions as to
the relationship between credo and
religio in our determination of our
mythos and the issue of criterion
setting made again another argument for
open-ended in that sense gnostic mythos
talked about a mythos that always puts
therefore the credo in service of the
religio and that is always directed
towards right top-down the propositional
being ultimately grounded in in the
participatory and also affording the
emergence up out of the participatory
through the perspective all and
procedural into the the propositional I
suggest in some ways in which we might
set up a way of engineering credo
something analogous to a wiki and create
a structure that is a distributed co-op
structure facilitated by things like the
internet and so again remind you I was
not trying to offer anything definitive
or set myself up in any kind of way that
is not what I want to do I want to try
and help facilitate the people who are
already doing this so that they have
ways of talking to each other
coordinating with each other
and facilitating each other's
development and growth I then turned
towards one of the culminating things we
need to do taking up one on one of the
deepest relationships between meaning
sort of one of the deepest relationships
that meaning has which is the
relationship between meaning and wisdom
we need wisdom of course to - as I've
argued because it's the the meta virtue
for the virtues and we need that in
order to give the individual pole for
the relationship with the the collective
creation and cultivation of the meta
cycle technology for creating the
ecology of psycho technology we also of
course need wisdom before during and
after the quest for enlightenment the
quest for a systematic and reliable
response to the perennial problems I
then proposed to take a look at the
cognitive science of wisdom and we did
that by taking note of an important
article that comes out sort of after the
first decade and a half of the
resurgence of scientific interest in
wisdom and that's the article of McGee
and Barber and they're doing something
consonant with what we've been trying to
do in this series they're trying to in a
sense salvage what we can from the
philosophical theories the legacy and
the axle Age of wisdom and the
psychological theories that were
emerging at that time and then they set
them into dialogue with each other a
process of reflective equilibrium trying
to get a convergence between them and
they argue that all of these theories
that philosophical and a psychologic
theories converge on a feature a central
feature of wisdom and then following
work that I did with Leo Ferraro and
2013 we can sort of expand beyond the
explicit thing to what we've also set a
long side of their phrase and also
directly implied by their phrase and so
a central feature of wisdom is to
systematic the systematically sorry the
systematic seeing through the lesion and
into reality at least comparatively so
and this of course is insight but it is
a fundamental insight is a systemic
insight it is an insight not just into a
particular problem but into a family of
problems and the maguey and Barbara make
use of a point that I made use of what I
was talking about systemic insight in
higher states of consciousness they make
use of the work of Piaget if you
remember Piaget found systematic errors
and the way children are seeing the
world remember things like they fail at
conservation task counting numbers or
pouring liquids right so you have these
systemic errors which reflect a
systematic way in which the children
have over constrained their cognition
there they have to constrain their
cognition it's adaptive but they have to
go through right that process of
assimilation and accommodation
constantly optimizing and complexify
system of constraints but what we see
with the children is eventually they get
a systemic insight and we've all done it
we go through qualitative change
qualitative development there's an
actual change in our competence because
it's not an insight into this problem or
this instance where I'm failing to
conserve or this instance or this
instance where I'm Vigo egocentric or
this instance but it's a insight into
failures of conservation as a
kind of error failures of egocentrism as
a kind of error and having a insight
that is not just at the level of framing
but at the level of trans framing
because it not only is reframing the
problem it is transforming my concept
my competence so it is a trans framing
insight it is a systemic insight because
what it gives you with sensibility
transcendence that's literally what's
happening to the children
their sensibility is going through a
form of transcendence that's exactly
what development is and they use that as
a way of explaining what they need of
course
without realizing it they're making use
of one of the paradigmatic metaphors for
talking about wisdom which is as the
child is to the adult right the adult is
to the sage just like the adult has had
systemic transfer aiming gone through
development so that in a in a way
compared to the child they much more
systematically see through illusion and
into what's real the sage right
similarly in comparison to an adult
right sees systematically through in a
trance framing fashion illusion and end
to reality so this is a core
constitutive feature of what it is to be
wise and you can see something and this
is not something the McGeehan barber say
okay but you can see how this is
automatically I would argue I would
argue they're not but I would argue this
is automatically you know connected to
the project of enlightenment in some
very important fashion all right what
are a couple other important things that
may and barber talked about they talked
about that with and this is the
beginning of the important distinction
between wisdom and knowledge that we've
been sort of also making use of
throughout the course that wisdom is not
about what you know wisdom has to do
with how you know it and there's two
senses of how that
want to explicate that they leave rather
implicit right there's how you know it
is how you have come to know it
what's the processing involved as
opposed to the product so wisdom has a
lot more to do with the process than
with the product knowledge is Right
often the product I know like this is
what I know and I know this and this and
this but wisdom is how am i knowing how
am i knowing right so definitely that
and that's going to be pivotal because
and that's going to immediately link
wisdom to rationality because one of the
key features of rationality I'd
mentioned this before we're going to
come back to this the work of Stanovich
is a rational person is not only fixated
on the products of their cognition they
pay attention to and find value the
processing of their cognition that's
what it is to be rational right so
that's one aspect of what they mean by
the how and then there's another aspect
of how you know and that has to do and
this goes to a point made by Keeks
between descriptive john cakes excellent
philosopher does work on wisdom right
but peaks makes a distinction between
descriptive knowledge and interpretive
knowledge
I often prefer to use the word knowing
rather than knowledge but that that's
his way of talking about so again this
is grasping the facts where is
interpretive knowledge this points
towards an aspect of wisdom that we're
gonna have to come back to this has to
do with understanding this is to grasp
of the significance of what you know and
of course relevance realization is being
invoked they're grasping the
significance right connecting to their
relevance realization but we're so Brass
understanding is grasping the
significance so part of what we're
talking about with wisdom and we're
talking about the how rather than the
what you know we're talking about the
process rather than the product and
we're talking not about right the the
description of the facts right but we're
talking about you grasping understanding
by grasping the significance of the
facts that you have so wisdom has to do
with these things it has deep
connections to understanding again which
has to do with the relevance realization
it has to do with the process rather
than the product right and that is all
tied into this right this systemic
transfer aiming realization of what's
real they then point to one other
important feature of wisdom may point
out there's a perspectival participatory
aspect to wisdom
they talk about a what's called a
pragmatic self-contradiction a pragmatic
self-contradiction is not a
contradiction in what you state it's a
contradiction in how in in the
perspective from which you make the
statement and the identity the degree of
identity you have in making the
statement let me give you a non
controversial example okay so I am
asleep
there is nothing logically wrong with
that if I'm pointing to the fact of John
being asleep you can there's there's no
there's no conceptual contradiction in
John being asleep this is a pragmatic
self contradiction because uttering it
means I have a uh Turing it from the
perspective of somebody who is awake
because I have to be awake in order to
say it and of course there's a sense in
which I'm not just pointing out of fact
I'm actually pointing to myself with it
and that's that's of course the degree
to which I'm actually I'm participating
in the fact that's being disclosed now
that that's very different by the way
from lucidity in Dreaming where people
can realize in a dream that
oh I'm dreaming right because you can
realize you're dreaming and remain in
the dream there is nothing pragmatically
self contradictory about that now they
point out and think of you can just here
are Socrates in this they point out that
this I am wise carries with it a sense a
very strong intuition of a pragmatic
self-contradiction to state that you are
wise seems to be an indication that you
are in a perspective and you have an
identity that is precisely not that of
being wise
and of course this is part of the
socratic you know I know what I don't
know idea this is part of again or how
I've argued and this is why ah right ah
as the this this two-faced thing between
horror and wonder right and that what it
does is it brings out and I again I'm
using this in the original meaning of
the word not what we mean by it now
right humiliation the inculcation of
humility right and so what that tells us
right away right is that wisdom has has
this perspectival and participatory
aspects to it such that right it's not a
matter of making even having true
beliefs there's a matter of what
perspective can you take what
perspectives what identities are you
assuming and assigning so the
participatory in the perspectival are
also very central to with them and that
of course makes sense again with wisdom
having to do with much more with the how
than the what and of course this is also
perspectival and participatory because
I'm seeing through a miss framing and
I'm going through trans framing I'm
actually right going through
developmental change my world is opening
it up and I and in a coordinated
resonant manner I'm opening up to it and
opening up through it which is of course
what Wonder and awe are all about okay
so that gives us some very important
things to take note of and I've already
indicated a connection to Stanovich with
the idea of paying attention to process
rather than product and we can
strengthen that connection by noting
that at the core of wisdom is the
capacity for overcoming self-deception
now a state of itch himself has
published about at least
overcoming foolishness and therefore at
least by implication what it is to
become wise but he normally talks about
this ability to systematically overcome
self-deception over and with another
term and this is the term rationality
and throughout I've been proposing to
you that part of what we need to do to
rehabilitate wisdom is we also need in a
coordinated fashion to rehabilitate what
it means to be rational rational does
not cannot be reduced to cannot be
equated to a facility with syllogistic
reasoning ok rationality cannot be
reduced to logic so let's broaden the
notion right away and make it connect to
what we're talking about which is what
we mean by rationality is a capacity
capacity to overcome self-deception in a
reliable manner so what I'm going to
mean by rationality is a lot reliably
and systematically what I mean by those
in a sec overcoming self-deception and
this is also in a lot of the work on
rationality especially by people like
Stanovich and also affording flourishing
which is afforded by some process of
optimization of the cognitive processing
okay what I mean by reliably it can't
operate according to a standard of
perfection completion right certainty
reliably does mean though that it is a
high probability of functioning
successfully systematically means it's
not operational just in this one domain
so let's compare being let's compare
rationality with expertise okay I can
become an expert and let's say tennis
I'm not this tennis won and I believe my
dysgraphia is bad today
let's whatever may be its two ends I can
become an expert in this okay we have to
be careful because we equivocate on this
term there is one in which we can into
something that we can study and one in
which this is just a synonym for being
good at something
okay I'm not using it in that sense okay
I'm using it in the sense in which it
makes sense to say somebody is an expert
in tennis they have acquired a high
proficiency in the set of skills such
that they have an authority about tennis
playing okay that's what we mean you can
become a legal expert etc okay so that
the person there is two ends in tennis
my brain is settling down okay or in the
law for example to become a legal expert
so what happens in expertise is
precisely this you find right a domain a
bounded domain that has a reliable set
of very complex very difficult but
nevertheless reliable set of
well-defined right or at least well
definable for you eventually set of
patterns and problems
you know it's expertise precise because
it doesn't transfer my expertise in
tennis won't transfer even the things
that are close in fact it will interfere
with when I try to play squash my
expertise in golf will interfere when I
try to play hockey okay that's not only
does it not transfer right it will often
interfere in transfer it even to things
that are relevant ly similar to your
area of expertise now this is a way
again in which we have to we have to pay
more attention in ways in which we can
 ourselves because we often
confuse right because we we don't pay
careful attention to how we're using
similarity we often confuse people's
expertise what do I mean by that so
here's somebody who's an expert for
example in a particular domain maybe in
physics they have expertise there and of
course physics is about knowledge and
about getting at what's real and so that
seems to be similar to you know
philosophy right and so presumably
somebody in physics can therefore just
transfer their expertise to philosophy
and just make pronouncements about
philosophy and metaphysics perhaps
pronouncing that philosophy is dead or
useless or some such thing which of
course itself is a philosophical
statement and pragmatically self
contradictory and if we don't pay
attention to this fact about expertise
we may fail to see that the similarity
between physics and philosophy may
actually be good reason for believing
that these people are the worst people
to listen to for philosophical advice
because their expertise in physics may
be in fact interfering with expertise in
philosophy for example of these
philosophy just the way that expertise
in tennis actually interferes with you
trying to play squash okay so expertise
is is not systematic it is limited in
its domain rationality is supposed to
apply within it's supposed to be apt
within each domain and apply across many
domains somebody right is rational if
they can note self-deception when
they're doing right their daily life
where they're doing their professional
work where they're engaged in friendship
where they're engaged in rational sorry
romantic relationships okay so and this
is an important thing to remember
rationality is in this sense a domain
general notion as opposed to a context
specific expertise tends to be a domain
specific now of course this is a
continuum the more systematic somebody
is the more rational we can claim there
to be somebody might be very rational in
a couple of domains and the irrational
and others so on balance they're not
that rational of a person all right and
of course I'm not claiming that
everybody is rational in the domain
general way I'm claiming that that is
the achievement that we are aspiring to
so rationality is to reliably and
systematically overcome self-deception
also affording flourishing optimization
so you get you optimize a set of
procedures for achieving the goals you
want but and standard bitch doesn't talk
enough about this other people talk
about this when they talk like Agnes
color when she talks about aspirational
rationally part of it is also as you
start to optimize your cognition
it will also tend to shift and change
the goals you are pursuing so the goals
also tend to come under revision as we
pursue this reliable and systematic
overcoming of self-deception and the
attempt to optimize our functioning so
that we can afford flourishing ok so
given that that's what we're talking
about we can then take a look at stander
bitches work and other people's work and
the way to do this is to situate it
within the cognitive science of
rationality and that is to take a look
at the rationality debate okay so the
rationality debate was driven by a whole
bunch of experimental results that seem
to show that human beings are irrational
okay
and how that works is I mean this is I'm
not going to go into this in great
lengths and I recommend you read
Stanovich is work I'm just going to show
you a couple of examples of the kind of
experiments you do and then show you the
features of them so you give people
certain problems to solve and then you
will you'll note certain things about
how they solve them so here's one
problem right so here's a right here's a
pond of water right and I'm covering it
right there's lily pads growing on it
starts with one lily pad and every day
the lily pads double right so on day day
one there's one day two there's two and
so for every day the lily pads are
doubling and then I tell you on day 20
the surface of the pond is completely
covered on what day was the pawn half
covered and people say oh on the tenth
day halfway through it's half covered no
right on day 19 the pond is half covered
because on day 19 I'm one I'm halfway
right oh look you have to ask yourself
right on day 19 I was halfway above
towards being right full because
doubling of half is what gets me full so
it's on day 19 that the pawn what's half
covered by the lily pads now what's
interesting here is notice how the
Machine there's machinery like your
insight machine er there's machinery
that's making you leap to a conclusion
it sound it feels like an insight but
it's actually causing you to miss sleep
it's it's and we talked about this
you're jumping to a conclusion that's
actually incorrect now please note that
how that adaptive machinery that often
causes you right to have an insight is
actually thwarting you in an important
way so you people reliably fail on this
kind of thing
right this kind of task or you can give
people this kind of task you can get
them to you give a preliminary test and
you find propositions that they strongly
agree with or strongly disagree well
let's say that some persons strongly
believes be well you know I'm not taking
stand here on this particular issue
right they may but you know they
strongly believe that abortion is wrong
or they strongly believe that capital
punishment is wrong now what you do is
you give them two situations you give
them a good in the sense of a logically
valid argument that leads to not B that
means not just but not in here and you
give them a bad a very poorly
constructed argument that leads to B and
you ask them take a look at this and
tell me which one of these is a good
argument and notice notice what I said
earlier how this points to what standard
which argues that part of rationality is
your ability to remove your fixation on
the product of your cognition that's
like being locked in the nine dot
problem right and be able to direct your
attention and care about the processing
for its own sake this is critical
detachment and what you find reliably
for many people is people will say oh
well this is the good argument this is
the good argument they'll fail a
critical detachment now here's the thing
I'll give you a couple more of these but
notice when I showed you the right
answer in the pawned example you went oh
yes of course of course so you
acknowledge the principle you should be
using but you don't actually reliably
apply it so you know what the right
reasoning principle is
but you don't reliably apply you know
you know that I should be able to
independently evaluate an argument with
independent of what it leads to because
if I can't do that then there is no
rationality possible because if you
can't independently evaluate the
argument then you can't use the argument
to evaluate the conclusion and therefore
I could never persuade you by argument
so you know that you should evaluate the
argument independently from the
conclusion but we reliably fail to do
that do you see what the pattern is we
know what the principle is we acquiesce
in it when it is stated to us but in
experiment after experiment we reliably
fail to do it let me give you one more
example there are so many of these look
up the conjunction fallacy look up
confirmation bias look up the waste and
selection task some of you can read some
of my work elsewhere I'll give you one
more example of this just because it's
again so interesting about this right so
here's a principle we all acquiescent I
believe because whenever you ask people
they say yes yes of course that's the
rule we should be using here's the rule
so I've got some evidence and the
evidence is the basis for my belief
right and then if the evidence is
undermined I should change my belief
right of course right
now of course we have disputes about
what counts as evidence bla bla bla but
that principle right right if the
evidence for my belief changes I should
change my belief now the problem of
course with testing that experimentally
is your beliefs are based upon all kinds
of background evidence and information
you've got so testing it in a
experimental situation is sometimes
difficult but this is what they did in
an experiment right so what you do is
you you try and create a belief just in
the experimental situation so you're
trying to create a new belief in the
person right in that experiment and so
the experiment is actually the place in
which you're providing the evidence so
what did they do is they brought a bunch
of people in and they they told them
about this important skill that they
wanted to see if they possessed which is
the ability to detect authentic suicide
notes many of us have no experience with
this and so that's why it's plausible
right that this is going to be a
situation in which a new belief is going
to emerge so the idea is I'm going to
give you a bunch of notes and you have
to be able to tell me which ones are
authentic and which ones are fraudulent
and this of course is a very valuable
skill because it can help you know with
first intervenors it can help prevent
real suicide it can help us determine
people who are just faking it or etc etc
and so what you do is you give people a
bunch of notes and they or they make
their judgments I think this is real no
I think this is fraudulent and then you
of course give them feedback
oh yes that's that's right or that's
incorrect right and then what happens is
right you later reveal to people the
following thing that's happened people
were randomly assigned to group a
randomly assigned to group B if they
were in Group A they were told they were
very good at this task if they were in
Group B they were told they were very
bad at this task of course there's going
to be a group C which is the control
group and it's just going to be neutral
and you're gonna use them as a control
and I'm not going to go into that
because that's just a good experimental
design right and so these people come to
believe
again on the basis of the evidence in
the experiment that they're good these
people come to believe they're bad and
now this is what you now do once you get
them to reliably evaluate like the self
about and say yeah I'm good look I keep
doing well on this no no I'm bad at this
I keep doing bad on then you say aha
then you debrief them right and you show
them that they were right they were only
getting the feedback completely randomly
you show them two things all of the
notes are fakes all of the notes are
fakes none of them are real and you were
given the feedback only on the arbitrary
write this on the arbitrary factor the
completely random factor that you were
just assigned to Group A or Group B what
that means right is the belief that you
are good at this or bad at this should
be completely undermined because the
evidence for it that these are real
suicide some of these are real suicide
notes and that I'm getting the feedback
based on my performance has been
completely undermined right and now you
give people a bunch of distractor task
so they're doing other things right and
then you come back and ask them okay but
how do you think you would do on this in
real life these people reliably port
I'll be bad at it oh no these people
I'll be good at this or you ask them how
would you do on a tasks vary in Allegan
this how you'd be able to distinguish
between fraudulent and legitimate
marriage proposals right something like
that and these people say oh I'll be
really good at it
these people say I'll be really bad at
it this is known as belief for severance
belief perseverance that people maintain
the belief even though the only evidence
for it has been completely directly
undermined in front of them so once
again what do we see here people
acquiesce in a principle they say yes
this is the principle notice to my
language I should use I acknowledge and
accept that I should use the principle
that if the evidence is undermined I
should revise the belief and yet they
reliably do not do that so again and
again again you get all these
experiments and there is a lot of them
I've just given you three example
and there are like there's like 15 kinds
of experiments you can run and you know
tens sometimes hundreds of versions of
these experiments right so people
acknowledge the principle and then they
reliably fail to engage in it so they
suffer notice my language here from
systemic illusion systemic
self-deception all right so a bunch of
psychologists call you scientists and
philosophers we're coming to the
conclusion that well that must human
beings are just irrational right they're
just irrational and so this idea that
we've carried throughout all of our
history from you know Aristotle on that
human beings are the rational the
irrational animals that's ultimately
flawed we're not human beings are not
rational no no that's very problematic
right because think about what that
means if you if you were convinced that
that was deeply correct that human
beings are not rational then you'd have
a very tough time justifying democracy
because if human beings are reliably
irrational democracy is a very bad idea
you should you should have the few
people who are reliably rational and let
them rule for example I'm not saying
this I'm not advocating this I'm trying
to show you the consequences you know
our legal system is also based on the
idea that people are fundamentally
reasonable reliably rational but if
that's not the case can we hold people
responsible for their actions I mean the
way they're connecting evidence to
believe to action is seriously you know
problematic
morality depends and this is something
that Kant famously argued for morality
depends on rationality people can only
be held moral if they can also be deemed
rational right if you if you keep doing
the right thing because of Locke right
or because of coercion we don't think
you moral we think it but if you do the
right thing because you have reasoned it
out and come to conclusion that that is
the right thing to do right then of
course we do deem you moral so as you
can imagine right a debate arose and
this is a very good thing for science
right see notice what's going on here
with rationality rationality is isn't
just a fact out in the world like
whether or not the earth is round right
rationality ultimately goes because it
is so deeply tied to prospective and
participatory knowing it goes deeply to
who and what I am and that has
implications for what kind of political
citizenship I can have what kind of
moral status I can have what kind of
legal status I can have even your
judgments for example if I'm mature or
immature are going to be vectored
through how well you are self how how
you how you assess how rational I am
rationality is a deeply existential
thing
so a debate ensued around wet this boy
they're not we should interpret the
experiments or what they are and they're
robust and reliable they are not
suffering the replication crisis these
experiments so these experiments are
robust and reliable but there's a debate
about and there's always another always
should be a debate innocence or in
science about how you interpret your
experiments should we interpret these
experiments to mean that human beings
are fundamentally irrational now a
debate ensued and that debate is very
important and I want to go through this
debate why are we doing this well first
of all I'm trying to show you the deep
connections between wisdom and
rationality and I'm trying to show you
the existential and political and moral
import of rationality and I'm also
trying to get you to consider expanding
and revising the notion of rationality
in a way that will help us to come back
and deepen our understanding of wisdom
why are we trying to understand wisdom
because wisdom is deeply associated with
meaning and wisdom is deeply needed for
addressing the project sort for for
cultivating enlightenment for the
project of enlightenment and addressing
the perennial problems and also for the
project of addressing the historical
forces that have driven the meaning
crisis okay so the rationality debate
the first major response is by Cohen
Cohen makes a very important argument
it's in an argument that we have we need
to go carefully through and see again
there's what I mean there has been so
much the work put into the notion of
rationality we should not take the right
self-proclaimed promoters of rationality
on YouTube to be clear examples of what
rationale
is okay we have to do this more
carefully cautiously reflectively paying
much more attention to the scientific
evidence the empirical evidence and the
debate so Cohen argued that there's a
problem with concluding that human
beings are fundamentally irrational and
his argument comes down to a couple of
very key points so let me use this word
cuz okay Cohen says okay to be rational
is to acknowledge and to follow a set of
right standards and we noted that that
we can only attribute irrationality to
someone something if it acknowledges the
standards and then fails to meet them to
say that this book is irrational makes
no sense because it does not acknowledge
the authority of those standards so the
fact that it fails to meets those
standards is no reason for calling it
irrational the book is a rational okay
so Cohen stops right there and he says
well let's slow down let's ask ourselves
where do we get these
the way he asked this is how do we come
up with our normative theory normative
not meaning statistically normal normal
here but normative meaning the the
theory about of the standards to which
we should hold ourselves accountable
when we're reasoning so where does our
normative theory come from right and
then he makes use of an argument that
goes back to Plato and you can it goes
all the way through the Conte and it's
like well there's a there's a deep sense
in which reason has to be autonomous
let's say I believed that my standards
were given to me by some divine being
right in the sense that right it is
commanded of me there are some Moses of
rationality and the thee comes back or
she comes back with the commandments for
how was supposed to reason so if we
follow these just because we are
commanded to do so that is ultimately
not a rational act that is just to give
into authority to give in to fear and we
would be doing the same thing regardless
of what those standards were right if we
follow the standards because we
acknowledge that they're good and right
that means we already possess the
standards this is an old argument that
goes back to Plato it's in the Euthyphro
dialogue right we're right normativity
has to be really deeply autonomous if
something is only good because the gods
say it then the gods aren't good in
saying it look if God says to you do X
and X isn't independently good to do
then God's saying do X does not make God
good because it would only make God good
to say doing acts if doing X was
independently good and if we only do
something because we're commanded to do
it not because we independently accept
that it is the good or the right thing
to do
then we are also acting arbitrarily and
not acting in a good manner so right we
have to possess the standards this is an
argument right you know crucial and
conch rash reason is ultimately
autonomous not in the sense of people
misunderstand it that it's like a god or
that right it has right absolute for
it's that reason has to be the source of
the very norms that constitute and
govern reason because that's how reason
operates okay so we have to be the
standard there's another way of seeing
this odd implies can giving you two
separate arguments for this idea odd
implies can if I lay a standard upon you
you ought to do this then you have to be
able to do it it makes no sense to apply
a standard to you that you do not have
the competence to fulfill okay you ought
to always say what is only certain and
perfectly true and if you don't you are
failing you're immoral in some fashion
but that's of course impossible you
can't lay on anybody the obligation to
speak all and only what is true because
everybody has false beliefs most of our
beliefs are false and nobody can act
comprehensively according to standards
of certainty if I lay that standard on
you it's a mistake because you don't
have the competence to fulfill those
standards okay so and there's just so
much argument that converges on this
right that's point okay we are the
source of the standards
that's of course why you so readily
acquiesce in them but then of course you
should immediately say right but what
the experiments show is yes people
acknowledge the standard but they fail
to satisfy them
well then Cohen does something very
interesting he says well we have to be
careful people make two kinds of
mistakes right and what we have to do is
we have to make a distinction between
competence and performance so let me
give you an example this goes back to
Chomsky and we talked about it when we
talked about systemic error let's do it
again just to bring it back into the
argument okay competence is what you're
capable of doing performance is what
you've actually done you have a
competence that greatly exceeds what
you've got really don't you have a
competence to speak so many sentences
that you will never speak right right so
it is false that I have held my breath
underwater for 17 days while listening
to Beethoven's 5th Symphony with a
company of super-intelligent starfish
that since happens to be true by the way
the fact that I uttered it is bizarre I
probably would never have uttered it in
my life right so but you have the call I
have the competence to generate it and
you have the competence to understand it
so competence is what you're capable of
doing performance of what you actually
do now the thing is in between your
competence and your performance right
there are all the implementation
processes remember this so I have the
competence to speak English but I mean
if I'm extremely tired the
implementation process is did the
English in me doesn't it comes out
garbled why I start slurring my speech
or right perhaps if I was very drunk or
something now you don't think that when
I'm very drunk or very tired that I've
lost the competence you just think
rightly by the way that there's
something interference in too
with the implementation processes
alright but if I get in a car accident
and my brain is damaged and I I'm
slurring my speech all the time and you
go oh no John's lost English it's a
different thing
all right now Coen does something really
clever here he says how do we come up
with this well we have to be the source
of it and it has to be something that we
can hold ourselves to odd implies can
okay
so where do we come up with these
standards well what we do this is how we
come up with all of our normative
theories what we do is we look at our
performance and we try to subtract from
our performance all of the errors in it
that are due to implementation
implementation errors or as if they're
often called
performance errors errors and how I'm
implementing my competence and so what I
do is by this process of systematic
idealization I try to come up with an
account of what my competence looks like
completely free of performance errors so
why would I have to have in my head so
that I could reliably speak and
understand English
all the time in a perfect manner now of
course all the time I'm speaking because
of implementation processes there are
performance errors you times stammer I
sometimes stutter there's gaps I speak
elliptically notice they're just what I
okay those are performance errors and
you read through those right so what we
do is we take our performance we put it
through a process of idealization we try
and subtract all the performance errors
that come from the implementation and
then we get a purified account right of
our competence an idealized account in
that sense and then it sits purified of
distortion by performance errors and
then that is the standard to which we
hold ourselves that's how we come up
with a normative theory that shows how
we can be the source
and how we're alternately capable of it
but how we can have nevertheless a lot
of the time fail to meet it so what he
argues brilliantly but we're gonna see
there's going to be problems with it he
argues that all of the errors in these
experiments have to be performance
errors that all of the mistakes that
people are making are like the slips of
tongue that pervade my speech their
performance errors because why people
have to be the source of the standards
and they have to be able of meeting
those standards so we must have at the
level of our competence all of the
rational standards we must be at the
level of our competence rational beings
and the the only Mazzoli reason we're
making those mistakes is performance
errors which means that human beings are
not fundamentally irrational after all
they are rational now what I want to
show you next time is what's right about
that argument and what's deeply wrong
about that argument how Stanovich and
the work of Stanovich and rest right
reply to this argument in a really
brilliant way and what it's going to
show us again about the nature of human
rationality human rationality is much
more comprehensive than facility with
civility syllogistic logic right it is
the reliable and systematic overcoming
of self-deception and that right right
has to do with us not just right sort of
up sort of theoretically and that's it
has to do with us existentially and
therefore this notion of rationality
deeply overlaps with and I am going to
argue is a component of what it is to be
a wise person to be able to
systematically see through
self-deception and into reality in such
a way that like rationality with wisdom
we can actually afford meaning in life
thank you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you