welcome to meditating with John Revathi
I am a cognitive psychologist and a
cognitive scientist at the University of
Toronto I scientifically study the
phenomenon meditate meditation
mindfulness related phenomena like flow
insight mystical experience and wisdom
I've been practicing the posner
meditation medical inflation and Tai Chi
Chuan for 29 years and I've been
teaching professionally for over 20
years
oh sorry for close to 20 years so this
is a course if you're just joining us
for the first time I you're welcome to
stay with us but this is not just a
drop-in sit this is a progressive course
there are instructions for new
principles and skills every Mondays and
Thursdays Tuesdays Wednesdays Fridays
and Saturdays we just sit together and I
also do a Q&A at the end they're doing
the Q&A at the end of everything so if
you'd like you could go back and watch
day one and I believe it's day three and
you'll get the two things I've taught
already how to find your Center how to
find a route how to follow your breath
how to sense your attitude so that's all
there and it's recorded it's on this
online channel and my playlist
meditating I was riveting so today what
we're going to do is the following
I'll just mention that my manures is
still acting up and I appreciate all the
support you guys sent me yesterday so
I'm a little bit wobbly so I might at
some point need to just reach down and
touch just to stabilize again but I'll
try and be as quiet as possible
shouldn't have to disrupt things as as
much as I did last time so just a quick
reminder take some time
find your Center up to that find your
Center side-to-side and your head go to
each one of the four centers in front
Center and back to find your root each
place you're looking you're making
contact with any sense of tension
tightness
emotional tone and then you're listening
really sensitizing yourself to it and
you're loosening your relaxing doing
enhance the sensitivity while having a
sense of stability it flow which means
you're trying to just let it fill your
awareness expand out so that there's no
nothing else in your mind you're sort of
diving it's deeply into it as you
possibly can and then letting it go not
getting a mesh or attached to it and
then opening and melting your drain and
draining your attention and awareness
down so we do that face heart Dantan
contact area in the front back of the
skull between the shoulders opposite
solar plexus contact point in the back
Center the skull center of the chest
Center the abdomen Center the contact
point and each time sinking three feet
into the earth like the root of a tree
it's giving us a sense of enhanced
stability a sense of enhanced
connectedness and groundedness alright
so we're going to set the timer for 15
minutes make sure you're comfortable and
ready and let's now begin
you
you
you
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate what you cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition so what's it
feel like to be centered and rooted does
it feel like to be present in your mind
like this open your eyes and see if you
can continue that don't force it it'll
fade let it fade gently lazy in the
background so I hope that was a good sip
for you it's a challenging sip for me my
meters are still acting up but we'll
keep going together because we're all in
this together and I want to be there and
offer you the best I can
no matter what my health challenges are
right now let's turn and answer some of
the questions that have been asked and
then they get off my bench dislike and
reorient a little what's the name of the
tradition you were taught in so the
tradition I was taught in is called the
meditation tradition is called whip a
sauna shortly I will teach you a
contemplative practice called meta and I
was also taught a moving Chi kung Tai
Chi Chuan set of practices that are also
engaged mindfulness but within movement
with your honors open interacting with
your environment and that's why I
emphasize trying to make sure that
you're integrating what you're
cultivating with your eyes closed and
your sitted practice with your everyday
conscious and cognition because the
point is to be able to bring mindfulness
into a dynamic interaction with your
environment so that pass onna Matta
MT ta and Tai Chi Chuan could you
explain the difference between looking
and listening again so the difference
between looking and listening looking as
you're just trying to make contact and
you're also trying setting up the right
frame so let's say I'm doing my eye area
I want to make contact with any
tightness tension in the emotional tone
any sense of like imminent information
that wants to express itself so and I'm
not trying to make it better I'm not
trying to make things Pleasant so I'm
trying to make that contact with those
elements and then come into the right
framing of them I'm listening and what
I'm trying to do is like really
sensitize my attention like really focus
my attention sensitize my awareness so
that that is like dominating on my
awareness and then when I move into
letting flow because there's another
question about that when I'm doing when
I'm letting flow is I'm trying to right
I'm trying to go from it maybe be like
this area to sort of filling the whole
of my awareness is just there's nothing
in my awareness like that I let it
unfold I give it the full theater of my
mind in order to try and give it as much
space as possible to express itself if I
want to deepen my meditation practice
should I meditate longer or more often I
would recommend doing two sittings if
you want to deepen your practice first
one in the morning and then one in the
early evening not right before you want
to go to bed but if that's difficult for
you for scheduling reasons then it's
also a good idea to try sitting a little
bit longer now don't ramp it up a huge
amount if you're sitting for 15 minutes
right now and you're finding that that's
not much of a challenge add an extra
five so you you always want to get into
that what's called the zone of proximal
development where you have to push
yourself to stay in the practice you
have to push yourself again not that
endurance like we talked about yesterday
you don't want any endurance but you
want to be able to through I have to
challenge yourself and challenge your
skills we'll talk a lot more about
challenging your skills on Monday when
we talk about finding the flow Holly
from Hamilton says I'm finding that
during the rooting phase there are
emotional tones coming up given our
current output at times are these
distractions to label or sensations to
let flow and it take up more space so
initially let them flow as sensation
that's what I mean by emotional tone
right well while you're doing the
routing practice but when you get to the
let go then it's like what you do with
when you're labeling your distractions
you letting it go you're stepping back
from it and then you return it and then
what becomes the center of your
awareness your focus of your awareness
is that opening and melting and draining
as you're going down whether you're
sitting if emotional tone is coming up
emotions are coming up yes and we'll
talk
there's several times in the course but
emotions come up step back and label
like is it fearing worrying hoping
wondering and then return your attention
to the breath and drave here when I am
creating these tree roots it's four
points or five as in head chest belly
point of contact and three feet under
are the last supposed to be as one as a
line for example yes
so the points are here we do that whole
pattern of looking listening loosening
letting it flow and letting it go you do
four points here once you've done the
contact point it just drains down into
the earth and you're not sort of looking
and loosening and listening it's just
that sense of it growing right
stabilizing rooting nourishing okay so
you're right there's actually sort of
five points where you end up locating
your awareness but the fifth point
doesn't have that sort of loosening
letting go opening and melting it's just
the sinking the rooting into the earth
if I get distracted in the middle of
routing process should I continue with
that until I get through the whole thing
in a focused way this is from Shannon
Sheena or just let it go and move on to
focusing in my breath
know if you get distracted label the
distraction during the recruiting
process with an ing word between them to
where you were where you were in the
routing process and then take it up
again okay and that's that's not what
that happen to you your chair and you
sort of get distracted label the
distraction with an ING word who were
returning your attention to where you
were in the routing process and then
continue it on if my head starts to tilt
forward should I adjust my parks posture
back to root Center yes always routing
Center so for example right now for me
my Meniere's is constantly sort of
uprooting me because my vestibular organ
is being offset so that's what I'm
constantly readjusting right little
micro adjustments you should always like
now the thing you have to be careful of
the thing you have to be careful of is
again getting into that sort of quest
for the perfect center like you know
when you're off center
you get a very clear thing if you feel
like you've lost your Center do the
micro adjustments slightly adjust your
posture posture to get your center back
okay but be very careful not to get into
the endlessly questing' right now just
could it could just be a bit better
maybe a bit better right because that
that's basically your monkey mind
finding a place where it can chatter and
constantly shake you away from taking
with your practice so that's our time
for today
I want to thank you and I appreciate
your patience for working with me as I
try to teach you this I'm gonna keep
trying out various things cuz I want to
keep going on this because there's
there's a sense in which what I'm doing
right now out of all my work is really
the most pertinent to trying to give
people online aid to help them really
adaptively
deal with what's happening right now I
want to thank amar for all his wonderful
help and I would also ask you to please
subscribe to the channel to be notified
of any videos and perhaps you can check
out some of my related videos there's a
lot of discussion on my channel with a
lot of really really brilliant and deep
people about ways in which we can think
about how to respond to this situation
we're in and what it can mean for us and
what opportunities it affords a reminder
that we will not be doing this tomorrow
morning because it's Sunday and I don't
I try to do as little as I can on Sunday
we'll take this up again on Monday and
I'm looking forward to it because it's
gonna be a new lesson we're going to be
learning about how to find your flow
Jason couldn't be with us today he's not
available on Saturdays but he'll join us
again on Monday
so everybody remember continuity of
practice more important than quantity if
you can own honestly only sit for five
minutes that's what's happening to me
some time right now because in my many
years I can only sit for five minute
and I sit for five minutes okay but if
you can sit longer always try to sit
just a few minutes beyond what feels
comfortable and easy for you thank you
very much for your time and attention
keep meditating I'll see you on Monday
take care bye bye