[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we continued
looking through the myth of Suharto's
awakening and we talked about him
leaving the palace the having mode his
attempt to rediscover recover the being
mode and the difficulty he faced in
pursuing self-denial as passionately as
he pursued self-indulgence and why this
ultimately failed because it's still
working within the same operation of
trying to have a self and then we looked
at said artists commitment to the middle
path an attempt to overcome that through
the cultivation of mindfulness and then
we began our exploration of mindfulness
we first looked at what it meant sati
and remember it's this deep remembering
this recovering of the being mode that
leads to a fundamental transformation
and alleviates the the existential
anxiety and distress that Suharto was
experiencing and potentially is on offer
for us and then we started to take a
look at that the practice of mindfulness
and its attempt to address at least an
individual or personal experience of a
meaning crisis and we were doing that
because we were trying to investigate
more broadly the mindfulness revolution
and how that is response to the meaning
crisis within the West we began by
noting that the study of mindfulness is
misleading in some ways the scientific
study because it begins with a feature
list and as we've noted multiple times
feature lists leave out the I das the
structural functional organization in
order to do that we brought out four
sort of central characteristics in the
feature list being present not judging
insightfulness and reduced reactivity or
an increased equanimity and then we
noted that what we need to do is to make
distinctions between the types of
features between those that are states
that we can engage in actions we can
perform and traits we can cultivate once
we did
we opened up the possibility of asking
causal questions how can the practice of
being present for example produce the
trait of insightfulness and then we also
could ask constitutive questions what's
the relationship the part-whole
relationship for example between being
present and and not judging that being
said we then also noted that we have to
replace the language of training with
the language of explaining they operate
according to different principles and
for different goals and we began that by
starting to ask what does it mean to be
present and then we talked about
concentration and we talked about
different senses of that and the kind of
soft vigilance that's actually conducive
of insight discussed by Allen Langer and
others this kind of involvement is very
much about conforming to be interesting
deeply interested connected to the
structural functional organization of
something we noted that that took us
into a discussion of paying attention
and all the while remembering this idea
that we got from sitar ticket to Tama
the story about tuning getting the right
tuning optimization and we started to
talk about attention and I made the
argument that attention is not very well
served by the spotlight metaphor well
while that metaphor does give us the
idea of attention altering salience the
metaphor misses a lot of what attention
is doing we began to investigate what's
missing by making use of Christopher
malls idea that attention is not a
direct action you perform by walking but
it's something you do by modifying
something else by optimizing something
else that's why you can successfully pay
attention by doing many disparate and
different kinds of things you can pay
attention by optimizing your seeing into
looking by optimizing your hearing into
listening by optimizing your seeing and
listening into a coordinated tracking of
some what somebody is saying like you're
doing right now all of those are
different ways in which we're paying
attention so what we needed was an
understanding of
tension that could capture the way it's
an optimization strategy which lines up
with this tuning idea and how such
optimization might be linked to a
response to existential modal confusion
and the alleviation of the suffering
found therein so I want to continue that
discussion about attention and start to
point towards what might be going on if
you remember mol talks about this idea
of cognitive unison getting a bunch of
processes to share a goal to be
coordinated together in some fashion now
he leaves it abstract like that and I
think we should try and investigate a
little bit more further and more
concretely
what that might mean and there's a lot
of attention is one of the hottest areas
in cognitive science right now there's a
lot of good work done by frank woo by
special watts all Christopher Moore just
many people are talking about this and
I'm not pretending to canvass all of
that rich and very fertile and and very
like it's it's very creative its
advancing I'm not trying to do that I'm
trying to pick up on some key themes
here because what we want to understand
is how can mindfulness training so as to
cause more insight to make one more
disposition aliy capable of insight
because all after all and we've talked
about this before we're not talking when
we're talking bout with and we're not
talking about an individual insight
we're talking about a systematic set of
insights that are mutually related to a
fundamental transformation of the
person's as we said last time
existential mode so let's talk a little
bit more again about what's missing from
the model of attention so this cognitive
unison I think we can make use of
another important cognitive scientist
philosopher scientist who did work on
attention and that's Michael Polanyi and
he pointed out that attention has an
important structure and we've been
trying to follow the Platonic idea of
turning the feature list into features
EEMA picking up on structures and the
way in order to bring out what plainy is
talking about I'm gonna run through an
experiment with you and it's experiment
you can sort of follow along with me so
let me describe it to you first I need
you to get some object like a pencil or
a pen and we will call that your your
probe nothing untoward is meant by that
that's just what it's called in
psychology and it doesn't involve any
alien doing graphic things to your body
or anything like that so what we're
gonna do is let me describe it to you
first okay it's what I'm going to ask
you to do it's gonna ask you to find
some object that you could put it on a
desk in front of you or hold in your
hand and then you're gonna do the
following do not start yet because I
want to describe it to you I'm going I'm
going to ask you to tap on the object as
if you were blind and you're trying to
figure out what the object is its shape
its structure its weight its density oh
that's a cup right that that makes sense
now
it's important well you know you should
close your eyes you're doing this I'm
using touch because touch is slower than
sight and so you can become more aware
of what's happening now it's important
while you do this that you continue
tapping so I'm gonna ask you in a moment
to close your eyes start the tapping and
then while you're doing it
continue the tapping as you are
following my instructions and this will
give you a sense of what you're doing
okay so what I want you to do is close
your eyes that you start tapping on your
object right start tapping until you
start to form an image of the object in
your mind okay so your eyes are closed
you're starting to get an image of what
that object is in your mind okay so
right now you're aware like you're
focally aware what's what you're
focusing your awareness on is the object
I want you to keep tapping but I want
you to shift your awareness into your
probe feel how your pencil or your pen
is moving around shifting okay keep
topping and then I want you to shift
your awareness into your fingers and
feel how your fingers are moving around
shifting around okay some of you may be
able to pick up on the individual
feelings that are occurring in your
fingers now go back feel your fingers
and your thumb how they're moving now
feel how the probe is moving
and now allow the tapping to reveal the
object to you once again so I've done
this multiple multiple times with people
and what's interesting is the following
thing most people find this very readily
easy to do and a couple things when
you're initially tapping for example I
was aware of my cop but then my
awareness moves into my marker and then
my awareness moves into my finger and
when my awareness is in my finger I'm
not aware of the cop at all that I was
able to reverse it I go from being aware
of my fingers to being aware of the
probe to being aware of the cup using
what's all this about what's going on
well there's an important structure
let's take a look at it step by step so
here's the cup or whatever your object
was right and I'm tapping on it with my
probe okay
now here's the interesting thing it's
not like I was completely unaware of my
probe because I was completely unaware
of that I couldn't manipulate it but I
wasn't actually aware of it I was aware
through it I was aware through my probe
of the cop so I'm aware through this and
I'm aware of this so it's like my probe
is transparent to me and okay let me
give you an analogy right now where this
is opaque right here's the analogy and
think about and we talked about this
before but let's do it again and it's
just like my glasses are like my framing
right my glasses are transparent to me
in the sense that I'm looking through
them beyond them by means of them to
transparent to me but what I can do is I
can redirect my awareness so that I'm
now looking at my glasses rather than
through them so my glasses have now
become opaque to me so I can do a
transparency to opacity shift now what
does that ability to shift indicate well
this is this is part of polanyi's idea
here's my probe I'm aware through my
probe he has what I call a subsidiary or
an implicit awareness
because I'm aware through it I'm not
aware of it I'm aware through it right
of my focal object for example my cup
and this I have a focal awareness or an
explicit awareness now here's a point
which is really quite good right is that
attention is this kind of structuring
phenomena what it is it's always
attention as he says from - it's an
attention through subsidiary awareness
into focal awareness when I'm paying
attention I'm doing this but here's the
interesting thing I was then able to
step back and make this focal right and
now it's my fingers that I am aware I'm
aware through my fingers of my probe and
then I can even step back and be aware
of my feet of my feelings what some
people would call sensations so I can I
can keep stepping back and stepping back
so I'm looking at the cup through my
probe now I'm looking through my fingers
the probe and now I'm looking through my
feelings my fingers and of course the
whole time I was actually looking at the
cup I was doing all of that I was
looking through my feelings through my
fingers through my probe into the cup
you see the spotlight metaphor is
missing all of that layered recursive
dynamic structuring that's going on and
notice you can move in both directions
you can do a transparency opacity shift
in which I step back more and more into
my mind or I can go the opposite way
I can do an opacity to transparency
shift that's when you went the opposite
way that's when you go from looking at
your fingers to looking through your
fingers your probe and going from
looking at your probe to looking through
your probe to the cup and your attention
is doing that all the time flowing in
and out doing a transparency and opacity
shifting now
that's very important because that's an
important what you're seeing is how many
different processes are being
coordinated integrated together to
optimize and prioritize to use an
important term from Watson this
particular object or this particular
scene or situation so that's one way in
which attention is operating now for
reasons I'm not quite sure of I think it
has to do something with we're using a
visual metaphor and the way vision is
oriented in our bodies we tend to use an
in/out metaphor for this like that's why
I'm using stepping back and looking at
as opposed to like looking through
notice also something that's really
important for what we're gonna need this
when we talk about gnosis and
participatory knowing notice when I was
and if you'll allow me when I was
knowing the cup through the probe I'm
indwelling the probe right it's not like
I'm right I'm participating in how the
probe is being with respect to the cup
I'm sort of indwelling it I'm not
knowing the probe I'm knowing through
the probe I'm interested that I'm
actually right integrated with it and
threw it into the cup the way my vision
is integrated with the these glass
lenses so that I'm actually seeing
through them and by means of them and
the point about this and we've talked
about this before of course is this also
works not which is technology with Syco
technologies we talked about this with
second-order thinking you can so
integrate literacy for example into your
cognition that you don't look at
literacy very much you automatically
look through it I will come back to that
all right so this is right as I said
this seems to be people talk about this
metaphorically as moving in and out with
their awareness so one of the ways
attentions work is it moves in and out
you can right look through a lot of
processing deeply out into the world or
you can step back and look at a lot of
processing and with
draw towards the center of your mind
there's another important access upon
which your attention is working and I
can bring it out by a famous example
right so you give this to people and you
ask them to read it and they say what
does it say and they'll say the cat and
there and they're like oh yeah
right and then you point out to them
that they're reading this as an H and
they're reading this as an A and these
are exactly the same thing why are you
reading once one is an H and the other
is an A and so what they'll typically
say to you is well because it fits in
with this word as an H and it fits in
with this word as an A so let's use
language we've already developed the
letters are the features and the word is
the gestalt the overall structure now
notice here you've got a problem it's
almost you know a pseudo Zen problem in
order to read the words I must read each
individual letter but in order to
disambiguate each letter I must have
read the whole word therefore reading is
impossible now of course reading isn't
impossible which means something else
has to change what has to change is you
our model of attention the searchlight
metaphor the spotlight metaphor can't
address that problem here's the what
your attention is actually doing its
simultaneously going up from the
features to the gestalt the eye dose the
structural functional whole and it's
going down from the gestalt the words to
the individual letters the features its
simultaneously doing that your attention
is also doing this so not only is your
attention flowing in and out right doing
transparency opacity shifting it's also
flowing up and down between feature and
Gestalt your attention is doing all of
that is doing it right now
and the spotlight metaphor doesn't
capture any of that and mindfulness has
to do with making use of all of this
complex dynamical remember what
dynamical systems are dynamical process
saying these are dynamic self-organizing
processes and they can be optimized and
mindfulness optimizes them in some way
so I'm going to put something up on the
board it looks like a graph but it's not
a graph because it doesn't have absolute
position it's just it's just a schema
because it has relative position so when
I move this way like we were talking
about when we were talking about
polanyi's work I'm doing transparency to
opacity shifting and going this way is
to do transparency to opacity and to go
this way is to do opacity to
transparency it's not an app no position
is transparent and the other is opaque
it's always the direction that matters
more I move this way the more I'm
stepping back and looking at the more I
go this way the more I'm indwelling and
looking out into the world then we have
this I can be going down from the
gestalt to the features using the word
to decide the letters for example and I
can be going up from the features to the
gestalt nothing is inherently a feature
look the letters are a feature in the
word but the word is a feature in the
sentence nothing is absolutely a feature
it's always relative that's why I'm
putting these double arrows this isn't a
Cartesian graph okay this is not a
Cartesian graph this is a schema but one
thing you should know is that although I
can describe and you can understand
these two axes independently they're
almost always operating in a highly
dynamic integrated fashion very often as
I'm moving towards a gestalt grabbing a
bigger picture I'm using that bigger
pattern to look more deeply into the
world so often I'm doing this I'm
grabbing bigger patterns and I'm using
those deeper patterns to look deeper and
of the world right so when you find this
is what we do in science for example I
find this and this and this I get a
pattern and then I find a way to
integrate it together and then I use
that pattern to look more deeply in the
world this is what this is right I found
a pattern and it allows me to look more
deeply into the world I'm no longer
looking at these individual things force
mass and acceleration I've integrated
them together and that allows me to look
more deeply into the world often when
we're stepping back and looking at our
minds our awareness processes within
attention we're also often breaking up
Gestalt into features for example you
were breaking up your experience of your
whole finger into individual sections of
your finger when we were doing the
experiment you were breaking up the
whole of the cup into individual moments
of contact so very often where all these
two two come together let's call this
scaling up of attention and scaling down
of attention
so first of all let's map these on to
mindfulness practices to make clear why
we're doing this
so I teach my students of a Poisson uh
very traditional form of meditation
notice what the word meditation means it
actually means moving towards the center
so we know it's going to have this
aspect to it so what do you two well
typically you train people by telling
them to pay attention to their breath
right so first of all what they're doing
is paying attention not to the world
they're stepping back but they're not
really paying attention to the breath
what you tell them is the following
again language of explaining not the
language of training look at it when
much more fine-grain you tell them to
pay attention to the feelings and
sensations that are being generated in
their abdomen as they breathe so as they
inhale they're feeling sensations in
their abdomen and as they exhale and
what they're doing is trying to write do
that that like I did with my finger
they're trying to maintain and renew
their interest constantly make it
salient to themselves
now notice what's happening normally
write our embodied sensations I'm not
happy with that word for sort of
philosophically important reasons but I
don't have time to go into it right now
right normally we don't pay attention so
much to our sensations we pay attention
through our sensations to the world
right so normally I'm not paying
attention to my feelings I'm paying
attention through my feelings to the cup
when meditation I'm stepping back and
not looking through my sensations I'm
stepping back and looking at them right
that's like I don't look through the way
my mind is framing things I'm looking at
the framing I also do something else I
don't just look at it as one blob I do
something like observational analysis I
break the gestalt up into separate
experiences I'm doing this I am stepping
back and looking at and I'm breaking the
gestalt of my experience up into its
features it's atomic features
you'll allow me a metaphor that you
shouldn't push too far that's what you
do in meditation and we'll talk about
why would you do this why would that
matter and importantly our question is
why would that help cause the insight so
that's it meditation that's for passin
for example I also teach my students a
contemplative practice so the word
meditation means to move towards the
center and that fits perfectly with the
past and this kind of thing
contemplation now it bespeaks how how
overly simplified the West is in trying
to understand this in that these terms
are now treated as synonyms
contemplative practices meditative
practices it's all the same thing are
these just synonyms they're not synonyms
and paying attention to their etymology
will quickly reveal this first of all
the Latin etymology this look what's in
the center of this is temple it comes
from a temple which actually comes from
the Latin word for a part of the sky
that you look up to to see the signs
from the gods to contemplate is to look
up towards the divine this also goes
well and convergent with the Contin
Plataea the latin term was a translation
of this greek word theoria and the--
oriya also originally doesn't mean
generating a theory a theory is a
species of the-- oriya because what I do
with furia is I try to see more deeply
into reality to see meditation is moving
this way and contemplation is moving
that way
meditation emphasizes scaling down
contemplation emphasizes scaling up and
I was taught both in fact I was taught
three things in an integrated fashion I
was taught of a pasta a scaling down
strategy I was taught Metta a scaling up
strategy and you're scaling up with your
sense of identity by the way well
thought will come back to that later and
then I was taught Tai Chi Chuan
because
Chi Chuan is about moving right in and
out in and out flowing between these
inner and outer movements in a dynamic
and optimizing fashion white why teach
me all these things together because
it's actually a system of these psycho
technologies that will optimize your
cognition for insight okay so do you
remember we did the nine dot problem
right we talked about that remember the
fact that you can miss frame things so
let's do the nine dot
all nine dots with four straight lines
and people find it difficult why
remember we talked about this they
automatically listen to the words
remember they automatically and
unconsciously project a square there and
then they automatically take this to be
a connect the dot problems and so no non
dot turns are possible and therefore
they can't get the solution the solution
is here's four straight lines one two
three four the reason why people find
that so difficult is I have to break the
square and I have to not treat it as a
typical connect-the-dot problem I have
to not treat it categorically to use
language you've heard already because
you don't do non dot turns remember this
now notice there's two mu moments to
having an insight I have to break up an
inappropriate frame what do I have to do
I have to break up the gestalt right and
I also have to do Dymatize my cognition
I have to make it not operate
unconsciously and automatically well how
do I do that I take stuff that's
normally happening unconsciously and I
have to bring it back into consciousness
yes that makes sense how do I do that I
do that by doing a transparency opacity
shift normally I'm automatically sensing
through my probe but I can
shift my awareness and become aware of
my probe I can bring things back into
awareness so you de automatize cognition
by doing a transparency to opacity shift
so I break up the inappropriate frame
and ID automatize my cognition by
scaling down now interestingly enough
there is lots of work by Knoblauch and
other people showing that you can
improve people's ability to solve in
recite problems if you get them to do
what's called chunk decomposition and
constraint relaxation chunk
decomposition is just breaking up a
gestalt that's what chunk decomposition
means constraint relaxation is basically
de anima ties in your cognition de anima
ties in your cognition scaling down
helps you to break up the chunks break
up the gestalt
and it helps you to do damnit eyes your
cognition but is that enough for insight
it's not enough yes I have to break up
the inappropriate frame but I have to
make an alternative and better frame I
have to watch I have to widen widen my
feel of an awareness I have to take
stuff that was in the background and
change its relevance I have to look more
deeply for deeper broader patterns that
I have not considered before what do I
have to do in order to make a new frame
I have to scale up and we also have lots
of independent evidence having nothing
to do with mindfulness or meditation
that one of the ways you can improve
people's ability to be insightful is
that they get trained if they have
training or practice or are naturally
disposed to being able to scale up if
people can complete patterns in a kind
of leaping that cesium BC Benner and
Baker talked about right and other
people we can scale up in that way or
voi we take pictures that are out of
focus and refocus them and in mentally
so we can suddenly see what the picture
is
again and again and again when people
can scale up better they're better at
solving insight problems so both make
you better but there's a problem because
both also make you worse because if I if
I just scale up if I just maximize like
taking the string then of course I will
immediately project the square and then
unlocked well shouldn't I just scale
down just meditate always if I just keep
breaking up your stalls I'll never make
the solution I'll choke myself that's
what happens when people are choking you
get away like if your sparring with
somebody a way to get them off is to
compliment them that was a really good
like right hook you just threw because
then the person will start stepping back
and looking at it and they'll get all
screwed up because they'll break up the
ability to generate the gestalt so
notice what I'm saying cuz and stick
with me because this is really sort of
tricky this can improve your chances for
insight by breaking up a bad frame but
it can also mess up your problem-solving
by causing you to choke this can improve
your ability for insight by causing you
to make a better frame but this can also
cause you to leap into an inappropriate
frame and be locked in fixation so what
should you do you don't want the strings
too tight you don't want the strings too
loose and you don't want it just halfway
well what do you want to do is you want
to train people in both of these skills
and then train them to flow between them
it's called opponent processing so
they're pulling and pushing on each
other and so they're forced to
coordinate and constantly get the right
degree of attentional engagement that is
most dynamically fitted to the world
that's why the people who trained me
trained me in all these things that's
why you shouldn't equate mindfulness
just with meditation it's not so if you
pay attention for example to the
Eightfold Path you'll have people who
trained in meditative practices
contemplative practices practices in
which you flow between the opposites
until you learn like in a martial art to
get an apt and constantly adjusted
fitted miss the tensional fitted 'no stu
the world now this leads very naturally
into talking about mystical experiences
and the kinds of mystical experiences
that people can have within their
mindfulness practices but before I do
that let's gather
notice what we've said here we have an
understanding of mindfulness
what's mindfulness doing mindfulness is
basically teaching us how to appropriate
and train a flexibility of attentional
scaling so that we can intervene
effectively in how we are framing our
problems and increase the chances of
insight when insight is needed
notice that this didn't really what how
is being present making you more
insightful but I've given you a way of
understanding being present that works
when I'm scaling down I'm actually like
making my mind less representational
less inferential I'm doing all of this
work to become aware of and gain some
mastery over my processes of problem
framing and thereby training skills that
will make me more insightful
what happens if you were just to scale
down and practice scaling down and
scaling down and scaling down and
scaling down well you can actually get
to one kind of important mystical
experience so Foreman calls this and
it's well attested calls this the pure
consciousness event the PCE the pure
consciousness event it's a kind of
mystical experience you can have after
extensive mindfulness practice I've
experienced this let's do it so right
now I'm looking at the world and the
thing you're doing when you're
practicing meditation is you try and
step back and look at the lens of your
mind if you'll allow me and what happens
is it's hard to maintain because you
have such deep developed habits of
directing your attention back out
towards the world and you start thinking
but I've got to do my laundry God do
this and then what you have to do is you
have to bring your attention back again
you have to you have to do that yet the
recenter and step back and look at your
mind rather than automatically looking
through it and you keep practicing and
that's like that or and it's in it's
arduous but these are like doing reps
that's meditation meditation is that
you're building this ability to step
back and look at your mind and then what
happens is right remember how we went
back in layers we went into the probe
and then inter fingers and into the
sensations when I do this with people
it's often the people who have had some
mindfulness training that can step back
all the way into their sensations that's
not a coincidence so I stop I start now
I'm looking at my mind right and then I
start looking at the more subsidiary
layer layers of my mind the deeper
layers by which I was looking at the
upper layers and then I step back again
I step back again so now I'm just
looking at my consciousness and
eventually I step back and I'm not even
conscious of anything I'm not conscious
of this sensation I'm just conscious so
it's called the pure consciousness event
you're not conscious of anything you're
just fully present as a consciousness
you don't you're not aware of yourself
you're not looking through yourself
machinery you're not looking through
your
you're not even looking through your
mind you're just fully conscious the
pure consciousness event this is the
event that results from this what about
if you had a really real really scale up
well think about things that you might
have heard associated with the Buddhist
view I see I'm good to see everything is
interconnected and everything is flowing
impermanent I'm gonna create this
overarching Gestalt and the Gestalt is
going to be so overarching it's going to
include and encompass me I'm gonna
experience this resonant at one minute
and you already know what that's like
cuz we've already talked about it think
about that as just a super flow state in
which I'm deeply at one with everything
super flow state resonant at one minute
I don't use a tone mint because that has
a particular Christian meaning that I'm
not trying to invoke here at one mint
see this model of mindfulness explains
why people get into these kinds of
mystical experiences if they do a lot of
meditative practices they will get a
pure consciousness event if they do a
lot of contemplative practices they will
develop this empathetic participatory
flowing super flowing resonant at one
mint but remember what we want
ultimately is we want these two together
there's a third state and this is
actually the state that matters this is
called the state of non-duality so let
me try and explain to you a way in which
you can at least imagine you could get
into it it's a way of trained people
imagine that you're going to be cycling
scaling up and scaling down with your
breath so as you inhale you scale up and
you do that sort of resonant at one min
you're trying to write be it like
flowing at one minute with everything
and then as you exhale you're doing the
apostille you're trying to step back as
close as you can to the pure
consciousness event and you you
oscillate back and forth with the breath
and you often have to do that for years
but what can happen and there's other
ways of getting into this state this
isn't exclusive this is one way way I
was taught what can happen is you can
have the third kind of mystical
experience it's not the pure
consciousness event it's not resonant at
one mint it includes both and transcends
both it's both at the same time your
awareness is deeply to the depths of
your consciousness and deeply to the
depths of reality and it's completely at
one it's it's all at once
mm-hmm there's a progeny state
the state of non-duality this is a one
term for wisdom this is kind of mystical
experience now this is the state that's
actually thought for that non-duality
because this is the state that should
lead to a comprehensive capacity for
insight because you're not gonna have an
insight about nine dots and four
straight lines you're going to have an
insight into the fundamental the guts
the grammar of the agent arena
relationship you're pushing to the
ground of the agent and you're pushing
out to the circumference of the arena
and you're pushing that machinery to
optimize so that you can see in as
deeply integrated of fashion as possible
that connectedness between the two so
you have the capacity for an insight not
into this problem or that problem but in
an insight and into your existential
modes of being this is how you can
remember the being mode you can have a
fundamental insight into it now this is
in fact of course what's it hard to
experienced he'd been practicing the
pasta and the contemplative practice
called Matta very deeply very powerfully
and it looks like one of his great
innovations was to conjoin the two
together he often talks about them and
what happened was a radical
transformation he experienced
enlightenment we're going to talk about
what that might mean so after his
enlightenment after his awakening he's
walking down the road and people come up
to him and his visit has changed think
about what you think about when you are
watching when you see somebody and you
know they're in the flow state and
they're flowing
and you can that grace and that energy
and that the musicality of
intelligibility that's playing across
their face and their gestures and their
emotions and you can't you know most of
it you're only picking up implicitly but
you've got a sense what's going oh
that's so beautiful that's some graceful
that's so much power and there's that
there's a charismatic and and you just
cut up in it so these men are
approaching siddharta and he's filled
with that and so they say to him
are you a god think about what the
conditions have to be like where that's
a reasonable thing to ask of someone and
he answers very clearly no I'm not are
you some kind of angelic messenger or
being no I'm not
are you some kind of Prophet no I'm not
are you just a man no I'm not they're
frustrated what are you then I am awake
that's how he gets his title he moves
from talking about an identity he could
have to a fundamental way of being I am
awake he has fully deeply the depths I
try to indicate here sot he remembered
the being mode in a way that isn't an
insight about this or that problem but
is a fundamental insight into what it is
to be a human being a systematic set of
insights that optimizes your entire
being that triggers and empowers a
fundamental transformative experience so
as a cognitive scientist especially one
who studies the connections between
buddhism and cognitive science i become
very interested in
these kinds of experiences that people
have meet and I have colleagues and and
collaborators are also interested in
this why do people pursue altered states
of consciousness why is the mindfulness
revolution which is the pursuit of
altered states of consciousness so
powerful why are we going through the
psychedelic revolution right now because
unlike other therapeutic pharmaceuticals
psychedelics were work exactly by
bringing about an altered state of
consciousness why is this so powerfully
important why is it that we're not the
only creatures in fact that pursue
altered states of consciousness it looks
like the more intelligent the creature
is the more it will pursue altered
states of consciousness Caledonian crows
will tumble down rooftops in order to
make themselves dizzy which is a risky
thing to do but they do it because
they're enjoying the altered state of
consciousness why is it that these that
some of these altered states mystical
experiences certain types of psychedelic
experiences within a therapeutic context
we're going to talk about all of this
can bring about and afford such powerful
transformations
what is it that's going on there any
here's what's interesting sometimes
people will have a kind of altered state
of consciousness that in my mind it
recapitulates the axial revolution look
normally when you have an altered state
of consciousness let's pick up on Sid
Hart his metaphor awakening wakening up
that's in contrast to being asleep to
dreaming so what happens in your typical
state of altered state of consciousness
one that you experience every night
you're dreaming and when you're in the
dream state you think that that world is
real you interact with it is it real but
when you wake up you go oh ha that was
just a dream that wasn't real this is
real this normally when we come out of
an altered state of consciousness we
point at it the finger of rejection and
say that isn't real oh I was drunk
that's not real oh I was high that's not
real but sometimes people have certain
kinds of experiences altered states of
consciousness in which exactly the
opposite occurs they go into that state
and they come back and they say that was
more real that was really real and this
is less real do you see how that's axial
that's like weight that higher higher
why do we call it a higher state of
consciousness that higher state of
consciousness that I had access to the
real world and when I come back like
like somebody in Plato's cave I've come
back out of the sunlight this I now
realize is only echoes and shadows it's
less real in fact and because of my
desire to be in contact with what's real
I'm gonna change myself and I'm gonna
change my world to try and recapture
zappy
sati to remember what that's like I want
to live in greater contact with that
really real and so they start to
transform their whole lives and their
whole self the whole agent arena
relationship is completely and radically
radically revolutionarily restructured
this is known as quantum change Theory
bad name bad name
good theory people do this this is of
course very important for understanding
what happened to people like Sid Hara in
fact most of the world religions that
emerge at the axial revolution are
predicated on the idea that there are
higher states of consciousness that
should empower challenged and encouraged
us to engage in such quantum
transformation to go through these
radical transformative experiences it's
obviously at the core of Buddhism you
experience Sitara Satori right
you realize Shunyata it's at the core
right of Vedanta when I experienced
moksha and release it's at the core of
Taoism I realized the doubt so
how is it right that these experiences
have such authority but it's it's not
just that they're they're important
historically right there at the core of
the world religions right and you and
you say well what about the Western like
Sufism within Islam and the christian
mystic tradition and Kabbalah like all
of the with all of the world traditions
point to these higher states of
consciousness that can bring about these
radical modal transformations in our
cognition and our very being but it and
and that's that's that's that's
important enough but it like when you do
surveys if you look at some of the work
that's been done thirty to forty percent
of the population has experienced these
events and it's like flow across
cultures language groups socioeconomic
status gender pervasive and universal
not Universal in the sense that
everybody has it but Universal in the
sense that doesn't seem to be any type
class or order of human beings that is
not capable of experiencing it
so both qualitatively historically and
quantitatively scientifically it's like
this is an important phenomenon and
here's what's really important for our
purposes there's a deep connect emember
I said before there's a deep connection
between how often you flow and how
meaningful you find your life that is
also the more radically the case for
these states people who have experienced
these higher states of consciousness and
undergone these quantum changes these
deep transformational experiences
reliably importand there's good
experimental evidence to support it that
they have had a significant increase in
meaning in life in fact many people
report these experiences as the most
significant in their life and that a lot
of the meaning of their life is hinged
upon these transformations there are
deep connections between awakening and
recovering meaning
there are deep connections between
awakening and insight as I've already
indicated we'll come back to see there's
a deep continuity between this kind of
insight mystical experience and flue
full blow and awakening experience my
lab we've just finished running with my
associate
Anderson Todd my lab director lab
manager Jensen Kim all of my wonderful
Ras and they'll show up in the
acknowledgement we just have submitted a
paper because we ran an experiment we
did a massive MTurk survey trying to see
if there was a relationship between if
people have a mystical experience and
how meaningful they find that in their
lives and there is in fact a significant
relationship between mystical experience
and if you have meaning in life we did a
more fine-grained analysis and this is
consonant with the work of Samantha
heinzelman and others experimental work
showing that it's something like a
capacity for insight making sense which
is often called coherence in the
literature that seems to be what's doing
all the heavy lifting so it doesn't
really matter if you'll allow me so much
what the content of your mystical
experience is in fact very often there's
no content these they're ineffable but
what seems to be happening is you're
somehow optimizing your capacity for
making sense both inwardly and outwardly
it's like it's it's like what's
happening is some improved optimization
of this of an agog a and people find
that deeply meaningful so there is good
reason to believe and not I'm not
advocating Buddhism here because I've
already pointed out there are similar
claims in all of the mystical traditions
and I'm not claiming that those
traditions are all identical and not
Aldous Huxley but there seems to be some
deep truths here about the nature of
attention the nature of mindfulness and
the enhancement of the ability to enter
into
these higher states of consciousness
that can significantly alleviate
existential distress and bring about a
pervasive profound kind of optimization
of our insight and our capacity for
finding our lives meaningful and that
would be being able to do all of those
things right alleviate the existential
anxiety create a systemic kind of
insight a transformation of agents in an
arena that recovers the being mode
Ford's transformation I mean isn't that
the core of meaning and in the ability
to do it wouldn't that be the core of
wisdom so what I want to do is I want to
continue on and I want to explore this
what's going on with mystical
experiences what's going on with these
higher states of consciousness
why are psychedelics coming back into
the center of the cognitive science
investigation we've got to talk about
consciousness got to talk about altered
states of consciousness we've got to
talk about higher states of
consciousness and transformative
experience and what is the knowing
that's going on here because it's no
knowing of words there's no words
there's no content pure consciousness
event they're not conscious of anything
this is everything's the same it's just
there's the resonant at one min the
flowing what kind of knowing is it
that's what we're going to take a look
at next time thank you very much
[Music]
you
you
[Music]
you
you