hey everybody we are back it is Jack
Murphy and you are on the Jack Murphy
live podcast flagship podcast of the
liberal order and today I have a
wonderful guest very excited to talk
about this guy is truly world-class
leading expert in artificial
intelligence we had a very interesting
way that we came together and learning
about his new software and his work
ladies and gentlemen like to introduce
to you my new friend Nick Casas Matt is
how you doing buddy good Jack thanks for
having me on the show hey it's my
pleasure and Nick you know the main
thrust of these podcasts is that I
really want to just try to help guys get
a better understanding of the world
around them today and artificial
intelligence and and computer science
obviously very important issue for us
moving forward into the future my guys
in the limo Order are very focused on
the way technology impacts the way that
we organize community technology impacts
the way that we communicate we're all
very focused on the way technology
impacts our way to even learn and have
ideas or even an understanding of who we
are as humans and what tribes and our
social affiliations we have so this is
something that fits right in theme with
the the larger overarching themes of the
podcasts but it is gonna be probably a
little bit more technical a little
nerdier than usual which is fine with me
I love it and I know the audience is
willing to go for it too so and in
contrast ARAG Weinstein's patil portal
podcast where he says if anybody gets
left behind so be it forget them they
don't want to dumb anything down or go
into basics I think we're gonna take the
opposite approach here and while you are
and I'll have you explain your
background imminently qualified to
discuss the finest details of the
subject matter my goal here is to have a
conversation that is gonna be digestible
and useful and informative for for most
people who aren't experts but certainly
are bringing with them a fair amount of
intellectual firepower for understanding
and processing this stuff so with that
in mind let's just get started I mean we
were introduced through a mutual
associate a few months ago and I gotta
be honest when we set up to have a phone
call
I just had the phone call with you and
then after Hertz went back and started
researching your background and I'm glad
that I did that in that order because I
would have been a little nervous I think
to talk to you because you have a very
impressive background and pedigree maybe
you could just start off by sharing
people with people a little bit about
where he came from generally speaking
and you know what sort of brought you to
this point so that I mean that's a big
question but you know what I mean
sure sure I guess so briefly I was you
know coming up basically when the first
personal computer revolution when AI
actually had its you know a burst of
popularity at that time and I decided to
become an artificial intelligence
researcher I was a professor in the
field for about nine years where did you
where did you study
artificial enjoy what is that does that
a degree do you go to ecology be like I
want to get an artificial intelligence
degree you know it's a time no I I did
my undergrad at MIT in math just to gave
me a lot of flexibility to learn lots of
because think about artificial
intelligence is that it's you know if
you just study the AI stuff out of
computer science you're gonna be pretty
narrow if you but you should it really
touches on linguistics psychology
philosophy and so just the way things
were at at MIT it was best to do a math
major because that gave you the
flexibility to take a lot of these other
classes as well so did that then I
decided believe it or not that I wanted
to make computers learn and that's a
good place to start what does that mean
how do you and that's a question I
really have I hear this machine learning
I don't even know what it means what how
do you how do you make a computer learn
stuff right that's actually a really
good deep question actually because it's
you know what what people call machine
learning right now actually technically
it is learning I mean basically the
computer starts out being able to do
very little than I can do more so you
can call that learning I guess the
difference is the way machine learning
is done today mostly is it's really deep
down basically a lot of memorization and
pattern recognition so for example if
you want to have a computer learned
you know what phases look like for
example recognize faces and so forth you
just show it a billion faces and it
starts to sort of maybe get some
patterns so so that so that like the the
joke about the the CAPTCHA stuff being
us teaching computers how to you know
pick up you know stoplights and doors
and cars and stuff that that's not
actually a joke or you know maybe
they're using that system or but there's
really like just human manual
interaction to help teach the computer
what it is and then also back this up
for me a little bit my experience in
programming is with basic okay yeah good
and it was very simple you know line 10
and put this line 20 if then and like
the computer program it so it didn't
write anything or remember anything so
I'm confused about how you teach it does
it does it begin writing its own code
like what happens there yeah that's a
good question so it's funny by the way
basic was my first language too and
let's see so take the caption that's a
good example so even something simple
like recognizing letters and numbers and
so forth
basically it's hard to sort of describe
in a nutshell without getting technical
very technical but but its nutshell what
you do is you show it a bunch of letters
say if you want to recognize letters and
then it tries to figure out sort of
actually let me let me think of it but
let me think of an easier example let's
say you wanted to text strawberries
right because you and this is one of the
earlier problems and artificial
intelligence yeah you know back decades
ago because you want to sort
strawberries from something else right
because you have some automated sort of
an industrial process or agricultural
process you show it a bunch of pictures
of strawberries and so you know part of
the thing you get in a picture is what
colors do you see you see a lot of red
then there's a lot of other things I
like do you see a lot of curves because
strawberries are curved rather than
square and so forth so there's you get
sets of properties that you input to the
to the computer and then basically you
see tons of these things
and over time you say oh well you
no four and then you tell it well these
are strawberries these are not
strawberries and a person has to sort of
sit there and say this is a strawberry
that's not a strawberry
then the computer figures out well you
know jeez and 95% of the you know 99% of
the cases where there's a strawberry
there's it's red and it figures out well
you know basically the sound in the
background basically doesn't really
matter whether something is a strawberry
not fifty percent you know if they're so
basically it's through tons of data it
tries to figure out which features
correlate the most with whether
something is a strawberry or not or well
you know whatever you're trying to learn
so it's a classic way of doing machine
learning and the more slightly more
modern way is that there's slightly more
complicated techniques for figuring out
what those features are relevant which
aren't and but that's really that's
really what a huge amount of machine
learning is and it's it's really
everybody thinks there's a lot of really
magic going on where people are writing
over their own programs or people are
doing all kinds of computers are doing
all kinds of really smart things that's
really all they are they're glorified
tabulations of statistics that they use
to in a lot of cases make predictions
and classifications so am I getting this
right that like the power of artificial
intelligence is driven by human clicking
on certain things yeah actually that's
one of the biggest challenges and
expenses in a lot of machine learning
projects is getting the data without a
human annotates so yeah if you need a
hundred thousand faces they'll train a
trainer a face recognition system you
need to find a way to sort of label
those faces label the victors that
sounds like a severely limiting factor
it is yeah and there are startups their
whole startups that sort of try to help
someone automate that or make it cheaper
or like have banks of people who like
mechanical to I know if you're familiar
with Mechanical Turk it's it's this
Amazon process it's a it's an Amazon
sort of a subsidiary where they
literally have people that you can
outsource these kinds of processes to
and basically where you basically send
them a thousand pictures also news
thousand people over the world you pay
them $10 you know per hour or whatever
it is to label these pictures so it's a
real limiting factor both an expense in
time and so forth yeah there's some
really deep irony in that actually think
about it this this quest to create I
think what you call a human level
artificial intelligence involves in some
degrees the most manual of physical
human labor possible at this point oh
yeah that is true yeah it's like almost
like a sweat shot for a I've a sip like
yeah that is wild and so when when you
say that they learn stuff it is like the
file size of whatever this program is
this is it continuously growing as it
like learns and becomes a custom is it
writing and expanding itself like if you
sit there and watch it doodle and I'm a
layman I don't know any of the stuff to
do the lines of code increases the file
size get bigger or whatever as it begins
to learn more and more way to think
about it is think of a lot of these
systems is like you think of like a
wiring diagram in electronics and and so
usually these motor color models are
fairly are fairly they're fairly static
they don't change a lot so the wire you
don't add new wires I mean in some in
some advanced methods you do sometimes
but but generally what everybody's using
what you hear about you don't you
basically start with a bunch of wires
your diagram and basically all you
really are learning is for every wire
every in the diagram there's like a
number of you know how much current to
put through there
and so really all these things are
really doing is based on the data
adjusting the current those those
numbers on the wires yeah
interesting interesting all right so I'm
having visions I've watched Silicon
Valley I don't know if you've watched
that show a couple I have a couple of
friends who are actually in the heart of
the Beast and they say that this shows
pretty realistic and like the characters
are based on people in real life but I'm
just remembering this one episode where
one of the guys creates an app that's
supposed to be able to identify certain
foods or something but it turns out all
it can identify is hotdogs or sausages
because it's all based on on dick pics
or something like that I just this the I
can't get past this extreme irony of
that in order to create the most
advanced piece of technology we've ever
seen it's gonna involve people in
sweatshops just being like hot dog yes
hot dog no hot dog yes hot dog no added
up over how many instances over how many
times for how long
knowing the fal ability of human of
humans in general what are the odds you
think that we roll up massive human
error into this big project because I'm
just starting to see just from the
ground up all the way up it seems like
there's so many opportunities for
something really up to happen so
like for example in the limo order we've
got you guys who are in Silicon Valley
and we just did this thing loosely
called computer literacy but it was much
deeper than that but it was basically to
understand how computers work and one of
the big things I took away from it is
that a computer basically just just
gonna go from A to B you got a tougher
go from A to B and then makes a decision
it goes from B to C and it's just a just
a pathway of decision makings but like
we're telling it what decisions to make
there seems like so many opportunities
for human error and it seems like these
things will become compounded and
increase in scope and size and problems
I mean is that a fundamental issue that
you guys are dealing with or is that
something that's been solved already or
or what does that mean for the future I
mean I cannot get over how much human
involvement is they're trying to teach a
computer on how to be bigger better and
smarter than we are
yeah it's an issue I mean you know one
example would be sort of you know
Facebook Google these companies taught
you know they automatically filter out
sort of a lot of content under platforms
to detect hate speech for example would
be one example and in obscenities and
and and things like that
well I mean there are basically trained
to do that by people and people are
telling and the way that's done is you
give lots of examples of text and this
is hate that's not etc and so basically
you're building in the bias of the
person who's actually training it and so
so there's there's more talk about that
and in the field are people doing much
about it I don't know tell you the truth
because I don't know really
what you can do about it from sort of an
AI pointed from now growing point of
view it's tough because you you know is
you rely so heavily on these people
the best thing you can do is try to like
instruct the people in some way you have
to train two people to be better
trainers but it's it's a problem and
there's no real obvious solution hmm and
this is something people are working on
and it's like is this in the
literature's as I could known I mean I
didn't just discover yes I'm talking to
you in 12 minutes
oh it's something people talk about a
lot you know and basically I don't think
if you go like to an academic conference
on on AI you're gonna see a lot of sort
of methods for this but it's definitely
there's what people talk about it in
terms of in the blogosphere or socially
in social media and so forth and their
meetups about this but uh if people see
it as a problem in some ways it's a
little bit overhyped of a problem
sometimes basically the world is biased
and so basically so you it's not
surprising that AI would be a little
biased as well in some ways and so so
that's um it's a problem people are
starting to think about yeah and work on
I mean jumpin jumpin really far far far
down the line here ultimately when you
you know you use this phrase human level
artificial intelligence one day the
artificial intelligence they're going to
be human-like and that they're even take
with us our own human flaws that's a
good question so first off I do think it
is possible someday for computers to be
as smartest people I and but I think
like all the people right now saying
that's about to happen and we really
need to worry about that I think they're
kind of they're way off base that
basically the stuff that's happening in
AI right now is nowhere close to taking
us that level and and it seems like
there's a lot of new stuff happening in
AI but there really isn't what's really
happening is there's a lot of old stuff
that wasn't artificial intelligence that
is being rebranded as artificial
intelligence so like all these you know
you might remember or not five or ten
years ago there was a big lot of hype
about big data and you kept hearing
about that so all of that stuff now
is being called AI and so it's it's yeah
so it's really just a lot of rebranding
that even so even though the hype has
increased by say a thousand percent
literally the actual stuff in AI has an
increased by it by that much what do you
what do you attribute that to so for
example there's discussions I listen to
Peter Thiel somebody I think that you've
had experience with I've listened to him
talk about how there hasn't been any
advances in certain fields and he's very
troubled by that and in fact he's making
the argument that were in a period of
technological stagnation Erik Weinstein
has them come up again he's making sore
the same argument in physics and I think
that that's something that we're being
sort of misled by we feel like we're
living in this crazy age of innovation
because you get a new iPhone every year
and there's new fancy apps and updates
and stuff and all that's very
interesting but in terms of leaps and
bounds and huge significant legs up
you're saying that we the rate of
acceleration in the development doesn't
lead you to believe that we're gonna hit
you know this human level anytime soon
what do you attribute the pace of change
or innovation to within your field
could it be higher what's holding it
back what what's the current status
there I think there's a lot of stuff I
mean overall just generalizing just from
AI but to a lot of fields I think you
know if you look at what's happened in
science this is the first time in
history where you can make a good living
being a scientist and and so and I think
what's happened is to come
professionalize so if you up until I
don't know what the data is you know if
you look at like World War weinrobe war
two right right after World War two
there's a lot of science funding that
that I was was a science funding for the
first time started really being put into
the economy from from the government and
so up until then up until maybe the 50s
in the 60s even or the 70s it was just
something you did if you were nerd you
were earnest about it and the people it
was basically blunderers and science
were organizing themselves and so that
had some downsides but it had the upside
which is that you were actually doing
sort of fairly real science I
as it became more professionalized as
there was more money into it basically
it got taken over by based professionals
and a bad in a bad sense based so
basically the people running the field
or the people who are really good at
raising funding and the skills it takes
to raise funding are completely the
opposite skills that it takes to make
scientific innovation and so I think
that's part of it it's become
institutionalized so in most
institutions don't stay vital and
productive for decades and decades and
decades like this classic example of
that is if you look at the the Dow the
 the companies in the Dow index I
think maybe one or two or three I don't
know what the right number is or have
been there for though for the last
hundred years all the rest of them have
changed but if you look at sort of the
top a lot of top schools a lot of top
institutions they haven't changed in
decades and so so I think that's part of
it I think within artificial
intelligence I think there is this
almost religion on about this machine
learning and data and so forth where you
have to use all this data and you have
to you can't actually see and see all
these people doing machine learning is
are telling themselves well actually
we're not actually telling our computers
our computers are just using data to
sort of learn stuff we're not actually
programming the computers to do things
and so there's just and but in reality
what they're doing actually is having
people train the computers using the
data that that's our training but that's
sort of no hot dog yeah but that
religion basically is is basically I
think really a damper on AI because
that's really not how people think or
you know people don't need a billion
sort of examples of things to learn
almost anything is is that sentiment
widely accepted in your industry are you
sort of a renegade voice on that matter
or no it's pretty red acade yeah I mean
there's yeah yeah there's a lot of
that's how we like it around here yeah
yeah definitely
ok so what what is the what is the
orthodoxy that you're battling against
that stymieing innovation and from what
I've heard similar phrase
I've heard of de-risking de-risking of
the market rate that these people want
to maintain their funding in their
career they're called careerists and
other circumstances um what is the what
is the dog mother you're fighting
against as them as a renegade AI
professional and academic yeah there's a
couple things on the one when Dogma is
basically that you should be able to
measure everything very precisely and
quantitative quantitatively so if you
want to advance a new AI method the way
you do that is you show that it's better
than other AI methods on a data set
that's already been accepted so for
example let's say somebody there's a
recognized data set for recognizing
characters right CAPTCHA type stuff and
then the way you show your algorithm is
better is by doing just as well on that
but if you in and that's the game people
like to play that's all of science
basically all of engineering as well for
a lot most of it but the problem for
that if you wanna do something really
new that actually takes the the does
something much smarter than that then
and there's no data set for that that
other people are working on then
basically you really can't even prove
that what you're doing is good it's
really very difficult it's some sense
you're because the game is to like beat
other people and data that already
exists you're kind of that data is like
an anchor making you for work on really
boring sort of isolated problems so it
exists well give an example and and your
solution to that well you know my last
startup had a technology for
understanding natural language and and
so the problem was the natural language
understood was much more complicated
it's sort of than any other data than
any other software could understand and
so we really couldn't really measure it
against existing data sets so our
solution was just to build it and have
it work on real-world problems and and
hopefully that people would see the
value of it through that so that's
that's basically one solution but it's
it's brutal like and if you want to you
can do that once your technology is easy
enough to sort of good enough to get to
that level it's almost you know that
that's like step three step one and two
are actually doing a lot of basic
research and
in that period is very difficult because
no one really wants to support you or
hire you during that period right you
can be a professional scientist you just
can't do real professional scientist
scientists exactly well that is that is
yet another irony that we've uncovered
so you mentioned you mentioned your last
startup and I believe me I have a
billion questions but I want to put it I
want to put a narrative structure into
this as well - so you mentioned in your
last startup I think that I have a lot
of guys myself included or very
intrigued at this idea of what it means
to do a startup get it funded and bring
it to fruition and have it be something
worthwhile
what was your experience what was the
name of the company you know how where
did you get started tell us a little bit
about that would you sure sure yeah I
was a professor at the time and we had
developed some natural language
understanding technology and that just
means you know the human the computer
could understand English not sort of
basic you know so and you got to the
point where it was I thought it was
useful in the real world so I found that
a small little startup and I hired two
or three of my students total in total
and we built something it this was
before Amazon echo so this was this was
actually when people still didn't really
a I was really a hard sell was something
called the AI winter and this was really
hard yeah yeah yeah definitely it's a
huge burst of enthusiasm in AI in the
80s and then a lot of promises were made
there that weren't kept and so during
the 90s and a 2000's in the early 2010's
basically it was AI winter and that
meant that it was a really unpopular
thing to do people told me not to do AI
it's gonna be horrible for your career
and all kinds of things like that and so
it was brutal it was brutal and so we
but it was still it was difficult
explaining it to investors basically
people I'd show them you know a really
nice demo if we say something like I
don't know find me the last three emails
I got from Jack that had a PDF in them
and you know would go to Gmail and just
find those three emails right and and
the thing is people say why would I want
that you know I really had a lot of
trouble explaining why anybody would
want
but but ultimately we were we were
bought out by by Yahoo but but a year or
two later than the echo comes out and
that was really the first real and
natural language processing the really
first real success that we're actual
consumers wanted something because Siri
the first iterations of Siri you might
remember that back in 2012 ish no one
read it felt yeah terrible no one really
wanted to use it and it was the sort of
emphasize as a product for a while so
echo comes out changes the world
basically everybody wants to do way I
and things got easier but before that it
was tough doing a start-up you know I
woke my mind that that this idea of
working towards human level artificial
intelligence what's it is super exciting
or sexy filled in that there was a an AI
winter would what was that all about
what how did that come how was their AI
winter I had never even heard of this
yeah yeah back in the 80s for the most
part there were a lot of investment in
AI and this was mostly in the Northeast
mostly in Boston
probably emanating from MIT I would
guess a lot of it was and there's a lot
of money venture capitalists put into a
artificial intelligence there was a lot
of a hype in the press about it you can
go back and look at Time magazine covers
from the 80s and and it you you know and
you'll see basically that there are
stories that about robots taking over
the world and all the fears people have
now we're actually being sort of
expressed then and but basically almost
all of that all those companies failed
and almost all of that hype sort of came
to naught and so people said well you
know this was you know we just got taken
its overhyped and and and so for
literally 10 a lot of people got burned
financially and so for you know 20 ish
years 25 years whatever it was it was
really tough to no one really wanted the
fund AI and this was when actually even
within the field of artificial
intelligence the academic field went to
this machine learning stuff because
because before that people actually
tried to make computers that could
reason and think and because that didn't
turn out so well they said well well you
know let's let's forget that let's have
them learn
their own because we can't trust
researchers to make them think and so
what they called learning was this
really wrote fairly stupid sort of
data-driven kind of learning and that's
that sort of was the the failure of that
early part of AI led to this sort of
machine learning sort of sort of
takeover of the field and that'll happen
during that winter interesting and you
think it was the the Amazon echo Alexa
you think that was what got people back
sort of wind under the the sails here
for AI I mean it seems like a
interesting push-pull circumstance would
you find that another feel fields were
like a very basic consumer product is
actually gonna excite academic
development and research and development
in the field I guess so it makes people
feel like that there's a reason for
moving forward I suppose home that's a
good question you know I mean I'm sure
like back in a Sputnik for example that
wasn't a consumer product but it was
sort of you know something happening in
the world that that that basically
probably sort of affected how much stuff
was going on in academia run aerospace
and physics and so forth and you know
that like technology to what it to what
extent is the government involved in
making this stuff happen you know I had
an associate who worked for DARPA and I
was amazed to learn all the things that
they were working on to what extent is
the government right now actively
working and tried to push the field and
and fund specific projects and work in
that way that the DARPA net did spill
over into Internet here we are talking
over my laptop is there something like
that in the works right now with with
the feds and and various governments
around the world yeah I mean overall
from the from the 50s up until today the
the government's been funding AI
research I would say you know I don't
know the actual numbers but I would say
up until the last five or 10 years it's
probably been the majority of it and now
I get I don't know raw numbers but now
it seems like the center and they were
funding it through sort of academic they
were funding you know professors to do
and their students and their labs to do
AI research I guess more recently it
seems like the center of gravity
move more into sort of the googles and
the Facebook's and the large companies
of the world
so yet no government's been involved for
a long time in AI go ahead well you can
look at you could look at something like
that I mean like the cruise missile
right so you know it's basically a very
simple feedback mechanism like am I am I
going tomorrow to the ride too far to
the left right and it's sort of adjust
it seems very simple and basic now but
when that that went out with technology
was first sort of invented it was sort
of in his field of cybernetics which was
sort of this pre AI type site field so
there's a lot of things like another
example would be in the you probably had
a modem back in the day where 300 baud
maybe yeah there are it at the bottom
now at the top there you go yeah and you
remember that they had a hiss in the
beginning right and that was sort of
like there's a little bit of AI going on
in there just for calibrate itself
towards the acoustics of the the Y of
the telephone wire and so that had a
little bit of AI in it and so long story
short there's a lot of you know stuff
through history that has evolved some
some AI that's in a lot of it's been
funded by the government it's a fact fax
machine is that AI G's yeah yeah a
little bit yeah
I guess I will never look at the facts
again no smart little guy
what's your hissing I do remember man
300 I remember we went to 2,400 9600
these were heady times man when you had
in 9600 and a 486 PC man you were just
jamming along I remember that my first
computer was a PC junior and it had I
got upgraded to 640 kilobytes of memory
so that's like a fraction of a megabyte
and I had a disk drive just in memory
and I compiled all my programs in memory
and and boy I felt I've never felt more
satisfied in terms of computational
power I've never thought that that was
the only time in my life where I thought
I don't want more computational power
yeah right yeah back before we even knew
what was possible um what do you so I
it's interesting the AI seemed seems to
you said there was it the winter and
then there's been an uptick in activity
but now you're saying a lot of its just
reap
packaged other stuff sold his AI for
investors and to make people look good
and whatever but where where is the
cutting edge right now it's a good
question if you keep saying that after
my questions I'm gonna start to thinking
that I'm getting good at this
there you go there you go uh-huh there's
I would say basically if you look in
history of fields depends what you like
cutting edge if you mean basically
taking the existing stuff that's
happening right now and making it sort
of incrementally better then that's
happening everywhere you know that is
happening sort of in companies it's
happening in academia
if you mean you know where is the stuff
that's gonna take the next leap forward
that's that's a significant leap I think
that's hard to predict I think if you
those things then you know I don't know
they wouldn't be such giant leaps and so
I don't know if you know this this
paradigm stuff is new about TS Coon and
paradigmatic SCI there's a there's a
philosopher called TS Kuhn who did a
looked in the history of science and he
said there's normal science which is
what people do every day and then
there's paradigm added there's a
revolutionary science which is Einstein
and Newton who's like totally change up
people think of stuff and I think in
some ways AI
so the normal science and AI is
happening in academia and Industry and
some of its good the sort of
revolutionary step that we need to go to
the next level I think that's that that
always you can't predict that it always
comes out of left field yeah do you but
please know make your prediction sure do
you is it what's limiting is it like
human brain power or computational power
like what's the what's the road block
like it would I be right in assuming
that we could take like everything that
we have now if we had infinite energy
and infinite computational power to get
to where we want it to go or are we
still we don't know even how to do that
if we had infinite power and resources
we don't know how to do even that and
and because there used to be you know 10
20 years ago these things these books
you'd say well you know boy if we just
had 10 times more power they try to
compute how much compute power was in
the brain right and I'd say how long is
it before a computer can have that power
but now with things like Amazon Web
Services and Google cloud you know these
these these online places we can rent
servers you can you there's no excuse
anymore like anybody like for an hour
can rent that kind of power I can
there's it's relatively affordable for a
lot of companies and a lot of
universities to have a thousand giant
sort of superfast workstations going all
at once which is probably more power
which is at least more power than
anybody ever thought we would need for
AI so that's not the problem the the
problem is it's what is what you said
it's basically it's human brain that
somebody just needs to think of think of
think of how to do it I mean you know if
you look at Einsteins stuff for example
there were 20 30 years ago
he didn't there was nothing he did that
relied on new cutting-edge science it's
just it took you know all the data he
used all them importance or results for
decades they were known for a while it's
just somebody needed to just sit down
and think about it do you do you think
that we're in the weeds of evolution on
this matter so it seems slow but in
historical terms if you scan up and
you're like oh well then it happened in
1985 and then 2005 and then 2025 people
would be like oh that happened pretty
quickly or is it actually really
happening slowly and especially in this
age of seemingly ever-increasing
acceleration on all fronts all around us
all the time are we just stuck in the
weeds and it seems slow because watching
the paint dry socks or or in a
historical sense is it gonna actually be
something that took place quickly I
suppose on a cosmic timescale
that's a good question I guess if you
look at you know what was the distance
between Einstein and Newton right
because one way of looking at physics is
that you know I you know Newton had a
revolution and then Einstein sort of had
his next revolution I don't know was at
300 years I don't know it was centuries
let's put it that way and so in that
sense things aren't going any faster
than any slower than that I guess the
the difference is we're used to progress
in so many other things accelerating you
know and I don't think that the progress
and maybe basic science is quite
accelerated as fast
yeah I just wonder if there's something
systemic holding us back if if Peter
Thiel and Weinstein are talked
about physics and nuclear energy and
computing and whatnot that that is just
not we're just not making the huge leaps
and bounds I wonder if there's something
broader based that's that's limiting
limiting our progress in this field
which again on the cosmic timescale is
really happening in plant and I but for
us as impatient it's taking
forever I definitely think there's
something systemic I think honestly the
problem is paradoxically there's too
much funding for it there's too much
support for it because you you pile in a
lot of money and you just get a lot of
people who chase money rather than
actual people who are you know deep
scientists who are going to do this
stuff that changes the culture of
everything it's different people become
in charge of stuff it becomes impossible
and then people are chasing money for
short term there's all these short-term
sort of things you can make progress on
like like sorting strawberries but the
long term sort of goals no one really
cares about that so in a lot of ways the
money is a wet blanket it really
actually makes these worse yeah I think
about the times in my life where I've
made some of the biggest leaps and
bounds and it wasn't because I had
everything that I wanted yeah because
it's because I had none of the things
that I wanted or needed and I had to
make serious change is there anybody in
the industry right now who sees things
similarly to you that's working to
create a space where these wet blankets
aren't a problem and maybe give you the
freedom to think outside of the box a
little bit more than would be if you are
otherwise constrained by budgets and
reporting and grants and research and
that kind of stuff that's a good
question I mean I don't know
I know sort of individuals who have
similar views on on artificial
intelligence but is there anybody with
some institutional clout who's trying to
make this kind of a home for that not
that I know of I mean there are people
so a very common pattern is you'll get a
billionaire Steve Allen was one who
they'll fund and they I said it'll take
an AI Center and no they'll put a lot of
money in a fund any I Center but then
the first thing they do is they go out
and they hire someone who's sort of
already well recognized leader in the
field and really what they come and do
is they just come and you just really do
normal science they just show up they do
what everybody else is doing they do it
better than everybody else or better
than average but but but it but
their mo is that they just go get the
best person in the field they you know
who's recognized in the field and and
what you really want up doing just doing
more the same right in one of their
papers of yours that I've read which one
that you sent me as being for lay people
I pretty sure I got out of there that
one of the issues that you've raised is
that the scientific method isn't
appropriate for AI research did I get
that right if so could you expand on
that tell me what the flaw is because
although you know not everybody in the
audience may be a scientist but we all
learn the scientific method we
understand question hypothesis test fail
whatever move forward can you did I get
that right from your from your piece and
if so what is a new scientific method
model of research or exploration that
you see is necessary in your field yeah
no that is correct you know that like
you said the scientific method the sort
of the caricature of it is that
basically somebody forms a hypothesis
they have an experiment that tests the
hypothesis and they collect some data
and they you know and they see basically
whether that causes confirmed or not and
the way this sort of plays out on
artificial intelligence is that people
love to see you know scientific papers
that have nice charts with improvements
and numbers in them and so forth and so
you know getting back to the strawberry
sorter basically what I can do is I can
create a strawberry sorter and I can
show it as 75% accuracy and then I come
across try berry sorter and it has 78
percent accuracy and that's a huge
result
it makes my career and I spend the rest
of my life sort of getting students
using that method described just on the
we do oranges and and we push 78 percent
to 81 percent and and that's that's
intoxicating to sort of institutional
sort of normal engineers and scientists
because they constantly have some goal
they can measure it it seems kind of
objective and but at least this sort of
short-term sort of focus on
you know relatively incremental
irrelevant sort of gains and if you
really wanted to do something that say
couldn't sort of just sort strawberries
but actually say have a conversation
about you know what which strawberries
are better than others and how would you
make a strawberry milkshake or something
like this to be you know a little bit
you know eccentric about it
you couldn't even that that would be a
big project it would take several years
to do that and these other guys every
six months they're making a strawberry
sword or half a percent faster a half a
percent or half a percent more accurate
and so they're they're they look they're
looking productive because they're
looking like what scientists are
supposed to look like whereas you wind
up in a corner seem like you're just
some some loser basically users I really
do anything that that's really gonna
mount to anything so it's that that that
sort of that's really one of the main
earth at that sort of view of what
science is and and and it's sort of
confidence people get from like short
term metrics and incremental results I
do think is a major sort of impediment
to science that's a to to development in
AI and it would have been in physics too
by the way I mean basically Einstein
didn't do any experiments he didn't
really do collect a lot of fine-grained
data or anything like that he just did a
lot of deep thinking and so and came up
with revolutionary theories so so that's
basically I think why the scientific
method in a nutshell sort of hurts
things I think the solution in my mind
is what people ought to do is try to
actually build machines just to just
find little microcosms I call them so so
what would be an example of this and a
little example is like what if you could
build like a two-year-old somebody so
and if you think a two-year-old can
speak some very simple you know language
they can learn a lot they can solve
little problems and so forth and so
build a simulate a two-year-old and and
that's it that's much harder than
anybody thinks if but anyway
to pick little pick something that would
I call microcosm sort of something
that's a small example of what you
really want a two-year-old has a lot of
what we wanted an adult intelligence
just in it's sort of a seed forms and so
trying to trying to like projects like
that would be good and but then even
within that there's a lot of sort of
ways of screwing it up so you can say
alright building a two-year-old a lot of
people say well let's build a robot that
moves around in the world and basically
you can walk like a two-year-old and
they'll spend millions of dollars and on
sort of irrelevant details about exactly
how they walk and how you know building
a robot and so it's you really need to
be smart about what exactly about a
two-year-old is it that you that's sort
of different than sort of a two-year-old
sort of dog and try to build that out
and build a simulation that does that so
basically binds build simulated really
small intelligences and grow from there
and the other thing about the
two-year-old example is very common in
AI is to baled not in integrated systems
so what you'll do is you'll build a
strawberry sorter or you'll build
something that detects phases but if you
think of human sort of intelligence it's
super integrated so like in this
conversation for example right now I'm
recognizing you know your your your your
gestures your your your facial
expressions using my vision I'm
recognizing your voice using sort of
speech recognition and I'm gonna try to
understand what you're saying using
reasoning and memory and knowledge and
so forth and it's all happening
literally it's integrated set in a
sub-second sort of timeframe and so so
you look at the two-year-old
two-year-old can look and do all those
things and learn recognize faces and so
forth so that's the other thing I would
I would just don't just build
two-year-old sort of speech recognition
capability but actually build a
two-year-old I can understand speech
second that can um you know make plans I
could solve problems and they can
recognize sort of faces and do those all
at once that's something that's not
encouraged in the field that I would
encourage as well do you think that
that's a where's the best place for that
to happen to me as you're talking about
this this sounds like tenured
professorship academia yeah it sounds
like that might be the best place to
happen it sounds to me like the worst
place
that to happen would be place like Yahoo
or something for example like you ended
up at Yahoo after you sold your your
startup did you find that to be
intellect bash any company I generally
say in general that yeah it's tough to
do in main industry generally because
basically there's a lot of focus on on
immediately short term results right it
honestly there's a history if you take a
bunch of PhDs and you put them in a
corner say don't show me results for
five years they're not going to do
anything for five mean that's just human
human nature for years and six months in
they're like alright what are we really
doing here yeah yeah that that's human
nature which which again it just brings
me back to some of the original stuff
we're talking about it's like we are
humans building this thing that we want
to call human level artificial
intelligence I'm pretty damn sure it's
gonna look you might end up looking like
a human with all of its flaws I I put
out a question on a tweet I said hey I'm
talking to an AI expert what would you
ask one of the questions I get back was
very interesting actually it was do you
is there value in neuro a typical humans
and if so will they'll be value in neuro
a typical AI right like should we create
artificial intelligence that reflects
the span of our neuro capabilities and
we build should we build like autistic
artificial intelligence machines I mean
these are these are something like
fascinating questions actually yeah they
are and in some sense all artificial
intelligent machines today are autistic
they're really good at doing one thing
and nothing else so they're hyper
autistic but yeah and in relating back
to your first question about you know
about AI and are but not our biases but
it will it have our motivations and our
flaws and so forth
I think a couple of things there first
off the reason we have a lot of these
flies is because of evolution basically
that that right be basically you know
we're all here because our ancestors
sort of killed a genocide over the next
into the people in the next Valley right
all you know we're all you know we're
all really we're all
the Center for war criminals in some
sets and so you know there's no reason
why an AI if an AI is designed it
doesn't necessarily need to have those
problems so I worry much more about I
think it's possible to have a relative
to design a benign AI the more you know
the real threat to me is people in
charge of a eyes so you gotta have a
nuclear weapon that's benign it just
sits there all day it doesn't do
anything it's really the you're the
person bombing someone with it is the
problem right and so guns don't kill
people
exactly yeah it's people who and so it's
that same argument for AI doesn't
doesn't need to kill people it's people
who are gonna kill people using AI and
so that's that's that I did but um I
don't interrupt you here but like this
is one thing I kept coming back to as I
was reading your work was if we're
trying to model human level and
artificial intelligence and but I've
talked to so many evolutionary
psychologists recently that I'm
convinced that we're only adapted to
adapt right like the our brain exists so
that we can stay alive and reproduce and
if we imbue and artificial intelligence
with those same two characteristics of
staying alive and reproducing that
sounds terrifying to me right like I
don't want them to be human because
humans do things that aren't necessarily
morally right are economically right
seemingly irrational because all we
really are is finely tuned instruments
on how to adapt and how to continue to
exist is that I mean if we were to
create an actual human intelligence then
that it would be its goal - right to
just reproduce and to exist at all cost
basically I don't think you need to
actually I don't think that's necessary
I think you can create sort of something
that's super smart as smart as we are
can do a lot all the things we can do
but has no desire to kill people or has
no desire to to do anything bad we're
about to exist
even that I mean I don't I don't think I
mean they're plenty humans who who don't
have a desire to exist right I mean
everyday just a suicide right I mean I
mean it's kind of morbid but but uh but
uh no IIIi think that's the desire to
exist is like an outgrowth of our
evolution and I don't think it's
necessary I don't think it's necessary
is there a point in time in which to say
I stuff gets programmed and set up to
evolve on its own and if so would that
not be a circumstance in which it would
find its optimization in evolution
rather than its optimization towards a
specific goal definitely yeah I mean I'm
not saying I'm saying it's possible to
sort of make AI that's benign but you're
definitely right it's it's also possible
to breed a super sort of intense
competitive AI as well if you want yeah
and I guess the the risk is that not all
the actors in this marketplace are going
to be rational or have the same desired
outcome as people working in a science
lab or at MIT or whatever you know
acceleration is people want to see that
in the world Nile Nile is without the
Constitution for suicide but would
rather do mass homicide you know things
like that that that to me seems to be
like one of the more troubling issues
and I just keep thinking about if they
act like humans were we need them
to be better than humans we need them to
be simpler than humans and we need it to
be more constrained and and with a goal
of doing its goal rather than but again
I come back I hear this Paperclip
example you know like we for people who
don't know where you set up in an AI
whose job it is is to make the most
amount of paperclips possible and
instead of just like making the factory
run as well as it can is somehow figures
how to take over the whole world to make
as many paper clips as you possibly can
it seems like the opportunity for a
fuckup along those lines given how much
how inclined we are to make mistakes as
humans this is this seemed probable
probabilistic does it seem somewhat
inevitable perhaps that we would err
like just the actual error rather than a
I'm not a malicious one I agree yeah no
I'm not I totally agree that that it is
possible to have flaws like that and I
yeah so just because yeah definitely I
don't think computers just I don't think
there's anything inherent to sort of
being conscious or intelligent that
makes you malicious but I definitely do
believe that someone can make them be
malicious and that there are sort of
unintended consequences sometimes we're
like you said if you tell a computer hey
you know build the best paperclip
Factory then sure let me just kill all
of you know Louisiana and and you know
and make paper clips out of the raw
materials or something like that that's
definitely something that that's
something should worry about frankly
though I mean it's it's I mean I would
worry much more about that's not gonna
happen anytime soon in our field I mean
done nuclear proliferation of a bio
warfare those are much serious more
serious yeah risks yeah I was thinking
the bio stuff and and genetic stuff team
seems to be making progress enough that
those types of ethical and and you know
existential worries seem to be much more
relevant in those industries than here
where we can't even get the computer to
tell me if that's a stoplight or
not at this point so we're probably
still some time away from that I wanted
to just take a total detour and talk
about reality first sure so we're
creating these machines whose job it is
to observe reality around them right
where what does that tell us about this
reality itself like is the existence of
the computer and we get ten of them and
we all set them in the same room and
they're supposed to scan up the room and
tell us everything that's in there
whatnot are they all gonna see it all
the same way are they gonna see things
that we're not seeing it is there gonna
be a unified version of what reality is
because it's a machine deducing it from
us versus all of us with our own biases
and our own distractions and everything
that we carry with us what does it mean
for like our understanding of a concrete
objective reality we're like this pen in
my hand this is it this is all there is
to it but you know I can't see there's
like bacteria all over it whatever
like what are what are what are machines
gonna tell us about the nature of
reality that we don't already know yeah
that's a good question
I think a very simple first stab at that
which isn't so interesting but but but
sort of might be a decent example is
that in the earliest days of computer
vision you know making you know
computers recognize the environment
around them using light signals people
were shocked at basically what looks the
same that you and me from looks totally
different from from like if you look at
me from this angle but I know where no
one can see this but and then I turned
45 degrees or I changed it lighting a
little bit but people don't realize is
oh it looks are the same thing that
looked very similar to us if you
actually flew the computer are vastly
different little things like shadows and
shading and the hues of the light
shining on them are vastly different and
and it's just our brain sort of some can
cancel all that out and just see the
essential stuff and it makes him see
that be the same so that was one example
where the history of the field were
looking at something through the prism
of a computer made us see things that we
wouldn't have seen in our own and so and
see differences that we wouldn't have
seen on our own now the bigger so I
think I think actually again for someone
who's intellectually earnest not doesn't
have an agenda I think you know seeing
stuff through again through the prism of
a computer can really make you more
objective because computers are
objective I mean they don't they don't
have an agenda and and computers
basically are very dumb and and so they
they belabor everything and they make
you sort of realize what your
assumptions are so there's all kinds of
assumptions behind your conversation
here everything we say I'll give you
another very some example if I say
something like the Brady Bunch
so the Brady Bunch by the way is a
family of what it was eight or nine
people for those who don't like have any
good education of our culture are as old
as we are yeah exactly the uneducated
masses
basically you know the Brady Bunch went
for a ride in their Corolla right
tweedle crawl a small car and so if if
so if I just say that that's you're
gonna say hey wait
basically how's that possible the ten
people can fit into a Corolla right and
you'll instantly think of that like
literally in less than a second and so
if you think about that there's this
background knowledge about about sort of
people of their size the cars how they
do the physics of whether they can all
fit in something and we're able to sort
of Martin in in constantly in our
conversations we have all this
background knowledge and assumptions
that were sort of marshalling to sort of
make sense of what's going on and when
you try to make a computer understand a
sentence like that you find it actually
doesn't have any of that and in and it
makes you realize for the first time all
the assumptions you had and so I think
and and I think a predecessor of that
was the before computers you know making
proofs like in math and science and
logic was another example of that that
basically proofs our computer like in
their stupidity they're just steps one
step to the other I think when you try
to like see the world through that prism
it's limiting in some ways but in the
other ways it sort of brings up all of
these biases you had all these
assumptions you had and it's really
tremendous I think in terms of like
making you more enlightened to make you
more a sort of insightful about the
world so I think you know in that sense
AI and if you look at if you do it well
or do you do what sort of earnestly
could be great for people actually make
us understand the world better do you
think that do you think that that will
lead us to like do you think that
there's one common reality that we're
all miss observing or is there multitude
of realities that we're all experiencing
independently I think there's one
reality but there's different ways of
thinking about it and and so and
different so I what's a good example of
that is I can't think of a great example
off topic I had but you know you see
basically somebody sees somebody kid
fall over right maybe the parents sort
of see thinks of the pain the kids
having maybe a physicist thinks of like
you know the actual physics of it
and the gyroscopic forces and so quick
but so there's there's different sort of
aspects of realities from ways of
looking at the different models of
reality but I think deep down there
actually is something that we can sort
of there is a reality that that actually
is there that sort of our mental models
don't really affect in any way but it's
a lot of work to actually even like when
people are really smart and a really
earnest and they're really dedicated and
energetic about it it's hard enough to
sort of be right about that but then on
top of that you add sort of laziness and
and sort of agendas and sort of emotions
and so forth
it's hard to get at that it's hard to
actually be accurate about that and I
think yeah there is a proper use of sort
of not just computers but just generally
sort of more formal rigorous methods of
looking at the world that can help us
sort of get more on agreement on stuff
but it sort of depends on people sort of
having this sort of motive to see it I
think the problems with people having
different perspectives I don't think
they're driven I mean there is different
people can look at the world in
different ways and different backgrounds
and and and sort of different sort of
personalities and different sort of ways
of thinking can affect that but I think
95% the problems we have about sort of
people having different ways of looking
at the world aren't driven by anything
that's inherent it's driven by the fact
that people just are being sort of
distorted by their by their emotions and
by their agendas and so forth I think
that I think if you if you really put
people who are seriously legitimately
earnest they're not afraid of
confronting facts that that they're that
are scary to them or unpopular I think
and are willing to take conclusions to
where they lead and have the mental
energy intelligence to do that I think
you put all those people together and
are really earnest about it I think you
can get a lot more agreement I think the
problem is that almost nobody has all
those all those characteristics yeah I
was gonna ask you how can you help me
devise like a boot camp to get people up
to that level so that they can so that
they can't engage with these
conversations and that capacity very
tough right it's tough and you know I
mean I think that's that's the problem
so like everybody expects sort of you
know technology and in a classroom for
example to make hits
smarter that's not what it is to make
his learn better it's it's been it's uh
it's it's it's other things it's your
habits it's your it's our outlook it's
it's you can have a great education with
books and pen and paper it really but I
think that's the question I think that's
the what you just described if somebody
needs to figure that out and that would
be the thing is let's say somebody did
figure that out my question is who would
actually want that I don't I don't I
don't know how many people really you
say did you want to be rational do you
want to be insightful do you want to be
objective sure right but actually when
they see what that means how many people
would really want that another example
would be think of like let's say you
let's say you invented some class that
was really good at this and made kids
super enlightened rational objective
whatever you want to put it and then you
eat and you shut up shop next to sort of
an SAT prep course right like no one's
gonna take their kids to this thing
they're all gonna take their kids of the
SAT prep course so I'm not trying to
dump on the idea I think it's the most
important idea is the main I think I
really do I believe that I think it's
really one of the most important
problems in history and civilization
like not just now in the past and in the
future but that's the challenge it's
getting people to want it I think if
people want something it happens well
I'm not known for taking on easy tasks
so funny you should say that's something
that we've been really that that's like
one of the goals of the liminal order
actually is to is to how do you find how
do you create yourself to become in a
state in which you can pass you know
interpret information discern what's
valuable make a choice and a commitment
and embody your ideals as it relates to
that information and in my conversations
with guys like Jordan Greenhalgh who's
now going by Jordan Hall he's a you know
a tech guy turned philosopher who's
really thinking about this issue quite a
bit and and thinking about sense making
and cohesion national cohesion and you
know you combine that with the stories
and and the narratives and the power of
our shared imagined orders and whatnot
and you can see how social media has
really all that up and made
much much worse and that we don't have
we don't have Rosie it's the postman
you're fine
Rosie no my dog well maybe we'll add
that out later but maybe not so we have
a we've we've lost the shared narratives
that held us all together and social
media has really punctuated us and tueur
blasted us into a million pieces instead
of one single coherent unit and one of
the things that Jordans come up with and
I and and this is not brand new
information it's it's sort of ancient
wisdoms
you know his idea is that you have to
become the most finely tuned version of
yourself as possible right and so that
means making sure that you're physically
sound making sure that you're mentally
clear for me and for my guys that's for
like that's for like meditating and and
for effort through exercise and
community service and effort and then
and realizing that you have to be of
service and commitment to other people
and so if you start to stack these
things up it begins to create this sense
of personal sovereignty which is allows
you to sort of detach from some of the
chaos that's out there and detach from
the agendas and develop an earnestness
and a courage to address some of these
issues and have difficult conversations
and and to accept competing ideas and
and have people push back against you
and not take it personal and to and to
really just engage in the pursuit of of
intellectual progress and and dialogue
and that's what we're doing right now
and that's what we're doing you and I
are doing right now and that's what
we're doing in the luminal order and
that's what I hope for from all our
guests is to be able to sort of put some
that stuff aside and to really think
about it Menke Majan how much more
popular I would be if all I did all day
was throw out red meat and Trump this
and then and you know and just throw out
political sausage for people to fry I
mean that would be that would bore me to
death absolutely and so we're going for
nuance and we're going for actual
commitment and we're going for
embodiment and courage and being able to
think about some of these things with
courage I think is something that's
totally missing out there so when you
say the kids won't your parents won't
send you that school for you know SAT
they'll choose SAT over that I'm hoping
that guys as they start to mature in the
world and start to sense
that the mental models that they've been
given the ways that they're perceiving
the data the systems that they have they
realize that they're stale they're
outdated they're not returning the the
the positive or productive information
or data that you need and so we need to
update those mental models just like
you're saying you need to update sort of
the scientific method as it relates to
artificial intelligence research or at
least in trying to create bigger leaps
forward rather than this boring-ass
incremental strawberry efficiency
 which I'll never forget that
example from now on and so we're really
we're trying to get outside of that day
to day grind and so I appreciate
appreciate you coming on to talk about
some of these things I wanted to take
one more turn because this is something
that I have a personal interest in I
don't know anything about really but it
dovetails off of like computers being
able to process reality and to see like
is this pen here or whatever where are
you on and have you even considered
simulation Theory an idea that we may be
operating within some sort of simulation
that there's some supercomputer advanced
civilization far out in the future that
has turned us into little technological
slaves and ones and zeroes the Rick and
Morty scenario I mean some of it sounds
really far-fetched but then there's some
like actual fundamental arguments that
seeming are seemingly very convincing as
well too so I imagine you've given this
some thought I have and you know I mean
to me the question I think about a lot
of them I mean lots of other people do
is you know I mean why is there no sign
of life anywhere else and and lots of
theories about that you know we could be
the first we could be some experiment it
could be that actually this is some
transitory you know there's there's like
being like a dog and then there's
basically being sort of there's
something that happens after us that's
superhuman that's sort of non-physical
that we don't even know how to observe
right maybe we're in this I don't know
there's lots of theories but um I don't
know what I don't know what to make of
that I don't know what I can do about
that and yeah are we some simulation I
think it's possible I guess my edit and
I do again I think about these things
that but I then I wonder like what how
does it really affect me how can I
actually what can I do about it and it
was very
I can actually no it's just it is fun it
is yeah it's a night it's an it's a
that's what it is it's fun yeah it's
like watching a football game or
something like that it's a doll indulge
me for a minute oh don't use what you
want yeah but on the fun side of this I
mean okay so one of the fundamental
things that I heard that got me thinking
was like we're on a path however long
that path may take the computational
power and the energy within the universe
at some point should be sufficient
enough that they could create someone
could create a simulation that would be
rich enough to confuse the human mind
and if that we're on that path and that
path could take thousand years or 10,000
or hundred thousand years from now that
the odds of us being the first one on
that path are so impressively small that
problems speaking from probability that
we're not the first iteration to come
through here does that hold any weight
for you yeah I mean that's s5u as well
like it's almost inconceivable that were
the first ones I mean it's it's a real
puzzle to me and the only the only
theories I have or one is you know again
these aren't I think none of these are
really my idea but one is that there's
something like all civilizations just
inherently self-destruct right at some
level that's one theory the other theory
is that they all reach some form of
enlightenment where you know where the
thing to do is you sit around like
meditate in a cave all day and so they
which I don't believe either I don't
think that's really what's then the
other thing is I'm starting to feel that
way what is way movie being detached and
but the other way is you know maybe like
somehow like oh we are they all sort of
like upload our brains into some kind of
like ether of some sort that we don't
even really know about or it's like
we're looking for at the wrong sort of
spectrum of electromagnetic frequency to
see where people are so those are those
are all theories of what it could be
going on but yeah I don't know what else
to say it's it's just shocking to me
that there's no other signs of life
anywhere yeah that's the one that gets
me and you know you go through the Fermi
paradox and whatever but I mean it's
just so big there's so many places
there's so much possibility source
opportunity that you would think
statistically speaking it would be
probable for us to have at least
detected anything out there whatsoever
but it doesn't seem like there is I mean
have you heard we heard there's been
like credible you
for reports I mean I haven't done too
much into that is that anything that you
you pay attention to at all you know
like as an amusement I guess I guess it
seems like probably some airforce secret
Air Force project is probably a better
explanation for a lot of those things I
think one other thing to think about
actually just think about our own
history as humans is that that um you
know basically technology really I mean
are sort of modern industrial
technological sort of society it
happened once and involved once and and
there were and people had happen sort of
in Western Europe and and is really
where it started and people don't really
realize this but a lot of people don't
but really Western Europe is like a
backwater right like basically from a
history no civilization started a lot of
other elsewhere and so there is this
sort of thing and even human industry
where there's plenty of precedent of
people having the mental capability to
sort of do everything we're doing now
but they haven't many other cults from
there the time to do what they the
resources to do it
so then you have to ask yourself maybe
there's really something maybe it's more
rare than it looks right but but any
other hand you know again there's
another billion sort of stars out there
whatever it is and planets not there so
that yeah but anyway that's the other
theories that there's really something
magically rare about what we're doing
that that it's more rare than we would
take it would be well and that's that's
where I'm starting to come down the more
I think about the math and the science
and the just nature of infinity it and
space and everything that's out there it
really did it seems to me and I was
raised half Jewish half Catholic but I
left all that in childhood I've not been
a practicing religious person as an
adult but I gotta say that the more I
learn about stuff the more I am inclined
to take a to receive an answer that is
like beyond science something super
special oh there's a word that I'm
mystical or something there's a word
that I'm missing here yeah but it seems
to me there's so many questions upon
questions upon questions and you take
down deeper deeper deeper and there's
still just more questions it gets just
more complicated and whatnot
and it seems to me you know I don't know
I become more and more open to accepting
the presence of some sort of
supernatural something or other you know
I'm not ready to put a face on it or
anything but it does seem to me that it
would it would answer a lot of questions
and I think that that is basically been
the primary goal over time really you
know we're not the first generation of
humans to wake up and look up at the sky
and be like I wonder what's out there
we've all had these we've all had these
questions and we've all felt the urge to
have them answered and so having an
answer that worked as a blanket answer
for things I think I can really see the
productive value and that muscle
starting to see the sort of emotional
spiritual value and that as well too
which is why some of these conversations
about reality perception and reality
simulation stuff creating a new human
mind out of VO sand and glass and heat
and whatever all these things are tied
together yeah which makes it so
absolutely fascinating such an
interesting field I know you said you
entered AI in the wintertime or whatever
but it seems like you're in the end of
really fascinating exciting realm of our
existence today I mean what what brings
it all together quite like that
it's very pretty fascinating to me it is
yeah I mean a question for you is have
you noticed that um again my V so there
are these deep questions why are we here
what caused everything and and I
remember when I was my first you know
you go to college there's a bunch of
other kids thinking about the same
things I get a sense now I don't mean
young kids now both when I was a
professor but also sort of just in
normal life now I don't get a sense that
they're asking the same questions I mean
I almost feel like like the curiosity
about the deeper questions is actually
waned I don't know if that's you found
that as well or not I mean one theory is
there's so much to social media just
constant simulation you don't even have
time to think about these things that
you're just it's like a brave new world
or something like that where your cost
like so your constant cap so occupy you
never think about the deep questions
yeah there's definitely information
overload and there there's new religion
now too though so there's new moral
codes and new religions that are
secular secular religions that have
popped up that are driving our
institutions in our education system
that don't even make space for those
kinds of conversations I think maybe the
lack of a questioning in that regard
could come from feeling like you already
have the answer and the answer is zero
blank dark nothing nihilistic totally
spiritualist just total random
matter and a random place in a ragam
time and there's no answer that's
interesting actually yeah that basically
that that we're becoming sort of almost
like this there's almost like this
doctrine it's being imposed on everybody
it's just not what it used to be and it
doesn't really have really space for
these kinds of questions and yeah
because it could it's presented as that
is the answer right right yeah here's
the answer and they did and they I think
from what my senses on campus and
talking to people studying curricula and
things is that it's not presented in a
way that kruta invites exploration
either especially there's the new
secular religions intersectionality
critical theory things like that these
things are being presented as just fact
question asked question answered just
move forward we have to be activists we
have to take care we have to make change
there's no there's no question for that
type of you know I'm gonna say
navel-gazing that's pejorative so you
know just dreaming imagining I mean dude
how much time did I spend just like
sticking poking a stick in the mud when
I was a kid yeah oh I'm just playing and
just where does your mind go and the
things you think about I mean
daydreaming used to be something that
they people look down on daydreaming but
man daydreaming is where I get most of
my good work done you know it's like I
can be totally lost in my own head and
and working even though it looks like
I'm just kind of staring off into space
and we don't
I mean I'm as a victim of this today as
anybody I that phone that phone is
 got me I'm like a heroin junkie
a iphone and I have to set really strict
parameters in its usage and day time and
and limits and stuff because I I can't
get deep work done when I have to when
I'm like doing social media and it's
part of my job and I love it I love
doing it but it just it starts a cascade
of thought and action
ward that that is really hard to break
out of you know if I start off my
morning doing social media and I have
some tweets like take off then I can
lose another two hours just watching
like thousands of notifications come in
when really all I wanted to do is set
off a couple of tweets and then get back
to writing or reading or prepping for an
interview or something so like for me
personally as an adult I've had to find
ways to create space in order to allow
my mind to go and as a writer luckily I
have a system for that too you know and
as I write people say you got to think
before you write I know no man I write
so I can think and that's when I start
to see things come together but I don't
see us really like creating those spaces
for our children and for our youth today
and and it's it's this transition period
you and I are approximately the same age
you can see yourself Gen X oh yeah
exactly yeah Gen X okay so we're part of
this transition time where we're all
making these mistakes you know like here
give your kid a phone when
they're 10 no it's probably a pretty bad
idea or a number of different mistakes
is like how to manage your privacy
online or how to just not be an idiot on
social media these are all things I had
no idea stuff I was doing I was 14
online was still gonna be out there
today
yeah so we're learning through trial and
error through humans which is and what
you wait a bummer and what you said
about sort of like your kid he had time
to just poke a stick in the mud and you
can't do that anymore and you have a se
out here in Silicon Valley you see all
these parents taking their kids they go
to these world-class schools and then
afterwards they go to these tutoring
centers and and so these kids are so
over program and they're constantly
scheduled although I'm not the first
person to say this but basically that's
all they're doing and they're being
turning the end it's good in some ways
but it's also making them fragile in
other ways and and they don't actually
think well and they don't even have time
to think for themselves and so I think
it's a scary thing where you get sort of
this elite we're breeding we're
basically it's super sort of intense and
concentrated and focused in certain ways
but also completely sort of incapable of
thinking about or having curiosity about
sort of what they're doing and why
they're doing it and it's not really a
sauna
so it's not a really good experimental
thing no it's not and we're beginning to
see those first kind of those people
raised like that in professional
industry now so like journalism for
example you know how many journalists
are between ages of 25 and 35 and who
grew up in this whole same environment
where you don't have any moment to
reflect you're taking everything at
everything is given as Dogma you really
aren't being critical you've had no time
to self explore other than those like
four weeks you took and in Spain after
your study abroad semester or whatever
drinking with other kids from Australia
that doesn't really count and so we're
seeing I think sort of that my op myopic
yeah I'm thinking in journalism and then
into our discourse and then it just
that's why in my book I called the
college campuses ground ground zero
patient zero because that's where that's
where it's all starting and then it just
Criss crosses the country infiltrates
our institutions and then the
institutions these days seem to be
bending to adopt to the needs of the new
people rather than the old days like
forcing the new entrants to adopt to the
institutional standards and norms which
I think is also very troubling
in fact I hadn't put this together now
but yeah the the cult of the child which
has evolved over the last few decades
here where the parents put the needs and
wants of the children first reads an
institutional structure an organization
in which the leadership of those
organizations are gonna want to put
those the needs of those child's and new
entrants first to and then there begin
to lose track of what their mission was
what their shareholder you know
responsibilities are it cetera and so
everybody gets distracted and though
you've got the kids sort of running the
insane asylum even though we rose them
raised them to be crazy in the first
place man
there's a lot in there but I'm doing my
best to not have that happen with my
kids I mean we have family dinner every
night
and they I cannot get the kids away from
the table they sit there no devices know
anything they sit there they ask
questions we probe we talk about all
kinds of and now my daughter's in
high school or following the election
and stuff and she's been a hurt her job
in her AP government her job was to
represent mayor Pete in her class
discussions every week and so it's been
really fun to see her process all that
stuff I can't wait to talk to her
tonight about what happened in Iowa last
night because you know we'll release
this in a week or two but last night
there was crazy who knows what's gonna
even come out of the Iowa caucus they
don't have any results 24 hours later at
this point but um it's been an hour and
20 minutes and I wanted to just wrap up
with a couple of other things I could
really rap about this with you for
forever this is very fascinating you're
a very interesting guy and I really
appreciate you coming on to talk to me
what I know that you you started your
company you sold to Yahoo you work for
them for a little bit you wouldn't work
for Samsung I believe for a little bit
as well as right and then and now you've
transitioned into something new once you
tell us about that - they sent its
you're able I'm very interested yeah
sure absolutely thanks for asking you
know the overall you know but there's
just expression software's eating the
world and what that really means is that
the entire economy the into all of
society at some level is being fueled by
software depends on software so you know
example be you know the taxi industry
now is like uber and so there's software
underlying that may or beam be sort of
in the hospitality industry and I could
go on everything at dating new even dog
walking I didn't think of that but I
believe it really it really is sued you
can there's an app now where wherever
you are if you're a dog walker you just
pull it up and there's like five people
within 50 feet of you that need their
dog walked Wow just go and you walk the
dog and they GPS tracks the walk that
you did you take a picture and you
upload it and you don't ever meet the
people but you know it's dog walking on
demand thank you very much Fitbit leash
somebody yeah oh you know what yeah
that's actually a really good idea yeah
I'm surprised it hasn't happened already
so that's a good Kickstarter project but
but but um so software's taking over the
world and and it's the software's
required everywhere but really the
supply of software developers is limited
that
that you know you contrary to what
people say everybody just can't learn
the code actually it's a very sort of
small amount of people who are really
good at being able to become good good
coders and so what you see is that
there's a shortage of programmers the
salaries are going super high which is
good if you're a programmer but what it
means is for most projects is that they
can't happen because the software for
what they want to do is actually doesn't
exist and we talked about that a little
bit in sort of relationship a liminal
order but it's everywhere
and so so or company and so one other -
wait that's one other way of talking
about it is if you follow with economics
at all or the stock market historically
when the price of oil or energy goes up
the economy does poorly because
basically profits go down because the
cost of making everything sort of
increases and because there's no profit
there's no investment new things don't
happen it's horrible
I think software's like that - that
basically basically the fact that
software smokes is to produce is a huge
sort of wet blanket on the entire human
progress literally so our startups goal
is to make software orders of magnitude
easier to produce and so we have a
technology that makes does that it for a
certain array of software we we can make
it a thousand times easier to produce
and and that's nice for the reasons I
just described but I also think it's
nice for maybe some of the things that
that you know your community's
interested in as well which is that if
you look at a lot of the dysfunction on
the web today I think a lot of it is
driven by this so you know you have four
or five platforms that are really
controlling the vast majority what
people see or think and and and and
attend to and and the reason you have
that to some extent a lot of reasons but
one of them is is that it's so expensive
to create these platforms that no one
can create an alternative that if you're
unhappy with how sort of Facebook or
Twitter or anybody's doing stuff to
create your own version of these things
is super expensive and and so if you can
make software virtually free to create
then you could have alternatives to a
lot of these things and
and everything will and I think in a lot
of ways there'll be a lot more diversity
and sort of in our tech platforms a lot
more be more customized what people want
that's sort of driven by top-down and I
think that the final angle on this is
that software super expensive to produce
you know literally Facebook and Google
spend billions of dollars on developers
but at the same time people want it to
be free and so the way you the way you
reconcile that is you charge for
advertising and that sort of gives you
an economic incentive to to sort of
hoard data and control people's data and
and limit their experience a certain way
so you can serve ads on their software
so basically the so again a lot of
things that we don't really think of
having to do with sort of economics or
or programming skills or programming
development actually our problems that
at least part of their cause is how
expensive it is to create software so
that's in a nutshell what we're doing I
guess short term I mean we're trying to
build sort of people have your own
social network or your own you know
collaboration type software you want to
create let us know or reach out to us
we're happy to sort of see if you if we
can help you in some way and that's it's
called dry IO dried out IO that's right
and you just search for that you'll find
us send so button so what you're saying
is that the high cost of software
development is basically a drag on human
development at this point in time right
exactly yeah
and it's enabled huge monopolies to take
over our communication platforms or
create and then control them collect
data on us sell it to the highest bidder
and use us basically in pawns for both
their political agendas and in their
money-making agendas and whatnot so
basically we feel like we're free but
we're also kind of trapped and and you
in part attribute that to the high cost
this was basically like a huge high
barrier to entry in this market so that
it keeps people out and allows these
companies to make whatever decisions
they want to make everybody can just
scream and cry about it me for example I
got banned I got banned from Twitter for
using the word
retard which I also then laughably saw
in your piece you use the word retard
but you use it in exactly the same way I
used it which is to say that it was like
limiting function and their limiting
factor in this person's development now
or in this case software development and
I got banned for 12 hours from that so I
know that I'm like so precariously at
the mercy yeah they could just on a whim
I mean I'm already on shadow bandless I
can already see and feel the algorithmic
soar manipulation
there's also manual manipulation that
goes on within Twitter we know that to
be true
and so you know I'm constantly battling
an uphill uphill mix my metaphors uphill
wind in my face you know tailwhip I
don't know
I'm definitely father dealing with
issues and and so I'm sort of at their
mercy but what you're saying is you have
devised and I would love to know a
little bit more of the how on this
because it sounds like like a fantasy
right like how were you able to create a
system that can help people create an
array of software you say that is going
to they're gonna be able to build it and
customize it and play it at a much
faster rate one that would be on par of
taking did you give me this example
before but of taking the price of oil
from ten thousand down to ten dollars
and would really pump up all of our
outcomes here like a do I haven't that
right and be how do you how do you do
that sorry yeah that's correct that's
correct
so there's two ways of thinking about
how we do it I mean sort of one is a
very high-level way of thinking about it
but uh you know you could look at sort
of what does a computer programmer do
right they basically have a normal
person who's not a programmer say you
know I want my software to do XYZ and
they say that say in English right a
natural human language and then there's
the computer which you know has a
computer language where you need to tell
it to do stuff and so what really what
the programmer does in some sense is
translate from human language to
computer language and it turns out
that's something that sort of you and I
can talk about I can describe an app for
you in ten minutes it would take that
same app it took to actually implement
that up in a computer
can take literally tens or hundreds of
thousands of pages of code it can take
literally person months of effort to do
and so if you could automate that
translation process then you can make
programming faster and so that's not
we're not there yet that would be the
ideal I just talked to the I just talked
for 10 minutes and suddenly my software
is created but we've done is we've
created sort of a way of describing
software that's sort of a lot simpler
closer about humans think of software
than how computers think of software
that lets you sort of describe your
software very simply and that actually
and we have a way of converting that
into actually running software and that
makes things faster I think that the
last part that's that's the secret sauce
we have a way of converting that into
ways that machines can understand does
this does this draw I presumably on you
know the work that you've started at MIT
and then worked on that where were you
at Rensselaer or things right and then
is this is this part of your career
trajectory or is this a off branch is
this a u-turn what is this now it's part
of my career trajectory I guess I
developed this theory called the
cognitive substrate and the basic idea
there is if if you look at you know what
we evolved say 50 or 200,000 years ago
as humans right that's when we the last
sort of major step in human evolution
where we came Homo sapiens sapiens there
hasn't been much that's changed since
then evolution is much slower than that
so we have and if you look at what we
were doing 200,000 years ago we were
basically running around being you know
manipulating the physical world
organizing in small groups and our
brains evolved for that so our brains
are not evolved to think about
Parliament's or elections or stock
markets or option prices or all the
things we think of our computers or
anything that we think of most of
anything we think about now so whatever
so all these sort of billions of things
people think about now really must be
sort of running on machinery that was
built for a small number of things that
we cared about one or two hundred
thousand years ago and so figuring out
what's that core sort of operating
system or what's the core sort of
substrate
mechanisms that sort of enable
everything else to sort of happen is
sort of what my whole career has been
about sort of identifying what the score
is and then implementing it and so in
the sense what we're doing right now is
identifying that core for computer
programming for software and sort of
finding a way to implement that so
people can leverage that to sort of
write their own software okay let me
make it a little bit more concrete
so look yeah to find for me one of my
questions I had pleased to find
cognitive substrate I think that's I
would I would like that and then you
know any other further example that you
have I mean you explained it very well
it's just it's a profound thought you've
been working on this for your career I'm
trying to process it right now school so
work with me absolutely so so you know
you 200,000 years ago you're you're
wherever people have evolved to 1,000
years ago and you know what are you
doing let's say when you're a big part
of your brain say was a fall for
tracking some animal because you're
hunting it right and so that involves
having really good capabilities for you
know cause this sort of sort of memory
of where something was for being able to
predict where it's going to be in you
know the next minute it involves
basically being able to recognize
objects and separate them from their
background it involves some knowledge of
time like if this happened before that
it involves cause and effect like if I I
don't know if I if I hit something with
a spear it's gonna it's gonna select
fall down and therefore I could eat it
so there are these primitive mechanisms
cause and effect time categorizations
and other ones so categorizing where
things are what things are and how they
behave and so there are all those sort
of mental mechanisms we have for those
things and I'd say there's 10 or 20 of
those whatever they are and the the
trick is those evolved just for those
narrow circumstances but whatever we do
now to think about stock options or
Parliament's or or whatever are using
just those same 10 mechanisms
I'm great okay yeah I got that okay so
we're we're woefully ill-equipped to
deal with the complexity of the world
around us today yeah yeah and the other
way of looking at is we kind of like
stuff the world we have around us into
that sort of paradigm so one example is
this like here's a here's an example
like let's say I'm on a bank or some
sort and I'm taking money and I'm giving
it from company a to Company B right so
I'm taking you know let's say GM is
paying who makes tires I forget
Firestone exactly they're paying
Firestone save a hundred million dollars
to buy some money well it turns out that
in our so we think of that money is
moving from point A to point B and we
use the same part even though that money
really is just all electronically might
even be it's nowhere it's like in the
cloud somewhere it's it's in some
database somewhere the way we think
about it in our head is like X moving
from physical location it's like moving
sort of a basketball from court a to
court B right it's that we so that's we
use those kinds of same mechanisms to to
to think about sort of more abstract
things that's yeah and now and how is
that applying to your work here with dry
eye oh sure so so it turns out that
there's like five or ten things that you
could look at and say those are core
processes that happen in all software so
one simple example would be
categorization so if you think of for
example email you had folders and email
right so you that it's really or that's
really a way of categorizing your emails
right if you look at something like
slack you know which is a chat a channel
a chat system I know you guys use
something else but you know but I think
most people are familiar with slack
basically there's channels and you can
look at channels is another way of just
categorizing you know it's categorizing
your messages if I have a channel on in
my in my ski club and I have a channel
on skis another channel on slopes or
something like that I you know that
they're categorizing your messages if
you look at something like folders in
sort of your operating system on your
computer
those are ways of categorizing files so
this notion of
at aghori a folder shows up actually
everywhere and in all and almost all
kinds of in done self-driving cars but
but it's like huge amount of software we
get this notion of categorization and
shows up in different ways another
example of that is search right so you
could look at basically your email inbox
is just sort of sort of like a search
result for showing me like you know show
me all my emails sorted by time right
you could look at your facebook stream
as sort of another search result like
show me all Facebook posts posted by my
friends sorted by time said and I could
go on about other piece of software like
that so there's these core ideas like
search categorization and there's a
handful of other ones like that that
actually underlie all of software
another one is permissioning so back in
nature you know a big thing is who who
who controlled what fruit who was
married to whom you know who was mating
with whom and who controlled what piece
of land so in data and software that
kind of access is an important thing
that happens a lot too so email for
example Facebook's like another good
example so classically in facebook you
can see a message you have access to it
basically if you posted it or if a
friend of you're supposed to it in
Twitter anybody could see any message at
least on a private on a public feed in
an email you can see a message only if
you sent it your asunder a receiver in
and slack you can see a message only if
you remember the channel it was in so
there's these sort of I can describe
them in one or two sentences these sort
of what I would call permission rules
and it turns out to implement them takes
can take hundreds of thousands of pages
of code but I can describe them one or
two sentences and @na it in the apply to
all software so so basically it turns
out if a if I if I if I if you give me
sort of your data model like what what
objects do you care about you give me
permission rules you give me some some
views of how you want to see it then a
small number of things like that are
enough to characterize what all software
does so yeah but are you are you let's
say today if you want to develop
you know Product X it takes $100,000 are
you taking like 99 thousand dollars
worth of work and just doing it all your
damn self and making and having your
client do a thousand a thousand dollars
worth of work or are you actually making
it so that you only have to do a
thousand dollars worth of work and the
client only has to do a thousand dollars
worth of work and all of a sudden it
only costs two thousand seven hundred
thousand do you do you understand are
you just taking on more responsibilities
on the front end or are whereas the
total amount of Labor is still the same
or is your year process you're actually
reducing the amount of Labor required
overall yeah the amount of labor is
reduced overall absolutely the name so
the name of our company is a dried out I
oh and and dry stands for don't repeat
yourself which is a very common sort of
expression for programmers and it turns
out that everybody is always rebuilding
the same things
so this permissions stuff everybody's
building their own version of it the
search stuff the the folder stuff and so
it you know is so it'd be great if you
could just build it into one platform
and everybody could use it the reason
that hasn't happened so far is because
it's different for everybody
and so adapting it to everybody's
specific needs has been no one's really
know how to do that sort of quickly it
we found a way to do it quickly
oh that's that sounds like the very
important part that's the part you
should probably keep under lock and key
and that's a sounds really fascinating
to me based on everything that we've
talked about I mean if we could reduce
some of the barriers to entry into these
markets reduce the friction involved in
trying to get something new produced
reduce the the inter platform headaches
and nonsense that I have to deal with
sometimes I could see how that would
open up greater efficiencies for more
communication and more innovation hella
could even open up greater avenues for
empathy and human understanding for
other people so personally from the
perspective of the liminal order that
sounds all very super interesting to us
and I can't wait to see how you guys
move along like where would you consider
you got yourselves in the in the process
in terms of creating a new
company we have a prototype and we're
gradually in the position now we're on a
cusp of moving if to something from a
prototype to something people can use so
we're starting to look for early users
basically early people who have a
community say like yours who might want
to use develop special software for it
and and you know very common use cases
would be you have your own social
network you want to build your own sort
of messaging platform your own forums so
anything like that we're happy to sort
of talk to people and sort of make them
test cases so build something for them
and use them to make this offer better
yeah well I would very much like for a
limo order to be a test case I know
we've talked about that and I look
forward to having an opportunity to
explore there anybody else who might be
interested reach out to Nick it dry dot
IO and Nick thank you so very much for
all of this it's been wonderful
conversation I know I learned a ton and
and I hope and I know that the rest of
the guys in the audience are definitely
going to appreciate this conversation as
well understanding the world today is
very complicated but understanding
computing and technology and artificial
intelligence is certainly one of the the
areas in which you have to have at least
some basic understanding to see what's
going on around you and why and what the
roadblocks and and bottlenecks are and
implications are for the future and
whatnot so thank you very much for
taking the time to come on I really
sincerely appreciate it and you know
hopefully we can have a chance to do
this again sometime soon
is there any place in particular where
the guys like are you present on social
media or do you have any sort of contact
out there besides dry i/o or is that
like the best place to get you yeah try
to find me on LinkedIn that's honestly a
place you've just directly message to be
there you can um you could follow us at
yeah try I oh that's that's or honestly
I don't even know where my twitter
handle is it's truth right now we use it
so frigging frequently I think I'll
stick it in the show I'd appreciate that
Thanks
yeah
no problem at all but the website is
definitely dry dot IO yeah and you can
look up Nick on LinkedIn as well too but
again thank you so much I really
appreciate it look forward to talking to
you some more and you know man thanks a
lot and let's do it again
likewise Jack this has been a lot of fun
I appreciate it