[Music]
what is the essential difference between
discernment and judgment let's take a
judgement first because it's the easiest
in the most familiar it's judgment is
the the capacity that we learn in school
it's the ability to remember information
in some schema and to be able to very
effectively and quickly recognize when
some portion that information some
pattern is given to us and then select
the right piece from that schema to
express back out right so a very simple
example would be if you see four times
four to be able to recognize that and
then say eight and that's judgment par
excellence sorry four plus four is eight
yes you've noticed that my capacity for
judgment has been declining rapidly and
judgment is is is the both trained by
school because judgment is the skill set
that we want to need in something like
the blue church it simply wants to need
in any kind of game a structure when it
reaches maturity because it's designed
to be able to execute on this
computational causal function right
button 1 or button to watch the light
it's green button one that's judgment
good judgment now of course sometimes we
might think that like I'm saying it very
simply to make it simple to understand
but of course it might be a very big
problem all right you may have to be
making a judgment around sailing a sail
sailing ship has a lot of stuff going on
and you have to actually make a very
specific quick judgment on what the turn
left or turn right but the point is that
you're still doing a form of holding in
your head in thought in memory a large
space of all the right kinds of choices
to make and then looking for the right
pattern and trying to figure out what is
that telling me about where to apply the
choice making structure most importantly
the choice making structure is
preconceived it's sort of there I could
necessarily write it down in a manual
that's judgment judgment being able to
search and go and by the way
Ã¡i does judgment really well so there's
no future in judgment which is an
interesting side product discernment is
what we're doing when we're encountering
true novelty that's what we're doing
were we were investigating mystery as
mystery it's the capacity that we use
when we're trying for example to do art
it's slow it doesn't have any
pre-existing structure to it it's
exactly about not having pre consisting
structure you're coming into true
mystery true novelty it is dominated not
by the quality of like the visual cortex
thinking but by the subtle quality of
feeling of not even isn't something able
to name it just yet
but it has a lot of richness to it and
when it comes out it's very clear it's
very strong because you can stand behind
it is that feeling of gut reaction and
the kind of thing we're trying to build
is this notion of a decentralized
collective intelligence and the fact
that we're trying to figure out how to
truly be in relationship with complexity
and wean ourselves off of an addiction
to complicated instruments to manage our
complexity means that it's the capacity
that we need to be using when we're
engaging into Surma what ends up
happening is as I'm relating to
everything as open new novel possible
complex but I've built the capacity to
be able to perceive it and to be able to
make sense of it it's how we make sense
of it really and then what comes out of
me if I can then express it has a
quality of surprising clear truth what
comes to me a cut is a couple of things
one is this phrase yes and that is often
associated with integral theory but and
the other is in how that also relates to
operating for example in in Improv
Theater Improv Theater is always based
around yes and so when someone comes up
with a
with a scenario the one rule in Improv
Theater is that you never say no it's
it's something else
till someone says okay we're on our
we're on a spaceship you go yeah we're
on a spaceship and it's driven by a
penguin and and and yes and and yes and
yeah as soon as you say no in on a
spaceship or on a fire engine that kills
the scene almost stone dead yeah yeah
this is really good you can think what's
happening there right because to say no
means that you have some preconceived
notion of what right is as you're
actually implying some schema that is
telling you a right choice must be and
so the end this isn't it all right now
of course you might also you may be
seeing yes inside a schema but the
saying no is evidence that you're in a
you're in a schema so it's kind of a
nice prophylactic way of avoiding
getting caught there's not foolproof but
it's nice but then if you like to think
about the example like what does yes
feel like when you actually say it
because the in Improv Theater the the
challenge in real-time
my actions you're really in flow is to
express something that feels right in
fact everyone there's a feeling of
rightness to it it feels right and it
lands and people have for they flow
they're uplifted is a levity to it and
is creative right pure creativity so
when you're trying to do creativity
we're trying to do collaboration with
other people in flow and so this is
discernment is that tool it's the
ability to kind of feel a wholeness and
to be able to actually sense from that
wholeness what in fact is precisely the
right thing right now
how does discernment relate to
sovereignty okay so there's a simple way
to begin so let's just begin very simply
and I think it actually unfroze quite
nicely sovereignty is a capacity to make
a choice in response to what's happening
such that your capacity in the next
moment is at least as good at making a
choice so it's a way of being in
relationship with your environment where
you are constantly able to continue to
be able to respond to what's happening
just sovereignty in sort of a very
practical sense now what's underneath
that
well there's a bunch of different things
that are inside that so when I'm doing
this notion I'm actually saying that
sovereignty has a certain sphere to me I
feel that it is a space of volume and
what I mean by that is that sovereignty
is always contextual if I happen to be a
good skateboarder for example and
there's a hill at say a two degree grade
you might say that I am sovereign in
that context which means that I can
continue to be on the skateboard such
that the next moment I can continue to
be on the skateboard such - the next
moment I can continue to be on the
skateboard right if the grade becomes
much steeper it's beyond my capacity as
a skateboarder then I it's the point is
moves out of my sovereignty and I'm now
in a situation where I'm going to become
destabilized I will fall off the
skateboard I'm no longer able to respond
to my circumstances so now of course
when I say sphere what I mean is this
sort of infinitely dimensional I can be
sovereign its regard to all possible
things and each point is in or out so
that's one element nurse is a certain
embodied capacity to be able to respond
to the circumstances that you find
yourself in so as to be equally or
better position to respond to the
circumstances you find yourself in next
now what we can do is we can actually
now go meta and by the way this med is
still included in the concept because if
you think about what I just said things
like learning are a fundamental capacity
because learning is about being able to
increase my capacity to be able to
respond to my environment so if I can
find a way to make it so that when I'm
encountering experience experiences
coming at me that the way that I respond
to that experience not only allows me to
still be well positioned with regard to
the experience but also to grow which is
to say to learn then that's even more
sovereign that's increasing the size of
my sphere and so sovereignty is
simultaneously a sort of state of where
you are in relationship to what's
happening but also a disposition of how
you relate to the possibility of what
could happen to be able to increase your
capacity to grow as a consequence of the
relationships with reality that you
happen to be
and I think there's actually a third
point which is we might call meta meta
which is to take a perspective on being
in the world which is able to be aware
of the difference between making
conscious choices and having unconscious
reactions and to be able to choose to
orient yourself so as to more and more
be in this place so at the top
sovereignty is fundamentally that choice
the choice to orient yourself more and
more towards more and more being able to
make conscious choices about how you're
going to respond to reality and less and
less being relegated to making
unconscious reactions to how you respond
to reality and how does that relate to
sense making we talked about incense
making that at the very least there's
two distinctions two kinds of sense that
we can talk about we can talk about the
kind of sense making that is judgment
that is very hardwired it has an input
process output characteristic and
there's another kind of sense making
that is determined that has a way of
being in response a relationship with
novelty and is creative okay and what
happens is is that if you're biased
towards this approach then what happens
is is that when as long as the things
you're dealing with are in fact actually
within that capacity you will be okay if
it can I feel quite effective you may be
very adapted to that context but you'll
be very fragile to anything that's
outside of your sovereignty so it'll
happen is is that if you've got a high
bias towards judgment then you're
fragile to novelty and of course in a
finite time you look eventually come
into some kind of novelty and you'll
have
trouble so it fundamentally creates we
make all simulated sovereignty or
fragile sovereignty which is in
sovereignty at all by contrast if
discernment is a primary quality then
your and if your if your sovereign and
bias towards discernment which means
that you are able to respond to what's
happening but you're not doing it
through a causal reactive habit based
mechanism but rather are doing it
through an embodied capacity to sense
what is really happening and then
consciously choose how you're going to
act in that context you're open to
novelty not only open to novelty in the
sense that it won't break you but rather
you're open to novelty in the sense that
it will be a source of learning a source
of growth so you might say that the
discernment is the crown the fundamental
interface layer the way that one is to
be able to actually show you this notion
of sovereignty in its deepest sense and
you might say the judgment is the trick
the judgment puts you in a place where
you feel very powerful but you're not in
fact sovereign why is it so difficult to
show up with genuine thinking in the
environment or in in the structures that
we have at the moment ah so in nature
the capacities of discernment and
judgment of thinking and well thinking
stone thinking fast are both always
available and you sort of fluidly move
between them sometimes it's perfectly
great to have a schema that just
iterates you know if you're driving your
car you would like to have your mind be
able to do with the things you actually
render all of that into habit and allow
that have to do its job but you stay
fluid ideally so that if circumstances
change or actually able to shift into a
space where you're actually able to
prove new more conscious of what's
happening so in nature both this happen
so the distinction that I want to make
is the distinction between this where
they're actually a nice balance
ultimately discernment is the holder to
a situation which is simulated thinking
where this
takes itself as being this so it's just
this and every time this is called for
every version and this is turned into
something this can handle so this grows
and begins to take itself as being the
whole story it's assimilated thinking
all right so now and then to distinguish
nature from the environment that we find
ourselves in this is actually a very
complicated question and it has to do
with the fact that if you have optimized
for simulated thinking then novelty is a
risk change is not your friend right if
you're over here
you're that saber-toothed tiger I talked
about your your this extremely peak
predator in a very very specific niche
you as long as the world continues to be
precisely the way that has been you will
continue to excel novelty is dangerous
and so therefore as these sorts of
things evolved over time as part of the
toolkit of simulated thinking it was
noticed that it is in fact available to
undercut thinking too niche construct
thinking out of effectiveness and
therefore avoid the unfortunate
consequence that niche the thinking has
a characteristic of changing of creating
novelty creativity changes things and so
it ends up happening is that you if you
are a simulated thinker you will use the
fact that your simulated thinking can
move very very quickly and generate
rapid effect and you will harness a
razor-sharp wit for example or you will
be skillful at creating manipulations in
the human domain and then when
somebody's in the space of thinking
where they're moving slowly they're
perceiving carefully and by the way
oftentimes expressing somewhat awkwardly
you will use your capacity to show up as
shiny show up as charismatic show up as
smart any we think that's like the word
smart it literally means like well put
together
and or your capacity to make this look
weak
foolish stumbling dumb to inhibit this
is this thing's capacity to threaten
your niche and I should mention by the
way that since at the end of the day
simulated thinking is still embedded in
a body your underlying instincts are
going to be telling you that your
fragile niche is in fact under threat so
you're going to be feeling it and
there's a reason why it shows up that
way
I think bit of it as a meta reason why
it shows up that way
which is we talked about the notion of a
niche construction at large and then the
fact that people and institutions like
say the blue church who have learned how
to have niche construction over an
entire social field benefit enormously
if you're the if you're if you're a
stimulated thinker you don't want a
thinker to come and disrupt your little
niche but if you're the king or if
you're the head of Goldman Sachs you
really don't want to think or to come
across and destruct destroy that niche
and remember that as you engage in
excellence and niche construction you
actually generate hyper fragility you
become more and more susceptible to
small changes could actually take the
whole thing down so there's an intrinsic
characteristic that you engage in niche
construction well in the domain of
excellence requires inhibiting the
natural what's it called solvent of true
thinking from breaking down your own
efforts at niche construction in some
sense you can't help it you have to
either undermine or co-opt capture and
bind thinking and make it in service to
your niche construction or well of
course by nature shift the niche and
you'll no longer be the saber-tooth
tiger and can you link that to the idea
of a debate like like for example the
thinker Titans showing up as oh yes yes
first let's see
in debates actually I think quite quite
an interesting phenomenon so let's just
look at it and think about it if you
notice debate is a social event and it
is fundamentally rhetorical well it may
of course present itself as having a
truth-seeking function it shows up under
the thing about the language like you
score points in debate there's a feeling
of combat and conflict which means of
course a feeling of winning in debate in
fact that's the whole point of debate
one side wins so you're not in a
collaborative space at all
thinking is by definition collaborative
it works best but only works in a
collaborative space and it works really
well in a collaborative space so it's
thinking enters into a collaborative
space debate is in fact intrinsically
non collaborative but it's kind of like
showing up as being something that's
trying to be a true seeking function and
it's performative right debate is about
being able to say the right thing in the
right way to create an effect in the
audience and to some extent to create an
effect in the opponent preferably an
emotional effect because what you want
to do you want to trigger them in some
fashion that causes their their
sovereignty to collapse you want to move
them out of sovereignties that they are
no longer able to respond to what's
happening and then I'm increasingly
erratic
it's just verbal conflict or combat and
nothing more or less and so if you have
become excellent at debate we've done it
you to become a simulated thinker in the
context of verbal conflict so you've
become subtle in understanding how to
turn a phrase
you've become subtle and be able to
notice a pattern when somebody has said
something when an opportunity exists or
tell a joke when an opportunity exists
to give a cutting remark I'm going to
say the ironic thing when to roll your
eyes when to turn your back on somebody
the whole sort of social engineering
milieu is your palette and you've become
very good at it and so then you're just
in it you're playing a game which is a
theatrical game
formative game that simulates human
beings communicating with each other
authentically and therefore by the way
your poor opponent is just not they came
they brought a writing pad to a gunfight
and your speed and your deafness and
being able to do pattern and pattern out
well of course
eviscerate the person whose integrity to
actually think and again coming back to
the basic notion new thinking doesn't
have a lot of shininess it rarely will
show up as elegant beautiful or well
thought through in fact the deeper and
more profound it is the more awkward and
challenging it will be because you're
trying to say things that have never
been said before which means by
definition whatever you're saying is not
going to be very good at it
and of course oftentimes when you engage
for example in long periods of niche
construction for excellence the few
thinkers who are still around and the
few people are like still trying to
think rather than going to go open Saks
to become bankers kind of got stuck
doing that if you could have gone down
the straight and narrow path to the
breeches it probably would have
something in you had to make it that so
that you couldn't ride that that
elevator you had to take the long road
and so you're unlikely to be polished
you're unlikely to be particularly
skillful in the fine art of showing up
as what your current culture perceives
as being excellent and so you're quite
likely to be vulnerable to the attacks
and so you've got you know all your
classic examples for whatever reason it
keeps popping into my head is the the
the Disney cartoon with the large bully
I think his name is Gaston and like the
the inventor right that's a classic
example and Gaston we know is it is not
only not smart or clever but is in fact
foolish and the bully and the inventor
in fact kind of is a little bit foolish
but seems like he's not mindless but
clearly it just comes off as being
completely incompetent Gascon Khan knows
how to play to the crowd and how to say
the things that performative Lee
decimate what's happening here
which by the way as I've mentioned
already because thinking is
intrinsically collaborative its
vulnerable
that anyway so what what comes next in
the war on sense-making if the sense
making framework that we have relied on
for so long is disintegrating where are
we going next great so let's take a look
at it from sort of one hand in the other
hand on the one hand we have the
continuing acceleration of the war on
since making the concept of deep fakes
for example I think is useful I think
it's begun to show up in the
contemporary consciousness this is the
the ability to generate media like even
video that are fake but in fact look
really real and let's by hypothesis say
our forensic li indistinguishable from
really real at least not easily so I can
create a video that has pick your
favorite person and have them doing
something that you might consider be
very bad and I'm gonna name names or
name acts and I can do it in software by
the way this is crucial because what
software does is it takes something that
you just in the hands of five very
sophisticated people and puts in the
hands of an arbitrary 13 year old kid in
about five years and so deep fakes is
moving through the arc of getting really
good and is gonna be going down the
software path and of course what that
means among other things by the way this
is just just one example the ability to
trust video is going to be going to zero
pretty soon
which of course means in the broader
picture the ability to trust anything
that is intermediated is zero so that's
the war on sense making by the way
you're better to trust anything that is
intermediated is zero if in listening to
that that feels challenging that's a
very good response because in the
contemporary environment it is in fact
madness it is the equivalent of being
completely insane right the inability to
and to trust your senses or your
thoughts at the social level very
problematic okay so well on the right
right hands so what do we do about it
like what's the response and the
response well there's a lot of different
ways of framing it but the basic
response is kind of just working
backwards is that you can't trust
anything that's intermediated well that
means you have to actually start
beginning a chain
that is relational and trustworthy there
to reconstruct a trustworthy extended
network of real relationships and this
is this is crucial this has not actually
even normally considered by
technologists at the blockchain
community for example is endeavor to
figure out to solve a problem by
removing trust entirely from the
equation and a booth I can prove that
can't work but in this case I'm simply
proposing that it can't work and the
appropriate answer is to actually create
trust go the other direction
double down on trust and double down on
your own ability as an individual to be
trustworthy in yourself this is crucial
by the way as I think we've talked about
in other components the priority now
gets put on the individual to become
sovereign the party becomes an
individual become a discerning on the
individual to become skillful at
expressing and at non ego eclis showing
up in relationship because a network
made of people of that sort becomes
extremely capable of making sense of
whatever happens to come its way and by
the way since its using discernment as
its primary modality it's capable of
interfacing with mystery this Capel of
interfacing with novelty which of course
is a characteristic of a world of
accelerating change and we've talked
about in the narrow space of the war on
sense making but let's open up the
container alright in any in any world
where our technological capacity is
continuing to increase what that means
is that the world is going to be
changing more faster well obviously what
that means is that there's more novelty
more new stuff to deal with and so just
to be able to survive the complexity of
a world of accelerating change means
building a collective intelligence that
is fundamentally builds around
discernment and has real relationship so
that the entire network is trustworthy
as a whole that's what's next you you've
talked about kind of the indie
integration of red and blue that that's
all the children of blue ah that's a
really important thing
so yeah I don't think I've actually
spoken about this before so one of the
things that I noticed as I was observing
anthropologically what was going on was
that there was a certain phenotype a
tractor that was happening in the
red-blue distinction that individuals
who were attracted to read had a certain
characteristic to them they had more of
the warrior archetype and I think this
maps to some of the stuff that we've
seen for example in the way that
personality type maps to conservatism
but in a well-functioning community
these various phenotypes actually relate
to each other through real relationships
and so the strengths and weaknesses
balance each other out
you know openness and diligence or
whatever is called are in relationships
conscientiousness thank you our
relationship with each other and so they
each serve but we've actually had as
we've made we tend to have a partition
where conscientiousness is creating its
own separate niche and it's attracting
itself to itself and openness is
creating its own nation attracting
itself to itself and so what happens is
there's a was a shift or a movement of
these demographics even physically like
physically relocating in space to be
concentrated and certainly politically
and so what ended up happening was is
that because the typology that began to
move towards blue happened to be a
typology that was advantage during the
rise of the church so the structure that
became the blue church it sort of ended
up being in charge of that era and the
typology that was attracted to red found
itself in a situation where I had to
innovate or lose and of course lost and
then it began to innovate but the
typology is a typology and so there's a
certain capacity around things like
physical courage and loyalty that is
valued intrinsically I'm arguing and
proposing at a physical level that is
much more valuable within this group
than it is over here and so it builds a
different kind of group that behaves
differently and is good at different
things so if you're in a situation where
things are beginning to become chaotic
these guys are actually really well
positioned because they will naturally
tend to pull together though and
actually tend to bind they'll naturally
tend to do what they said they would do
they form good solid teams they're not
wildly creative teams but of course
because they've had to evolve it
actually ended is in pretty interesting
stuff so this is team red by the way I
believe this is the case
I've spent meaningful time watching it
too pelagic what's happening here and
that is who these people more or less
show up to be of course you've got a big
chunk of disaffected four trainers over
here who are chaotic as hell but the
mass that's here is of that sort it's
actually kind of an interesting
relationship the four trainers create
the openness that's necessary to allow
this thing to evolve but they're still
fundamentally we want to be part of this
team well you know Blue has the the
challenge of not having a lot of those
characteristics and openness
unfortunately ends in vapor all right to
be fully openness in fact it's sort of
almost evaporate and there's a
collapsing event what do they call it
they eat their own like it tends to
become a a process of balkanization
internally and atomization which is part
of what's happening that's part of where
we are so when I say the the children of
blue what I mean is the the rescuing of
this typology
and of the effects the human capacities
that is currently being held here from
its capture by the structures of the
blue church into a truly liminal space
and into a space where it may in fact be
able to re-establish relationships with
these type ologies and these capacities
in themselves or in others and I know
that it's quite available there's no
question that there is a story that can
be told here that is vastly more
powerful than this story and infinitely
powerful in this drug which I think it's
up to zero and in that context when you
get basically cooking of as a Rijo 'less
a reformation of a whole human community
that actually has the capacity to bring
in these aspects in right relationship
with each other the question of course
is just obviously more creative and more
resilient at the same time which was why
they exist in the first place
so that's what I mean by that well as
I've said many times the first step is
to admit you've got a problem and
there's a necessity I'll speak about
blue first necessity on the part of
people who are captured to no longer be
captured and where's the phrase
what does Bob Marley say none but
ourselves can free our minds you got a
 free your mind like recognize
that you are in fact captured that the
blue church and that the orthodoxy and
that the habits of mind and the ideology
and ideological thinking in general are
all wrong the whole category is wrong
and if you're running that code you're
running that code which means you're
running code and you're running somebody
else's code which means you're not free
you're not autonomous you're not an
agent you are in fact an NPC so let's
get it straight you are actually an NPC
realize it accept it and then choose no
longer to be alright so that's the key
first step I would call that red pill in
which because it that should mean but of
course that term has been co-opted and
spun all over the place so I'll just
call it waking up and then taking
responsibility becoming conscious is a
good term but not becoming false
conscious cuz that linked to that whole
category is sucked all kinds of things
into it so spiritual bypass is another
problem over here
but actually becoming conscious and
stepping into responsibility in the
deepest possible sense saying okay while
yes
I can tell lots of narratives about how
all kinds of structural is going on
about all kinds of historical artifacts
we've gone on and how all kinds of
things that are coming from there and
there and they are bad the only thing I
can truly ever be responsible for is
myself so I'll take that first and then
I'll begin to step into how a
responsible self how sovereign
individual can begin to show up in the
world there's no other way but it is a
is a process of evaporation out of
captured down into rebirth and then
coming back up as somebody who can
actually do something effective in the
world at all then you can start doing
effective things live with other people
that's fun and by the way when you're in
this place as you gone through here you
can begin to
you can actually do effective things in
the world with these kinds of people so
let's talk about them
the biggest challenge is here have to do
with what I would call narrow tribalism
in-group groupthink is actually stronger
here these guys got captured by
groupthink but it's not natural to
openness it's natural here natural is to
say okay here's the truth we're all
gonna more or less say yes and March
right and anger right if this group over
here could go the wrong direction I
don't think they are yet and I think the
values of that 1950s through 90 mm I
sense of right and to do the right thing
like a lot of the values that were the
last half of the 20th century are still
actually held here they're not racist in
a deep sense and they quite distinctly
would be happy to protect people from
racists who are racist and deep sense
broadly speaking but they could go
sideways right this thing has a
possibility of moving there that would
be terrible
that would actually be well I suppose
like it at the end like there's no
recovery from that and so it's quite
important to avoid it and most of what
causes it is actually creating a context
for their only way to be in integrity at
all is to continue to become more
together and more extreme so let's
create some space that doesn't happen it
doesn't need to and then the challenge
of course is to actually have openness
yes actually encounter to the to the
natural tendency to be able to
hmm you know it's interesting I know
exactly what the right answer is the
answer is it actually to be able to know
what truth feels like this team actually
is not biased towards head they're not
as capturable by thinking they can be
captured by charismatic manipulation at
the body level that's was very important
to distinguish between those two and
they can also make short-term pragmatic
trade-offs which is also something to be
careful for but to really be able to go
deep into what is fundamentally true
like valor virtue honesty integrity
courage like values that are so deep
that they echo down throughout the ages
and hold those at the absolute center
without the slightest bit of movement
off of them and these guys have to hold
they have to stand and learn how to
stand and become absolutely and
vulnerable to the forces that want to
pull them they're like you know that
scene that the great image of the the
rally ethics Nuremberg whatever Nazi
right there's like a hundred thousand
people in the Nazi salute there's just
one dude like that right there could be
that guy you need a couple of those guys
ideally a lot but at least a couple
enough to hold well this thing comes
back and then okay let's come together
and I should mention by the way I'm I'm
using language that has a very masculine
feel to it because I am a man and I
speak that language very naturally but
this is very much not that story you
might even say a much more fundamental
level and unfortunately it is very
challenging to be able to express
because it's been more thoroughly
captured than anything else in our world
is simply to actually allow the feminine
to show up and express itself naturally
for what it really is that's like the
deepest answer and what I just said in
both cases is that in men and women and
any other kind of being that happens to
want to show up so like the thing that
shows up over here in red that I was
describing those virtues each one of
those virtues is what it is and is
meaningful person
I see in the context to which it is has
sworn fealty to the feminine in its most
fundamental archetypal sense that is why
it is meaningful that is how it evolved
that's how it exists right so if you
don't have that it's not real if you do
have that it is real and then this
capacity is able to come back but it has
to completely get out of this whole
concept of ideology and completely get
out of the whole concept of simulated
thinking getting in the way of the
natural capacity to feel and discern and
to be able to relax away from fear to
become invulnerable but becoming
fearless in the context of what might
happen I really liked I've went through
the foundation with some assumptions
peace I love the peace about how we're
in the middle of a potentially a kind of
thousand-year disruption wave we don't
know the answers but culture may have
the answers culture itself that'd be
really good to kind of recap sure and
how is that that stored at the cultural
level the myth our ethic level right so
how big is the crisis and where do we
look at the answers can just walk it
down yeah all right so the basic premise
is to begin like this the first thing to
kind of allow yourself to accept is
something that is real is the phrase
that I've used as history happens it's
very odd to me actually the people who
are perfectly capable of knowing that
for example the Roman Empire rose and
fell it actually happened there's no
question that occurred in reality
somehow are incapable of perceiving the
notion that therefore it might happen
again so let's just accept the notion
that that kind of thing happens on
occasion all right be open to the
possibility okay next okay well how how
do those kinds of things show up well
there's and I'm not going to go through
this in detail we can if you'd like but
there's certain characteristics that we
can actually begin to take a look at
they give us a sense of when where
things are and well where we are is
she rather challenging and we're in a
situation which is definitely not
awesome and probably is quite bad okay
well how bad how big an order of
magnitude trouble are we looking at well
let's just take a couple of examples to
kind of gauge the order of magnitude
let's just start with one everybody's
involved the whole world every single
human on the planet is involved in this
door that has never happened before
before right now any time any trouble
has emerged it's been a tiny tiny
fraction the human family the biggest
collapse of all time the bronze age
collapse happened right there and it hit
you know 15% most of the cities but 15%
of the people now everybody's involved
so if anything goes sideways that is
vaguely the order of magnitude of
something of that kind it's going to be
a lot bigger like a lot lot bigger
because these things reinforce each
other you mean notice that when things
go south people become less good at
dealing with each other gently which
makes it worse Shh let's try another one
we have nukes lots of us have nukes and
we're getting better at making nukes so
more of us are going to have news and we
don't just have nukes we also have
CRISPR which means the big people can
start making genetic weapons that are
new cliking capacity anding over time
not too long from now we're also going
to have micro drones that can target
assassinate pretty much anybody
unconsciously fill in the blank wish to
say that up until now no matter how hard
we tried we couldn't really kill that
many of us we've tried really hard we
have guns and bullets and gas and still
didn't kill that many of us to take a
look at the human population even the
Black Plague is like a little did it now
we can't in fact kill everybody or at
least mostly everybody okay next
technological change I don't know if
you've seen the charts to show the pace
of technological change but if you look
at a graph that goes like this
and you're here things are different
than they were when you were here and
the 1940s was like here in terms of the
pace of change that was going on you
know they in the the degree to which our
actuation commences our capacity to do
things in the world is accelerating is
really not comprehensible to anyone I
wrote an essay called the generation of
Magan where I talked about if the amount
of change is continuing to move this
current pace then the capacity of the
people who are the current generation I
think it's like 30 years from now will
be 1 million times more than now and I
kind of get a sense of that that's like
going from inventing language to the
computer in a single generation and of
course we already have computers so what
that looked like
that's big Shh it's like three or four
more oh sorry climate we've got the
whole world every single one of our
activities has a characteristic that it
generates an externality it is not well
processed by the complex environment
when we're relatively lightweight
there's not many of us and we're not
engaging a lot of those activities the
complex environment can still process it
sometimes heavy metals not so much well
there's a lot of us and we have
increasingly intensive activities so I'm
not really talking about climate change
which has kind of been scary
but it's like this bit on the scale I'm
talking about comprehensive destructured
the entire complex web of the ecosystem
across every single bind I'm talking
about concentration of heavy metals
hormones I'm talking about the complete
depletion of oxygen in oceans I mean
it's a show
and it's n-dimensional it's all over the
place and each one reinforces the others
so it's at some point all we need is a
little tipping point here then you get
cascade effects that run all over the
place I can go on by the way there's
about 500 of these each one of which
tells the same story it's big the order
of magnitude is at least a thousand
years and probably on the order of a
million years we're talking about the
origin of humanity big and maybe even
bigger than that
as in the inflection point yeah the
transition that we're facing right now
the magnitude of the thing that we're
dealing with the magnitude of what we
have to be capable responding to if you
want to be able to deal with it is the
biggest thing humanity has ever faced by
a large margin
so it's as challenging as the process of
becoming human at all and maybe even
bigger than that I can just keep going
so now the question is how long God's
name did we deal with that the
proposition that I was making in that
particular article is well we probably
have another slightest idea and we're
working as human beings we're we live a
hundred years and most of that is like
in a thirty year window
we're actually agentic lee acting out in
the world so we're not really wired to
deal with things that are magnitudes
larger than that we aren't well designed
to perceive things that are much bigger
than us from are smaller than us in
scale space or time so then we have to
ask ourselves what might be what kind of
thing might be would be part of for
being relationship with that is the kind
of thing that ordeals and orders of
magnitude that are even vaguely in the
size that we're dealing with and so the
proposition is that perhaps it's
something like culture maybe even
something deeper than culture like the
generator functionally gives rise to
culture itself like innovation in
evolution it's something in that order
well the mythopoetic
yeah so when you say the myth but strong
structures what I what I hear is either
culture or evolution in its depth so let
me take that what I mean by that so a
culture wants a culture I mean is that
that thing that humans do now I want to
go deeper than that we can actually
spell out what that means oh why sure
with culture might say it's a myth so
what what does it mean I'm gonna get to
mathematics in a second so when I say
culture what I mean is we create
artifacts institutions stories
technologies that actuate our capacity
increase our capacity to think and to do
in the world and that change us and so
we create them they create us and to
we co-evolved but their artifacts that
are produced by us through our
intelligence through our hands and our
capacity to do things in the world of
this one of the things that we do is we
retell stories and when we tell stories
we will often find that our stories are
built around these mythopoetic
archetypes now there's two possible ways
of grasping this notion of mythopoetic
archetype
well three one has to say that it's
nonsense but I'm going to ignore that
one the second is the most common is to
say well it's an artifact of culture
that cultures have been telling stories
for a long time and to the degree to
which certain stories have been showing
up over and over again which means that
there in cultures they've been around or
they keep showing up in culture it's one
of the two they have a high density to
them they have a perennial nough stew
them and so they were kind of thing that
you might want to consider counting on
when things get squishy so that's one
way of taking a look at it so if we're
doing that something that's in the order
of magnitude of say a thousand years
that by itself is enough if we're going
to be trying to search for what are the
kinds of things that pass on through
thousand year cycles we're gonna have to
be looking for the deep mythopoetic
locations in our stories and by the way
in our bodies so let's talk about our
bodies because the same threat works at
a longer scale our bodies are narratives
in a sense meaning that the kinds of
things that have been showing up for now
thousands of generations the things have
been showing that made us Homo sapiens
sapiens instincts that are wired into us
at a very deep level at a precognitive
level are still mythopoetic in the
deeper sense meaning that they are the
kinds of things that showed up because
they continue to show up protect your
young is a mythopoetic this is in the
body it is physical because obviously
any being that has young that are not
fish and being that has a small number
of young that are relatively vulnerable
and doesn't embody protect your young is
quickly extinguished now of course we
can be conscious of that and have it as
a virtue but our body naturally
expresses it and so that process is even
deeper it's because okay well what is
that what's happening there is there a
story in that are there deep threads
that are actually showing up that brings
us to where we are now
now that
say well the mythopoetic stories are
both they're both narratives that have
happened to keep showing up and they are
also wisdom that has been endeavoring to
find the deepest threads that have been
showing up in our bodies that are as
deep as we can go and to reify them into
things that can be made available to
consciousness so they can we find them
and do them well that is the ground upon
which you can build something they might
endure
[Music]