[Music]
we live in a strange time extraordinary
events keep happening
that undermine stability of album
suicide bombers waves of refugees Donald
Trump Vladimir Putin even braixen get
those in control seem unable to do
no has any vision of a difference or a
better kind of future this film will
tell the story of how we got to this
strange place it is about how over the
past 40 years politicians finances and
technological utopians rather than face
up to the real complexities of the world
retreat
instead they constructed a simpler
version of the world in order to hang on
to power
as this fake world grew all of us went
along with it because the simplicity was
reassuring even those who thought they
were attacking the system the radicals
the artists the musicians and our whole
counterculture actually became part of
the trickery as they too had retreated
into the make-believe world which is why
their opposition has no effect and
nothing ever training but this retreat
into a dream wave allowed dark and
destructive forces to fester and grow
outside
verses that are now returned to pierce
the paddle surface of our Catholic
instructors oh boy
[Music]
the story begins in two cities at the
same moment in 1975 one is New York the
other is Damascus it was a moment when
two ideas about how it might be possible
to run the world without politics first
hookers
[Music]
in 1975 New York City's on the garage
influence for 30 years the politicians
who ran the city had borrowed more and
more money from the banks to pay for its
growing services and wealth but in the
early seventies the middle classes fled
from the city and taxes they pay
disappeared with soda banks let the city
even learn but then they began to get
worried about the size of growing debt
whether the city would ever be able to
pay it back and then one day in 1975 the
bank's just stopped
the city held its regular meeting to
issue bonds in return for the loans
overseen by the city's financial
controller morning ladies and gentlemen
today the city of New York is rocking
from competitive bidding sale 260
million tax anticipation notes of which
one hundred million will mature on June
30 1975 the banks are supposed to turn
up at 11:00 air but it soon became clear
but none of them were going to appeal
the meeting was rescheduled for 2 p.m.
and the bank's promised they would turn
[Music]
the announcement on behalf of the
controller is that the offer which we
had expected to receive an announce at
two o'clock this afternoon is now
expected at four o'clock what does this
mean that so far nobody wants those
bonds we will be making a further
announcement at four o'clock and
anything further that I could say now I
think would not advance the interests of
the sale which is now in progress
does this mean that you have not been
able to sell them so far today we will
have a further announcement at four
o'clock what happened that day anew
marked a radical shift in power the
banks insisted that in order to protect
their loans they should be allowed to
take control of the city the suti
appealed to the president but he refused
to help so a new committee was set up to
manage the city's finances out of nine
members eight of the robe ankles
it was the start of an extraordinary
experiment where the financial
institutions took power away from the
politicians and started to run society
themselves the city had no other option
the bank has enforced what was called
austerity on the city assisting that
thousands of teachers policemen and
firemen were sacked this was a new kind
of politics the old politicians believe
that crises were sold through
negotiations and deals the anchors had a
completely different view they were just
the representatives of something that
couldn't be negotiated with the logic of
the market to them there was no
alternative to this system it should run
suss at
[Music]
just by shifting paper on these slobs
can make 60 65 million dollars in a
single transaction that would take care
of all of the layoffs in the city so
it's reckless it's cruel and it's a
disgrace the be fair number bankers of
course you'd say well it's the union's
who have been too greedy and what would
your reaction be I guess they're right
in a way if you can make 60 million
dollars on a single transaction and a
worker makes eight nine thousand dollars
a year I suppose they're correct and as
they go back to their little estates in
Greenwich Connecticut I want to wish
them well the slobs but the
extraordinary thing was no one opposed
the bankers the radicals and the left
wingers for ten years before the dreamt
of changing America through revolution
did nothing they had retreated and we're
living in the abandoned buildings in
Manhattan
[Music]
the singer Patti Smith later described
the mood of disillusion that had come
over them I could not identify with the
political movements any longer she said
all the manic activity in the streets in
trying to join them I felt overwhelmed
by yet another form of bureaucracy what
she was describing was the rise of a new
powerful individualism that could not
fit with the idea of collective
political action instead
howdy Smith and many others became a new
kind of individual radical who watched
the decaying CC with a cool detachment
they didn't try and change it they just
experienced look at that Michael I love
that word like kids write all over the
wall as me is needed in hard time on
Jose and Maria forever could
oh there's a lot of things like when you
big movie houses maybe we'll find one
but they have little movie screens where
you can see clips of like Z or something
like that people watch it over and over
I've seen people I've checked them out
all day I'm going back and forth and
they're still there watching the credits
or them of a movie because they don't
have enough so but it's some
entertainment you know instead radicals
across America turn to art and music as
a means of expressing their criticism of
society they believed that instead of
trying to change the world outside for
you while we were dozing the money crept
it
[Music]
what's your data price Larry but one of
the people who did understand how to use
this new power was Donald Trump
humph realized there was now no future
in building housing for ordinary people
because all the government grants had
gone do you saw that there were other
ways to get vast amounts of money out of
the state Trump started to buy up
derelict buildings in New York and he
announced that he was going to transform
into luxury hotels and apartments but in
return he negotiated the biggest tax
break in New York's history was 116
million dollars the city had to agree
because they were desperate on the banks
seeing a new opportunity also started to
lend him money
and Donald Trump began to transform you
into a city for the rich while he paid
practically nothing
[Music]
at the very same time in 1975 there was
a concentration between two powerful men
in Damascus the capital of Syria one was
Henry Kissinger the US Secretary of
State the other was the President of
Syria F s al-assad
the battle between the two men was going
to have profound consequences for the
world and like in New York it was going
to be a struggle between the old idea of
using politics to change the world and a
new idea but you could run the world as
a stable system
President Assad dominated Syria the
country was full of giant images and
statutes that glorified him it was
brutal and ruthless killing or
imprisoning anyone he suspected of being
a threat
but a sad believed that the violence was
for a practice if you wanted to find a
way of uniting the Arab countries and
using that power to stand up to the West
[Music]
four three two one
Kissinger was also tough and ruthless he
had started in the 1950s as an expert in
the theory of nuclear strategy what was
called the delicate balance of terror it
was the system that ran the Cold War
both sides believed that if they
attacked the other side would
immediately launch their missiles and
everyone would be annihilated Kissinger
had been one of the models for the
character of dr. Strangelove in Stanley
Kubrick's film it's a resident I would
not rule out the chance to preserve a
nucleus of human specimens it would be
quite easy at the bottom of some of our
deeper mineshafts Henry was not a warm
friendly modest jovial sort of person he
was thought of as one of the more
anxious temperamental self-conscious
ambitious inconsiderate people at
Harvard
Kissinger Sorensen is a hard realist he
had no time for the emotional turmoil of
political ideologies he believed that
history had always really been a
struggle for power between groups and
Nations
but what Kissinger took from the Cold
War was a way of seeing the world as an
interconnected system and his aim was to
keep that system in balance and prevent
it from falling into chaos
[Music]
I believe that with all the dislocations
you know now experience they also exists
an extraordinary opportunity to form for
the first time in history a truly global
society carried out by the principle of
interdependence and if we act wisely and
with vision I think we can look back to
all this turmoil as the birth pangs of a
more creative and better system if we
miss the opportunity I think there's
going to be chaos the flight has been
delayed we understand now the listener
will be arriving here about an hour and
a half from now so we'll just get the
have the press informed and then we'll
say fine and it was this idea but
Kissinger set out to impose on the
chaotic politics of the Middle East
to manage it he knew that he was going
to have to deal with President Assad of
Syria President Assad was convinced that
there would only ever be a real and
lasting peace between the Arabs and
Israel if the Palestinian refugees were
allowed to return to their homeland
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
were living in exile in Syria as well as
in the Lebanon and Jordan have you found
that the Palestinians here want to
integrate with the Syrians oh no never
they don't want not here or neither in
Lebanon or in Jordan I never know
because they want to stay as a whole as
a Palestinian as they call themselves
those who go back and are you doing
saying in Arabic Assad also believed
that such a peace would strengthen the
Arab world but Kissinger thought that
strengthening the Arabs would
destabilize his balance of power so he
set out to do the very opposite to
fracture the power of the Arab countries
by dividing them and breaking their
alliances so they would keep each other
in check
Kissinger now played the double game or
as he termed it constructive ambiguity
in a series of meatrix he persuaded
Egypt to sign a separate agreement with
Israel but at the same time he led Assad
to believe that he was working for a
wider peace agreement one that would
include the Palestinians in reality the
Palestinians were ignored
they were irrelevant to the structural
balance of the global system
[Music]
the hallmark of a Kissinger is thinking
about it in a tional politics is its
structural design everything is always
connected in his mind to everything else
but his first thoughts are on that level
on this structural global balance of
power level and as he addresses
questions of human dignity human
survival human freedom I think they tend
to come into his mind as an adjunct of
the play of Nations at the power game
when Assad found out the truth it was
too late in a series of confrontations
with Kissinger and Damascus Assad raged
about this treachery he told Kissinger
that what he had done would release
demons hidden under the surface of the
Arab world
cuz inter described balances assad's
controlled fury hereit was all the more
impressive for its eerily cold seemingly
unemotional demeanor
as had now retreated he started to build
a giant palace that loomed over Damascus
and his belief that it would be possible
to transform Arab world began to fade a
British journalist who knew Assad wrote
Assad's optimism has got a trust in the
future has gone what has emerged instead
is a brutal vengeful who believes in
nothing etc
[Music]
the original dream of the Soviet youth
had been to create a glorious new world
the world were not only the society that
the people themselves would be
transformed they would become new and
better kinds of human beings by the
1980s it was clear that the dream would
spend
[Music]
the Soviet Union became instead a
society where no one believed in
anything
will had any vision of the future
I assume a little I just kept waiting
with my getting bigger each side yes Joe
I mean just me but just nothing yet
every but a little bit to July Krista
it's that the other side entrance
comment
Frankie visualize that are usually
children and families at around yes
honorable to do it they really embody
boom instant originated from - howdy
individually even
muchachas planet reaches completely
melted her feel positively Nagin was
funk me must escape a street
absolutely change the county matter
radio cattle it's almost unchecked
machine but if Rob would endure
[Music]
you're gonna
[Music]
do you
[Music]
those around the Soviet you had believed
that they could plan and manage the new
kind of socialist society they had
discovered that it was impossible to
control and predict everything for the
plan had run out of control but rather
than reveal this the technocrats began
to pretend that everything was still
going according to plan
and what emerged instead was a fake
version of the society the Soviet Union
became a society where everyone knew
that what their leaders said was not
real because they could see with their
own eyes that the economy was falling
apart but everybody had to play along
and pretend that it was real because no
one could imagine any alternate one
Soviet writer called it - normalization
he was so much a part of the system that
it was impossible to see beyond it the
fakeness was hyper normal
i Ronnie Raymond solemnly swear that I
will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States that I
will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States the new
president of America had a new vision of
the world
it wasn't the harsh realism of Henry
Kissinger any longer it was different it
was a simple moral crusade where America
had a special destiny to fight evil to
make the world a better place the places
and the periods in which man is known
freedom are few and far between just
scattered moments on the span of time
and most of those moments have been ours
the American people have a genius for
great and unselfish deeds into the hands
of America God has placed the destiny of
an afflicted mankind god bless america
but this precinct was going to lead
Reagan to come face to face with Henry
Kissinger's legacy and above all the
vengeful fury President Assad of Syria
[Music]
Israel was now determined to finally
destroy the power of the Palestinian
Muslim and in 1982 they sent a massive
army to encircle the Palestinian camps
in the Lebanon do you know do you know
how strong these Raley's are do you know
how many how many tests I have outside
literature humana Astra they are there
yeah you know I'm not afraid in aqueous
real hada be a serabian
Sol America will do a llama battalion at
Alma's Lana be edna ye ee slalom table
that means you're not ready to shine
tomorrow we shall broth are also sharp
mana is Muhammad Ali Yong Yong Yong
session system here because the
parasites have expected simulator will
be a huge explosion in several of these
in the last few minutes as you can see
there's no worse damage in all the
buildings around here
[Music]
two months later thousands of
Palestinian refugees were massacred in
the camps it horrified the world what
was even more shocking was that Israel
had allowed it to happen its troops had
stood by and watched as a Christian
Lebanese action murdered the
Palestinians
[Music]
this was the first of the massacres we
discovered yesterday now 24 hours later
the stench here is appalling but the
effect on the Israelis of what their
Christian allies did here and in dozens
of other places around this camp are
going to be immense there's always been
a risk of such massacres if Christian
militiamen were allowed to come into
Palestinian camps and the Israelis seem
to have done nothing to prevent them
coming into this one in the face of the
horror and the growing camps President
Reagan was forced to act he announced
that American marines would come to
Beirut to lead a peacekeeping force
Regan insisted that the troops were
neutral but President Assad was
convinced that there was another reality
he saw the troops as part of the growing
conspiracy between America and Israel to
divide the Middle East into factions and
destroy the power of the Arts I decided
to get the Americans out of the middle
to do this he made maligns with the new
revolutionary force ayatollah khomeini's
around
what Hawaii could bring to assert was an
extraordinary new weapon that he had
just created
it was cause the poor man's atomic bomb
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
ayatollah khomeini had come to power two
years before as the leader of the
Iranian Revolution but his hold on power
was precarious
and Romania had developed a new idea of
how to fight his enemies and defend the
revolution how mainly told his followers
that they could destroy themselves in
order to save the revolution providing
that in the process they killed as many
enemies around them as possible this was
completely new across the Koran
specifically prohibited suicide in the
past you became a martyr on the
battlefield because God chose the time
and place about them how main changed he
did it by going back to one of the
central rituals of Shia Islam
every year she iced March in a
procession morning the sacrifice of
their found of the same as they do they
whip themselves symbolically reenacting
for saying sake
[Music]
Khomeini said the ultimate act of
penitence was not just to whip us but to
kill providing us for the greater good
revolution
in the name of God the compassionate the
merciful good afternoon Annie rocky
soviet-made mig-23 was shot down by the
Air Force jet fighters of the Islamic
Republic over the northwestern Iranian
border region of Matawan at 10:08
hours local time Saturday said the Joint
Staff commands communique numbered 1710
Khomeini had mobilized the space when
the country was attacked by around Iran
faced almost certain defeat because Iraq
had far superior weapons many of them
supplied by America so the
revolutionaries took tens of thousands
of young boys out of schools put them on
buses and sent them to the frontline
their job was to walk through the
enemy's minefields deliberately blowing
themselves up in order to open gaps that
would allow the Iranian army to pass
through on home it was organized suicide
on a vast scale
this human sacrifice was commemorated in
giant cemeteries across the country
fountains glowing blood-red water
glorified this new kind of martyrdom
[Music]
and it was this new idea of an
unstoppable human weapon the President
Assad took from Khomeini
and walked to the West for the first
time and as it traveled it will mutate
into something even more dangerous
instead of just killing yourself you
would take explosives with you into the
heart of the enemy and then blow
yourself up taking dozens or even
hundreds along with it would become
known the suicide bombing
[Music]
in October 1983 two suicide bombers
drove trucks into the u.s. Marine arks
in Beirut it was seeing something move
that took me out of my trance then I
recognized oh yes
Marines were in that building a lot of
Marines were in that building that's
when I ran down and it was a black black
marine he looked white to dust it just
covered the massive explosions killed
241 Americans the Bombers were members
of a new militant group but no one had
heard of they called themselves
Hezbollah and although many of them were
Iranian they were very much under the
control of Syria and the Syrian
intelligence agencies President Assad
was using that was his proxies to attack
America
whoever carried out yesterday's bombings
sheer Muslim fanatics devotees of the
ayatollah khamenei or whatever it is
syria who profits politically the most
significant fact is that the dissidents
live and work with syrian protection so
it is to syria rather than to the
dissident groups guiding light Ayatollah
how many of Iran but we must look for an
explanation of the group's activities
destabilization is Syria's middle
eastern way of reminding the world that
Syria must not be left out of plans for
the future of the area
there are no words that can express our
sorrow and grief or the loss of those
splendid young men the injury to so many
others but these deeds make so evident
the beastial nature of those who would
assume power if they could have their
way and drive us out of that area the
dispatcher's were within four months
president reagan withdrew all the
American troops from the Lebanon
Secretary of State George Shultz
explained we became paralyzed by the
complexity that we faced he said so the
Americans turned the President Assad it
was an extraordinary achievement he was
the only Arab League to have defeated
the Americans and forced them to leave
the Middle East he had done it by using
the new force of suicide bombing force
that once Unleashed was going to spread
with unstoppable path but at this point
both sad and the arrangements thought
that they could control it and what gave
it this extraordinary power
that is held out the tree transcending
the corruptions of the world and
triggered you better now one should
defend the realm of Islam and Muslims
against heretics and invaders and to
fulfill this duty one should even
sacrifice one's life to get that raw
head in remote ideal of a messiah we
believe that martyrs can overlook our
deeds from the other world the
commander's it means that after death
the martyr lives and can still witness
this world
[Music]
by the middle of the 1980s the banks
were rising up and becoming several more
paths in America what had started 10
years before in New York the idea that
the financial system could run society
is spread but unlike older sisters
it was mostly invisible a writer called
William Gibbs tried to dramatize what
was happening in a powerful imaginative
way in a series of month Gibson had
noticed how the banks and the new
corporations were beginning to link
themselves together through computer
systems
what they were created was a series of
giant networks of information the way
invisible to ordinary people and to
politicians but those networks gave the
corporation's extraordinary new powers
of control Gibson gave this new world a
name he called it cyberspace and his
novels described a future that was
dangerous and frightening hackers could
literally enter into cyberspace and as
they did they traveled through systems
that were so powerful that they could
reach out and crush intruders by
destroying their minds in cyberspace
there were no laws and no politicians to
protect you just rule brutal corporate
power
[Music]
but then a strange thing happened the
new group of visionaries in America took
Gibson's idea of a hidden secret world
and transformed it into something
completely different they turned it into
a dream of a new hotel well they were
the technological utopians who are
rising up on the west coast of America
they turned Gibson's idea on its head
instead of cyberspace being a
frightening place dominated by powerful
corporations they reinvented it as the
very opposite a new safe world where
radical dreams could come true ten years
before faced by the complexity of real
politics the radicals had given up on
the idea of changing the world
but now the computer utopians saw in
cyberspace an alternative reality a
place they could retreat you away from
the harsh white-winged politics but now
dominated reagan's America
[Music]
the roots of this vision lay back in the
counterculture of the 1960s and above
all with LSD
you
[Music]
that's the more air cylinder is Lauren
going breath many of those who had taken
Alice T in the 60s were convinced that
it was more than just another drug but
it opened human perception and allowed
people to see new realities that were
normally different either ones they have
fighting over really great it freed them
from the narrow limited view of the
world that was imposed on them by
politicians and those in power in the
United States in the next 5 10 15 years
you're going to see more and more people
taking LSD and making it a part of their
lives
so there will be a nasty country within
15 years an LSD society there will be
less interest in obviously warfare in
power politics you know politics today
is a disease as a real addiction
artex politics politics politics don't
politic don't vote these are all men's
games impotent and senile old men they
want to put you onto their old chess
games and war and power 20 years later
the new networks of machines seem to
offer a way to construct a real or turn
not just one was chemically-induced but
a space that actually existed in a
parallel dimension to the real world
and like with acid cyberspace could be a
place where you would be liberated from
the old corrupt hierarchies of politics
and power but explore new ways of being
one of the leading exponents of this
idea was called John Perry Barlow in the
60s he had written songs for the
Grateful Dead moving part of the acid
counterculture now he organized what he
called cyber thorns to try and bring the
cyberspace movement together well you
know the cyber Sun as it was originally
conceived was we're supposed to be the
90s equivalent of the acid test and we
had to involve some of the same
personnel you and I insisted on time
okay and it immediately acquired a
financial quality or commercial quality
that was initially a little unsettling
to an old hippie like me but as soon as
I saw it actually working then I thought
ah well you're going to have an answer
test for the 90s money better be
involved instead of having a glass
barrier that separates you your mind
from the mind of the computer the
computer pulls us inside and creates a
world for us incorporates everything
that could be incorporated it
incorporates experience itself Paul I
then wrote a manifesto that he called a
declaration of independence of
cyberspace it was addressed to all
politicians telling them to keep out
with this movement
it was going to be incredibly
influential because what our lobe did
was give a powerful picture of the
internet not as a network controlled by
jad corporations but instead as a kind
of magical Friedrichs an alternative to
the old systems of plan this is a vision
that would come to dominate the internet
over the next 20 years governments of
the industrial world cyberspace does not
lie within your borders we are creating
the world where anyone anywhere may
express his or her beliefs and no matter
how singular without fear of being
coerced into silent or conformity I
declare the global social space we are
building to be naturally independent of
the tyrannies you seek to impose on us
we will create a civilization of the
mind in cyberspace
may it be more humane
the world your governments have made the
fool
[Music]
this key to a new walk this code means
the two young hackers in New York
thought that Barling was describing a
fantasy world but his vision or no
relationship at all to what was really
emerging online they were cults figures
on the early online scene and their fans
followed and recorded they called
themselves
fiber-optic of acid freak and they spent
that time exploring and breaking into
giant computer networks that they knew
were the hard realities of modern
digital power my specific instance I was
charged with conspiracy to commit a few
dozen over acts they called them among a
new number of things having to do with
computer trespass and and I guess
computer eavesdropping interception
unauthorized access to federal interest
computers which is pretty vague law
communications network computers and so
on in a notorious public debate online
the to hackers attack bomber what
infuriated the most the Barlow's
insistence there was no hierarchy or
controlling promise in the new cyber
the hackers set out to demonstrate that
he was born as he freaked packed into
the computers of a giant corporation
with TRW TRW had originally built the
systems that ran the Cold War the US
military they had helped create the
delicate balance of terror
now TRW had adapted their computers to
run a new system at a credit and debt
their computers gathered up the credit
data of millions of Americans and were
being used by the banks to decide
individuals credit ratings
the hackers broke into the TRW Network
stole Barlow's credit history and
published it online
the hackers were demonstrating the
growing cloud violence now the companies
that ran the new systems credit knew
more and more about you and increasing
use that information to control your
destiny the system that was allowing
this to happen with a new giant networks
of information connected through
computer service the hackers were
questioning whether Barlow's utopian
Rachel about cyberspace might really be
a convenient camouflage hiding the
emergence of a new and growing crowd
that was way beyond concepts
[Music]
[Music]
the cyberspace was not the only
imaginary story being created
faced with the humiliating defeat in the
liberal president reagan's government
was desperate to shore up the vision of
a moral world where a good america
struggled against evil and to do this
they were going to create a simple
villain an imaginary one that would free
them than the paralyzing complexity of
real Middle Eastern politics
and the perfect candidate was waiting in
the wings
colonel qaddafi the ruler of Naboo
[Music]
the Americans were going to ruthlessly
use code to create a fake terrorist
mastermind
was a young officer Gaddafi had been
sent to England for training and he had
to tested the patronizing racism but he
said he had found at the heart of
British society as I did because every
little glandon's
disc c6 so abrasive August you had the
best man see I I was in mechanical to
finish called battlefield in Argos code
effectively ill-treated in that place
from some British office I think was
officer or a juice by dishes but
ill-treated in what sort of way
always the ill treated every time by
being rude or by being bullying or in
their own behavior towards us is
thickness they hate us now because of
colonization is a result of cleansing
once in power Gaddafi had developed his
own revolutionary theory which he called
the third universal theory it was more
Turner civic said to communism and
companies he published it in a green
book but practically no one read it he
had sent money and weapons to the IRA
and Ireland to help them overthrow the
British ruling class but all the other
Arab leaders rejected him and his ideas
they thought that he was mad and by the
mid-1980s Gaddafi was an isolated figure
with no friends and no global influence
then suddenly that changed in December
1985 terrorists attack Rome and Vienna
Airport simultaneously killing 19 people
including five Americans there was
growing pressure on President Reagan to
retaliate it's time to rename your State
Department the capitulation department
get off of your stick mr. president the
American people are sick and tired of
being kicked around you talk cut let's
say you use some of these billions and
billions and billions dollars worth of
weapons that you've asked us to approve
your words are cheap talk President
Reagan immediately announced that
Colonel Gaddafi was definitely behind
the attacks these murderers could not
carry out their crimes without the
sanctuary and support provided by
regimes such as Colonel Qaddafi's in
Libya the Rome and Vienna murders are
the latest in a series of brutal
terrorist acts committed with Gaddafi's
vacuum but the European security
services who investigated the attack
we're convinced that Libya was not
involved at all that the mastermind
behind the attacks was in fact Syria the
terrorists be directed by the Syrian
intelligence agencies but the Americans
say that the attack at Rome Airport was
organized by Gaddafi not by Hamas know
what you think we don't have any any
evidence you have never been ot such a
such a puffy mission the only evidence
we have sure shows a senior connection
do you say that it was Libya and the
president said the evidence of Libya's
culpability was irrefutable
yeah but the Italian authorities to whom
I've spoken say emphatically on the
record that their investigations have
shown that it was entirely masterminded
by Syria I don't agree with that at all
well they've invested interrogated their
surviving terrorists I must just say I
don't agree with that that you've no
evidence that Libya was in on the
planning either our evidence on Libya is
a circumstantial but very strong but why
did the president then say it's
irrefutable if you call itself a
circumstantial well people can be
convicted and sentenced in our courts on
circumstantial evidence but what made it
even more confusing was that although
there seemed to be no evidence that
Gaddafi had been behind the attacks he
made no attempt to deny the allegations
instead he went the other way and turned
the crisis into a global drama did the
day or
of dialogue for pollination threatening
suicide attacks against America this
hostile position cannot be explained in
a racist and cussing terms very suicidal
attacks would have to be an answer to a
military attack but India is not
affected buying such measures that we
cannot declared they're stinking rotten
potato Gaddafi now starts to play a role
that was going to become very familiar
he grabbed the publicity that had been
given to him by the Americans and used
it dramatically he promote himself as an
international revolutionary who had
helped to liberate oppressed peoples
around the world even the blacks in
America
[Music]
Gaddafi arranged for a live satellite
link to a mass meeting of the Nation of
Islam in Chicago brothers and sisters it
is with great honor and privilege that I
present to you the leader of the
al-fatiha revolution from Libya our
brother Muammar al-gaddafi Grassi total
that Libya was now their hand in their
struggle against white America I thought
it's the best way for support it's a lot
of my country - your struggle for
freedom for innovation Gras he promised
that he would supply weapons to create a
black army in America at 400,000 men if
white America refuses to accept blacks
as US citizens he told them it must
never be destroyed
[Music]
Gaddafi also invited a group of German
rocket scientists to come to Libya to
built in a rocket he insisted it had no
military purpose Libya was now going to
explore outer space I think it is a
peaceful and secure civilian signal
fidelity to be a product distribution
office Kirsten something like these and
it has nothing to do with any military
things but no one believed journalist
warned that Gaddafi was really preparing
to attack Europe vividly dramatizing the
new danger that is something like this
which goes that way to put something
into space but the same device tilted
say to an angle of 45 degrees could of
course become something very different
a missile possibly carrying a warhead
but would put Libya within range of an
enormous earth chilling proposition with
its range of 2,000 kilometers the
Americans in Gaddafi now that came
locked together in a cycle of mutual
reinforcement
in the process a powerful new image was
created that was going to capture the
imagination of the West Gaddafi became a
global superpower of the head of what
was called a rogue state a madman who
threatened the stability of the world
and Gaddafi was loving every minute of
it
as he think in the past his decisions
sometimes have been taken too quickly on
world affairs meaning I think sometimes
that is what has made people in the
world nervous of you perhaps
then there was another terrorist attack
at a discotheque in West Berlin the bomb
killed an American soldier and injured
hundreds the Americans released what
they said were intercepts by the
National Security Agency that proves
that Colonel Gaddafi was behind the
bombing and a dossier that they said
prove that he was also the mastermind
behind a whole range of other attacks
President Reagan ordered the Pentagon to
prepare to bomb Libya but again to a
dance this time within the American
government itself their concerns that
analysts were being pressured to make a
case that didn't really exist and to do
it they were taking Qaddafi's rhetoric
about himself as a global revolution and
his manic ravings and then representing
them as fact
and in the process together the
Americans in Kadapa
we're constructing a fictional world the
analyst was certainly convinced he
pressured into developing a prima facie
case against the Libyan government from
the somewhat incoherent ravings of a
maniac
both interceptions of a clandestine
nature interceptions of a open radio
broadcast or whatever as well as other
sources quotations of is one can
assemble a neatly put together package
demonstrating that the man had violent
interests against the United States and
its European allies the European
international sanctions is told the
Americans to pay were wrong but it was
serious behind only not
the Americans have decided to attack
living because they couldn't face the
dangerous consequences of attacking
Syria instead they went for Gaddafi a
man without friends or allies Libya had
for Less downside consequences if you
will there's less Arab support for
Qaddafi we figured there would be less
Soviet support for Gaddafi there's no
question but what Libya was more
vulnerable than Syria and Iran is a Sun
Valley certainly an element of course in
April 1986 the Americans attacked Libya
their targets included Colonel Gaddafi's
own house immediately after the attack
could ask a appear in the ruins to
describe what had happened they family
were asleep and my wife was led be tied
down to the bed because she had a
slipped disc
ie tried to rescue the children English
and the house starts to collapse as you
can see and the books started to that
demon selected a concentrated on the
children's readable honor so that they
would kill all the children our small
adopted daughter was killed and two of
our children were injured but yes again
Gaddafi might have been lying ever since
then there have been rumors that his
adopted daughter actually survived but
many other children were killed in the
raid because the American bombing was so
inaccurate
good after you realize that the
attention of the whole world is now
focused on and he grabbed the moon to
promote his own revolutionary theory the
third way as a global alternative
democracy I feel that I'm really
responsible for conveying the third
world hearing and the Green Book to the
rising generations to the young American
and British people here so that we can
rescue America and Britain and these
generations of young people easily from
this theory which this electoral party
theory which enabled an imbecile like
pagan Tocqueville to ruled the mightiest
power on earth and use it to destroy
other people's homes and enable the
harlot like Thatcher to rule a great
nation like Britain
[Music]
what the heck is that oh my god
only crap
it's just moving really slowly Wow
what is it doing
whoa my god what was happening happening
what is going on oh yeah oh my god wait
we can get a good video critique
what the hell in the 1980s more and more
people in the United States reported
seeing unexplained objects and lights in
the sky at the same time investigators
who believed in UFOs revealed that they
had discovered top-secret government
documents stated that alien craft had
visited earth
[Music]
documents have been hidden for twenty
years they seem to prove that there have
been a giant cover
but actually the reality was even
stranger the American government might
have been making it all out but they
have created a fake conspiracy to
deliberately mislead population
flights that people imagine were UFOs
may in reality be new high technology
weapons the US government were testing
[Music]
the government had developed the methods
because they in turn imagined the Soviet
Union was far stronger than it was and
still wanted to conquer the world the
government wanted to keep the weapons
secret but they couldn't always hide
their appearance in the scouts so it is
alleged that they chose a number of
people to use to spread the room
that these were really alien visitations
one of those chosen was called cool
benifits who lived outside a jad airbase
in New Mexico but have noticed strange
things going on
years later I sat down with Paul at
dinner in told Paul exactly that
everything we did was a sanction
counterintelligence operation to
convince him that what he was seeing was
UFOs and that what what we didn't want
him to know was he tapped into something
on the base and we didn't want him to
ever disclose that we kind of planted
the seed in Paul that what he was seeing
and what he was hearing and what he was
collecting was in fact probably maybe
UFOs relevance and others chosen by the
agency where it is alleged given a
series of forged documents many of them
were top secret memos by the military
describing sightings of unidentified
aerial vehicles the documents spread
like wildfire
they formed the basis for the wave of
belief in UFOs that would spread through
America in the 1990s
[Music]
what the fuck you got me that's uh
that's crazy go
another spacer and it also fueled the
wider growing belief that governments
like that conspiracies were will
what the Reagan administration would do
both with Colonel Gaddafi and with the
UFO s was a blurring of fact and fiction
but it was part of an even broader
program the president's advisers had
given it a name they called it
perception management and it became a
central part of the American government
during the 1980s
[Music]
the aim was to tell dramatic stories
that grabbed the public imagination not
just about the Middle East but about
Central America and the Soviet Union and
it didn't matter if the stories were
true or not providing they distractedly
and you the politician from having to
deal with the intractable complexities
of the real world
[Music]
reality became less and less of an
important factor in American politics
it wasn't what was real that was driving
anything with fax driving anything it
was how you could turn those facts or
twist the fact or even make up the facts
to make your opponent look bad so
perception management became a device
and the facts could be twisted anything
could be anything it becomes how can you
manipulate the American people and in
the process reality becomes law reality
becomes simply something to play with to
achieve that end reality is not
important in this context reality is
simply something that you handle the
something was about to happen that would
demonstrate dramatically just how far
the American government had detached
from reality Soviet empire is about to
employ and knew none of the politicians
or the germs or the things all the
economies or the academics saw it coming
[Music]
[Music]
ready to work out
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
the collapse of the Soviet Union also
had a powerful effect on the West for
many it symbolized the final failure of
the dream that politics could be used to
build a new kind of world what was going
to emerge instead was a new system but
had nothing to do with politics a system
whose aim was not to try and change
things but rather to manage a post
political world one of the first people
to describe this dramatic change with a
left-wing German political thinker
called Ulrich Beck Beck said that any
politician who believed that they could
take control of society and drive it
forward to build a better future was now
seen as dangerous
in the past politicians might have been
able to do this but now they were faced
with what he called a runaway world
where things were so complex and
interconnected and modern technologies
so potentially dangerous that it was
impossible to predict the outcomes of
anything you did the catalog of
environmental disasters proved this
politicians would have to give up any
idea of trying to change the world
instead their new aim would be to try
and predict the dangers in the future
and then find ways to avoid those risks
[Music]
although back came from the political
left the world he saw coming was deeply
concerned
the picture he gave was of a political
class reduced to try to steer society
into a dark and frightening future
constantly peering forward and trying to
see the risks coming towards their only
aim to avoid those risks and keep
society state it only lasted for a few
seconds so you're basically shocked you
really didn't know what was going on at
the time where were you in the building
and where was the explosive but a system
that could anticipate the future and
keep society stable has already been
built pieced together from all kinds of
different than sometimes surprising
sources all of them outside politics one
part of it was taking shape in a tiny
town in the far northwest of the United
States put East Wenatchee it was a giant
computer his job was to make the future
predictable
[Music]
the man building it because a bank could
Larry sink back in 1986
mr. Fink's career had collapsed he lost
one hundred million dollars in a deal
and had been sacked he became to term it
wouldn't happen again
things started a company called
Blackrock and Bill's a computer he
called Aladdin it is housed in a series
of large sheds in the apple orchards
outside Willard she thinks aim was to
use the computer to predict with
certainty what the risk of any deal or
investment is going to be
the computer constantly monitors the
wind and it takes things that it sees
happening and then compares them to
events in the past it can do this
because it has in its memory a vast
history of the past 50 years not just
financial at all kinds of events out of
the millions and millions of
correlations the computer then spots
possible disasters possible dangers
lying in the future and moves the
investments to avoid any radical change
and keep the system stable today I'm
going to deliver 1.8 million records
execute 25,000 trades and avert 3,000
disasters I'm going to monitor interest
rates in Europe silver price formation
droughts in the Midwest I'm going to
witness 4 billion shares change hands on
the new york stock exchange and record
the effects on 14 trillion in assets
across 20,000 portfolios i am 11 i am
Aladdin and today I'll find the numbers
behind the numbers I will see the trends
in mobile skaters the connection the
risk I am allowed
I'm Aladdin and I will get the data
right I am 25 million lines of code
written by hundreds of people across two
decades smarter than any algorithm more
powerful than any processing because I
am Aladdin because I am Aladdin
[Music]
I am alone Aladdin has proved to be
incredibly successful the assets it
guides and controls now amount to
fifteen trillion dollars which is seven
percent of the world's total
[Music]
but when at she was also a dramatic
example of another kind of craving for
stability and reassurance more of its
citizens took Prozac than practically
any other town in America when a
person's central nervous system is
changed by an SSRI with that medicine
they will view things differently and
they will be strangers they look at
things differently I have a chemical up
here that changes me
I think differently for me was like
walking around like this for my whole
life and really not knowing that I was
nearsighted I mean really I mean no one
had ever offered me glasses and then all
of a sudden here comes somebody that
says okay now try these on try this
prozac on and I tried it on it for the
first time in my life I went whoa is
this the way reality really is your
perception can be changed and and it's
frightening that's scary to people it's
it's it speaks of science fiction almost
well the medicine just kind of lets you
be you listen to what needs to do on and
then your doctor you every time come
back he says you're looking so much
better and then he just like Jim he ever
Taiwanese you are so beautiful you know
and he's even sucking up
I mean he's being nice you know you're
beautiful you're nice you're friendly
you've got so much going for you I think
yeah yeah so I got I tell my friends oh
I feel much better about myself you know
mom goes out oh I feel so much better
about myself so your friend starts
saying you know I've seen such an
improvement seen such improvement
everybody improves all the way around
they see improvement you know it's like
everybody's kind of brainwashing each
other into being happy but there was a
more effective way of reassuring people
that was being developed that did not
involve medication it too came from
computer systems at this time artificial
intelligence but the way to do it had
been discovered by accident back in the
1960s that had been optimistic dreams
that would be possible to develop
computers that could think like human
beings
scientists then spent years trying to
program the rules that govern human
thought but they never want one computer
scientist at MIT became so disillusioned
that he decided to build a computer
program that would parody these hopeless
attempts he was called Joseph Weizenbaum
and he built what he claimed was a
computer psychotherapist just like a
therapist people could come and talk to
the machine by typing in their problems
Weisenberger calls the program eliza he
modeled it on a real psychotherapist
called Carl Rogers who was famous for
simply repeating back to the patient
what they had just said and that is what
Eliza did the patient sat in front of
the screen and typed in what they were
feeling with the program repeated it
back to them often in the form of a
question
men are all alike in what way
they're always bugging us about
something or other can you think of a
specific example well my boyfriend
Maiden's come here no boyfriend made you
come here he says them I'm depressed
much the time I'm sorry to hear that
you're depressed it's true I am unhappy
do you think coming here will help you
not to be unhappy well I need some help
that much seems certain one of the first
people to use an Isaac was wife and
found secretary and her reaction was
something that he had not predicted at
all
good night yes sir to my office and set
it down as the keyboard and she began to
tighten of course I looked over her
shoulder to make sure that everything
was operating properly after two or
three interchanges with with the Machine
she turned to me and she said would you
mind leaving the room please
but yet she knew has wizened bounded but
Eliza didn't understand a single word
that was being typed into it
you're not my travelling family you
don't argue with me why do you think I
don't argue with you you're afraid of me
does it please you to think Weizenbaum
was astonished he discovered everyone
who tried Eliza became engrossed they
would sit for hours telling the Machine
about their inner feelings and
incredibly intimate details of their
lives they also liked it because it was
free of any kind of patronizing elitism
one person said after all the computer
doesn't burn out look down on you we'll
try to have sex with you
what Eliza showed was that in an age of
individuals what made people feel secure
was having those sounds reflected back
to them just like in a mirror
[Music]
artificial-intelligence
change direction and started to create
new systems did just that but on a giant
scale they were called intelligent
agents they worked by monitoring
individuals gathering vast amounts of
data about their past behavior and then
looked for patterns and correlations
from which they could predict what they
would want in the future it was a system
that ordered the world in a way that was
centered around you and in an age of
anxious individualist frightened of the
future that Israel just idolized
safe public protected from the
complexities of the world
[Laughter]
[Music]
but the applications of this new
direction prove fruitful and profitable
if you liked that love this what was
rising up in different ways was a new
system that promised to keep the world
stable its tentacles reached into every
area of our lives finance promised that
it could control the unpredictability of
the free market while individuals were
more and more monitored to stabilize
their physical and mental states and
increasingly the intelligent agents of
life predicted what people would want in
the future and how they were bearing
but the biggest change was to politics
in a world where the overriding aim was
now stability politics became just part
of a wider system of managing the world
the old idea of democratic politics they
gave a voice to dilute against the path
as eroded and a resentment began to
quietly grow out on the edges of society
[Music]
but the new system did have a dangerous
flaw because in the real world not
everything can be predicted by reading
data from the past if someone was about
to discover them to his own cost was
Donald Trump one day a man called Jess
Marcum received a phone call it was from
Donald Trump and Trump was desperate for
help Markham was a strange mysterious
figure he had been a nuclear scientist
of 1950s who studied the effect of
radiation from nuclear weapons on the
human body then Markham had gone to Las
Vegas become obsessed by gambling
he had a photographic memory and he used
it to instantly process the data of the
games as they were played from that he
could predict the outcome and he always
won
the Las Vegas gangsters were fascinated
they called him the automat Donald Trump
was one of the heroes at the age but in
reality much of his success was a facade
mr. banks that had learnt from the
millions had discovered that he could no
longer pay the interest on the loan your
high the Klumps empire was facing
bankruptcy
his wife Ivana hated him because he was
having an affair with Miss Hawaiian
Tropic 1980 known famous Japanese
gambler could Akio Kashiwagi came to one
of trumps casinos started to win
millions of dollars in the extraordinary
run of luck Trammell who was desperate
for money panicked as day after day he
watched millions being siphoned out of
his casino so he turned for help to just
mark welcome came to Trump's casino in
Atlantic City he analyzed all the data
about the way that Kashiwagi had been
playing he then told to suggest a
particular high-stakes game that he knew
the Japanese gambler could not resist
model not consent
predictive of Kashiwagi antonyms
and after five agonizing days he did
Kashiwagi lost ten million dollars and
he gave her Donald Trump was elated he
thought he'd got his money
[Music]
[Music]
Abelardo is right that it cover the
poorest Peru Clara
but before Kashiwagi could pay his debt
he was hacked to death in his kitchen
are you loser gangsters Donald Trump
didn't get his money Trump's business
went bankrupt but he was forced to sell
most of his buildings to the banks and
he married Miss Hawaiian Tropic in the
future he would sell his name to other
people to put on their buildings and he
himself would become a celebrity tycoon
[Music]
president Hassan didn't want stability
he wanted revenge in December 1988 a
bomb exploded on a Pan Am plane over
Lockerbie in Scotland almost immediately
investigators and journalists pointed
the finger at Syria the bombing had been
done they said in revenge for the
Americans shooting down of an Iranian
airliner in the Gulf a few months before
for 18 months everyone agreed that this
was the truth
the firm a strange thing happened the
security agencies said that they had
been wrong it hadn't been Syria at all
it was Libya who had been behind the
Lockerbie bomber but many journalists
and politicians did not believe they
were convinced that the switch had
happened for the most cynical of reasons
but America and Britain desperately
needed us and as an ally in the coming
Gulf war against Saddam Husein
so once again they blamed Colonel
Gaddafi as the terrorist mastermind
the city of course was unfortunately
accused of many terrorist outrage and of
harboring terrorist groups
it appears that we have now restored
relations with them as have the
Americans there now our friends although
we get no real assurances on the past
whatsoever it strikes me as very strange
indeed that many of the things we
thought were previously the
responsibility of Syria have now
dramatically become the responsibility
of Libya but her South was not really in
control because he had released forces
that no one would be able to control the
force for ten years before he had
brought from Iran to attack the West
the human bomb is now about to jump like
a virus from Shearer to Sunni Islam
in December 1992 the militant group from
us kidnapped an Israeli border stabbed
him to death the Israeli response was
overwhelmed
they arrested 415 members of ours put
them on buses and chopped them to the
top of a bleak mountain in southern
Lebanon
[Music]
the leftist refused to allow any
humanitarian aid but the Israelis have
dumped the Hamas mountains in an area
controlled by Hezbollah they spent six
months there and during that time they
learn from us how powerful suicide
bombing could be his Millar told them
how they had used it to force the
Israelis out of Beirut and back to the
border the first sign that the idea had
spread to Hamas was when a group of the
deportees marched in protest towards the
Israeli border dressed as martyrs as he
Israelis shell but it soon became more
than just lit a mask the ganna waved
suicide attacks in Israel just before
9:00 at the height of Tel Aviv's rush
hour the dawn ripped apart a commuter
bus an amateur cameraman recorded the
scene in the moments afterwards as a
dazed woman was helped out of the
smoldering wreckage I still want to
believe this undermines how threw the
bomb and when I really like it the bomb
I
I started to cry because this damaged
øystein instead of you Hamas said the
Bombers into the heart of Israeli cities
to blow themselves up and kill as many
around them as possible in doing this
Hamas we're going much further the
Hezbollah ever had they were targeting
civilians
something has Bella had never done the
tactic shot the silly one this was
something completely alien to its
history not only did the Koran forbids
suicide but Sunni Islam did not have any
rituals of self-sacrifice
unlike the shields the most senior
religious leader in Saudi Arabia
insisted it was wrong but a mainstream
theologian from Egypt could Sheikh
Qaradawi seized the moment he issued a
fatwa that justified the attacks and he
added it was also justified to kill
civilians because in Israel everyone
including women serve as reservists so
really they are all part of the enemy
army
well here lace at the looker but it is
not suicide it is martyrdom in the name
of God Islamic theologians and
jurisprudence have debated this issue
Israeli women are not like women in our
society because Israeli women are
militarized secondly I consider this
type of martyrdom operation as
indication of justice of love Almighty
Allah is just Allah through His infinite
wisdom he has given the weak what the
strong do not possess and that is the
ability to turn their bodies into bombs
like the Palestinians do hamas kept
sending the bombers into israel
sometimes day after day the horror
overwhelmed israeli society and it
completely destroyed the ability of
politics to solve the Palestinian crisis
instead in the Israeli election of 1996
Benjamin Netanyahu took part he turned
against the peace process which was
exactly what Hamas wanted and from then
on the two sides became locked together
and ever more horrific cycles of man's
human bonds have destroyed the very
thing with President Assad at first was
the real political solution to the
Palestinian question it was just after 1
o'clock and the market was full of
shopping streams of ambulances came to
carry away the dead are we in good it
was a place of appalling suffering but
even with the first Greek claim the
immediate political impact on the peace
process he's impossible this moment it
will be there and must be there of this
bloody peace process
you
and in American all optimistic visions
of the future had also disappeared
instead everyone in society not just the
politicians but the scientists the
journalists and all kinds of experts
have begun to focus or the dangers that
might be hidden in the future this in
turn creates a pessimistic mood then
began to spread out from the rational
technocratic world infects the whole of
the culture the careful one became
possessed by dark forebodings imagining
the very worst that might have
[Music]
the
even
[Music]
over there the trees
remember dream trip ever dream ever
good
[Music]
Oh
[Music]
is
the three
[Music]
[Music]
whoo
I can see that lady
you
[Music]
the attacks in September 2001 the
suicide bombers but now on a huge scale
they demonstrated the terrifying part of
this new force to penetrate through
defense they had come to kill thousands
of Americans on their own side twenty
years before President Reagan had been
confronted by the first suicide bombers
they had been unleashed by President
Assad of Syria to force America out of
the Middle East but rather than confront
the complexity of Syria and Israel and
the Palestinian problem America had
retreated and left Syria and suicide
bombing to fester and mutate they had
gone instead for Colonel Gaddafi and
turned him into an evil global terrorist
but in the process this changed the way
people saw and understood terrors
instead of a violence born out of
political struggles for power it became
replaced by a much simpler image of an
evil tyrant of the head of a rogue state
who became more like an arch criminal
who wants terrorized the world
[Music]
all the politics and power dropped away
the problem was just them their evil
personalities
[Music]
and after 9/11 this led to a new and
equally simple idea if only you could
remove these tyrannical figures then the
grateful people of their country would
transform naturally into a democracy
because they would be free of the evil
we owe it to the future of civilization
not to allow the world's worst leaders
to develop and deploy and therefore
blackmail free driving countries with
the world's worst weapons we know
they've already got chemical and
biological weapons there we know that
they're certainly doing their best to
acquire nuclear weapons technology if we
allow them to do that and do nothing
about it
then I think later generations will
consider as deeply responsible both Tony
Blair and George Bush became possessed
by the idea of ridding the world of
Saturn was saying so possessed that they
believed any story to prove his evil
intentions and the line between reality
and fiction became ever more benign
in September 2002 the head of mi6 rushed
to Downing Street to tell Blair
excitedly they had finally found the
source that confirmed everything the
source he said had direct access to
Saddam Hussein's chemical weapons
program which was making vast quantities
of VX and sarin nerve agents the nerve
agents were being loaded into linked
hollow glass spheres but then someone in
our meetings notice the detail the
source was describing was identical to
seams in the 1996 movie The Rock
starring Sean Connery a Nicholas Cage
[Applause]
really elegant string of pearls
configurations unfortunately incredibly
unstable and what exactly does this
stuff do if the rocket winners in
aerosol to take out the entire city of
people the cholinesterase inhibitor
stops the brain from studying neural
messages down the spell a later report
into the Iraq war pointed out glass
containers were not typically used in
chemical munitions seizes your nervous
system do not move that and the
informant had obviously seen a popular
movie known as the rocks that had
inaccurately depicted nerve agents being
carried in glass beads or spheres your
skin melts off oh my god that there is a
threat from Saddam Hussein and the
weapons of mass destruction that he has
acquired is not in doubt at all
Hafez al-asad had died in 2000 his son
Basha became the new president of Syria
but he couldn't escape the inexorable
logic of what his father had started 20
years before his father had sent Shiites
suicide bombers to attack the Americans
in Lebanon now as America and Britain
invaded Iraq
I sure decided that he would copy this
father but what he was about to let
loose would tear the Arab world apart
and then come back to try to destroy him
[Music]
maschera sack was never supposed to have
been president it was always going to
have been his elder brother
Patton but then battle had died in the
car crash
so now flash I took over the giant
palace but his father had built above
the mast
after this point - I have not been
interested in politics he was fascinated
by computers
he founded the Syrian Computer Society
and brought the Internet to the country
his favorite band was the Electric Light
Orchestra but now he was president he
set out to attack America
[Music]
I assure Assad was convinced that the
invasion of Iraq was just the first step
of plot either Western powers to take
over the whole of the Middle East he
knew that the invasion had outraged many
of the radical Islamists in Syria what
they most wanted to do was to go to Iraq
and kill Americans
so basher instructed the Syrian
intelligence services to help them do
this
Syrian agents set up a pipeline that
began to feel it's thousands of
militants across the border and into the
heart of the insurgents and it grew
within a year almost all the foreign
fighters from across the world were
coming through Syria and they brought
suicide bombing with the Americans
estimated that 90 percent the suicide
bombers in Iraq were foreign fighters as
it began to run out of control most of
the jihadists had joined the group al
Qaeda in Iraq but then turned to killing
Shiites in an attempt to create a civil
war
the force that had originally been
invented either Sharon's suicide bombing
now returned and started to kill them
then this a moment of silence before
people realized what was happening a few
seconds ago we just had repeated
explosions in the street below me
people are now fleeing in terror from
the central square around the mosque
this is what everybody feared we just
had another explosion in the distance
but somebody was trying to target this
religious festival to try to bring about
a sectarian conflict in Iraq
[Applause]
there was panic a terrified stampede
but some of these people were running
into the next bombs we counted only six
separate explosions
Tony bear and George Bush were faced by
disaster Iraq was imploding while at
home they were being accused of lying to
their own people to justify the invasion
what they desperately needed was
something that would show that the
invasion was having a good effect in the
Arab world so they made an extraordinary
decision they turn for help to the man
who they had always insisted is one of
the world's most dangerous times Colonel
Gaddafi
[Music]
and instead they set out to make him
their new best friend it was going to be
the highest achievement perception
management a man who had been created by
the West the fate global Superman was
now going to be turned into a fake hero
of democracy and everyone not just
politicians would become involved public
relations academics television
presenters spies and even musicians were
all going to help reinvent Koga back it
would show just how many people in the
Western establishment but by now become
the engineers this fake one
ever since he had been accused of the
Lockerbie bombing Colonel Gaddafi have
been a complete outcast the West had
imposed sanctions on Libya and the
economy was falling apart but then
suddenly Tony Blair broke live into the
BBC evening news the Prime Minister Tony
Blair is a mad about to make a statement
the BBC understands from Downing Street
it's of international significance he'll
be making his statement at any moment
now we can see pictures of him in WM
City hearing Colonel Gaddafi has
confirmed that Libya has in the past
sought to develop weapons of mass
destruction capabilities Libya has now
declared its intention to dismantle its
weapons of mass destruction completely
this decision by Colonel Gaddafi is an
historic one and a courageous one and I
applaud it today in Tripoli the leader
of Libya Colonel Muammar al-gaddafi
publicly confirmed his commitment to
disclose and dismantle all weapons of
mass destruction programs in his country
Colonel Gaddafi now became for Western
politicians a heroic figure
his decision to give up his weapons of
mass destruction seemed to prove that
the invasion of Iraq could transform the
Middle East and Tony Blair traveled to
meet Gaddafi in his desert tent to
welcome him back into what one
journalist called the community of
civilized nations but as in the past
nothing is what it seemed with Colonel
Gaddafi in reality Gaddafi did not
really have the terrifying weapons of
mass destruction he was promising to
destroy his nuclear program has started
to a halt long ago and never produced
anything dangerous he had managed to buy
some equipment to the black market but
his technicians had been unable to
assemble it his biological weapons were
non-existent all he had was some old
mustard gas in leting bounds but now he
had to pretend to have a terrifying
arsenal of weapons the West had to
pretend that they had avoided another
global threat
[Music]
and then the made-up stories became even
more complicated as part of the team the
West said that if Gaddafi admitted that
Libya had done the Lockerbie bombing but
they would lift the sanctions but many
of those who had investigated after they
were still convinced that Libya hadn't
done it but really it had been Syria but
Colonel Gaddafi confessed his son Saif
was interviewed about this confession he
said that his father was simply
pretending that he had been behind the
Lockerbie bombing to get the sanctions
lifted but new lives were being built on
top of old ones to construct a
completely make-believe world you have
to accept what we had to accept at the
time responsibility because you have to
accept responsibility you have to pay
compensation and order to get in to
sanction it you did that because we are
convinced that we needed but because the
final edit of this nightmare so what
you're saying is that you accept
responsibility but you're not admitting
that you did it yes and this is all a
sham you're saying just just to get
sanctions over with so that you can
start normal diplomatic relations with
arrest okay what's wrong with it it's a
very cynical way to behave as a country
isn't it many people would say first of
all I mean zemanick is a division they
told us to write that letter they told
us to pay compensation and then they
open that embassies and restore the
relation and they came to us it was
their game but our game does you know
that the leader now there's a picture on
the television ally in town a good thank
you
there is public relations companies then
came to Libya to do what they called
reframing the narrative one firm has
paid three million dollars to turn
Gaddafi into what they described as a
modern world think they did this by
bringing other famous world thinkers and
TV presenters out to Libya to meet the
colonel and discuss his theories hello
and welcome to Libya in the global age a
conversation with malama Gadhafi but
first let's get the story so far of
Libya one world thinker was called Lord
Antony Gibbons coincidentally he had a
theory which he called the Third Way
which had inspired Tony Brown Colonel
Gaddafi's idea was called the third
universal thing
Lord giddons later wrote about his talks
with the Libyan leader Colonel Gaddafi
likes my turn the third way because his
own political philosophy is a version of
this idea he makes many intelligent and
perceptive points I leave enlightened
and encouraged over 40 years the leader
of Libya Muammar Qaddafi and then
Colonel Gaddafi achieved his lifelong
dream he was invited to address the
United Nations he spent almost two hours
explaining his third universal theory
and also demanded an investigation into
the shootings of President Kennedy and
Martin Luther King when he was in New
York Gaddafi was offered a tenth just
like the one he had thrown in the
gardens of the grand mansion the land of
Maivia was Donald Trump when I dealt
with everybody I can tell you something
else what I dealt with Gadhafi Onegin
excuse me I rented a piece of land he
paid me what more for one night at least
that the land was belong here over two
years and I did not amuse the land
that's what we should be doing with a
nominee to use the word screw by his
freedom we should be doing
[Music]
people in Britain and America now began
to turn away from politics The effect of
the Iraq war had been very powerful
not only did millions of people feel
that they had been lied to over the
weapons of mass destruction but there
was a deeper feeling but whatever they
did or said had no effect
but despite the mass protests and the
fears and the warnings the war had
happened anyway
liberals radicals the whole new
generation of young people retreated
they turned instead to another world
it was free of this hypocrisy when the
corruption of politics
they went into cyberspace
[Music]
[Music]
by now
cyberspace had become even more
sophisticated and responsive to human
interaction the online world was full of
algorithms that could analyze and
predict human behavior this was a
scientist called Judea pearl he was the
Godfather of modern artificial
intelligence hell's brakes had been to
use what were called Bayesian belief
networks they were systems that could
predict behavior even when the
information was incomplete but to make
the system work pearl and others had
imported a model of human beings drawn
from economics they created what were
called rational agents software that
mimicked human beings but in a very
simplified form the model assumed that
the agent would always act rationally in
order to get what it wanted nothing more
one of the early utopians of cyberspace
Jaron Lanier warned of the implications
of this
the agents model what you are interested
in would always be a cartoon and in
return you will see a cartoon version of
the world through the agents arse
[Music]
Antion it will never be clear who they
are working you someone else new
technology began to allow people to
upload millions of images and videos
into cyberspace and the web which up to
that point had seemed like an abstract
other world began to look and feel like
the real world from videos of animals
personal moments of experience
extraordinary events to horrific
terrible use more and more we fucked
over
[Laughter]
and in a strange sad twist first
terrorist beheading videos that was
posted online was that of Judaea pills
oh the Sun Daniel he was a journalist
for The Wall Street Journal and had been
kidnapped by radical Islamists in
Pakistan they recorded what they said
was his confession and then his killing
a McDaniel Pro and the jewish-american I
come from other side family designers by
college my mother's Jewish
I'm sure only now do I think about that
some of the people with my terrible they
must be in their syllabus situation this
was a new world that the old systems of
power found it very difficult to deal
with in the wake of the 9/11 attacks the
security agencies secretly collected
data from millions of people online one
program was caught optic nerve it took
stills from the webcam conversations of
millions of people across the world
trying to spot terrorists planning
another attack the program did not
discover a single terrorist but it did
discover something else the top-secret
assessment said unfortunately there are
issues with undesirable images within
the data it would appear that a
surprising number of people are using
webcam conversations to show intimate
parts of their body to the other person
also the fact that the software allows
more than one person to view a webcam
stream means that it appears to be being
used to broadcast pornography
[Music]
but increasingly people were using the
Internet in other ways to present
themselves as they wanted to be seen I
did the video evolve is about me
I don't really want to tell you islands
because you could the web drew people in
because it was mathematics it was
somewhere that you could explore and get
lost it in any way you want with behind
the screen like in a two-way mirror
simplified agents were watching and
predicting and guiding your hand on the
mouse through my phone wakes top
let's stop please it's nothin up a
selfie there you go
my name is sweetie
the man asked me to take off my clothes
they undress they play with themselves
but what they don't know I'm not real
I'm a computer model made piece by piece
to track down this man who do this
you
[Applause]
[Music]
as the intelligence systems online
gathered ever more dates new forms of
guidance began to elude social media
creative filters complex algorithms that
looked at what individuals liked and
then fed more of same factor
in the process individuals began to move
without noticing into bubbles that
isolated them from enormous amounts of
other information
they only heard and saw that they liked
and the news feeds increasingly excluded
anything that might challenge people's
pre-existing belief
is
I mean
yes
[Music]
Oh
you
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
the version of cyberspace is rising up
to be very much like William Gibson
original vision
but behind the superficial freedoms of
web were a few giant corporations their
cake systems controlled what people saw
and shaped what they feel
what was even more mysterious but how
they made their decisions about what you
should like and that should be hidden
from then the other utopian vision of
cyberspace re-emerged
[Music]
[Applause]
take care of the roadway
[Applause]
after the financial crash of 2008 the
politicians saved the banks but they did
practically nothing about the massive
corruption that was revealed in its wind
and the reason they gave that it might
destabilize the system public anger
burst out the Occupy movement took over
Wall Street and then the Senate in
Washington the issue is that certain
individuals they are very wealthy and
pretty much corrupted our political
system and this is like the heart of it
I mean this is a Senate building these
people are cut off and they bitch with
retro democracy and it's literally
killing people I'm an Iraq war vet once
a record of knives he would happen first
hand when we let the Russian Lords of
government and democracy and we're
coming here today
basically just ways around it what close
the economy was the original dream of
the internet that people like John Perry
Barlow had outlined in the early 1990s
in his declaration of the independence
of cyberspace while I had described a
new world free of politics and the old
hierarchies of travel the space where
people connected together as equals in a
network and built a new society without
leaders now the Occupy movement set out
to build that kind of society in the
real world
the camps were to be the models all the
meetings use the idea of the human
microphone people throughout the crowd
repeated a speaker's words so everyone
could hear but if someone wanted to
challenge the speaker the human
amplifiers also had to repeat their
words so their voice had equal power
[Applause]
each person was an autonomous individual
who expressed what they believed but
together they became components in a
network that organized itself through
the feedback of information around the
system you could organize people without
the exercise of power
[Music]
nice treat
books whitetail looks like colleges
running around
few hundreds people walking down the
street
then almost immediately the Arab Spring
began the first revolution started in
Tunisia but it quickly spread to Egypt
on January the 25th 2011 thousands of
Egyptians came out in groups across town
and then started moving towards chahiye
as well
it seemed like a spontaneous aphorism
but the internet played a key role in
organizing groups
[Music]
one of the main activists was an
Egyptian computer actually with why
he'll gone he worked with Google in
Egypt but he had also set up the
Facebook site played the key role in
organizing the first prototypes
hundreds of thousands took over tokyo
square ghonim gave an interview on
egyptian TV
in Yanni show a cherub on an exhibition
in Wausau sir the man i le facebook how
much can be someone as a man I am one of
italicized I will knock down a hole in
the trifle and I Facebook memory shadows
who said the Indian in the Shiva bowl
miss Liu basharat LLS human samsara she
fordwick Omega ma my fish appalled
October - Alicia Sharon Apollo aku knew
I'd seen an official head musician
harder hydrocortisone ho Olivia drops
elgu how hurricane is a hadith ha ke
ko'olau coke addict we sold chef Evan
Internet we saw the child internet will
abide by the katasonych Shabaab must
live in Decatur but it's old columnist a
golden was also overwhelmed by the power
of this new technology had but a
computer engineer with a keyboard could
call out thousands of people some of
whom then died in the midst of the
protests and I look only local humble
get the fuckin know
[Music]
my love all of them it wonderful new
academic people's everything many
liberals in the West saw this as proof
of the revolutionary power of the
incident again seem to be able to
organize a revolution without leaders a
revolution happened to topple a brutal
dictator who have been backed by America
of the West for thirty years
[Music]
but the internet radicals were not the
only ones who saw their dreams being
fulfilled in the Arab Spring many of the
political leaders of the West also
enthusiastically supported the
revolutions but it seemed to fit with
their simple idea of regime change it
might have failed in Iraq but now the
people everywhere were rising up to rid
themselves of the evil tyrants democracy
with flourish
[Music]
so when an uprising began in Libyan
Britain France and America supported
suddenly Colonel Gaddafi stopped being a
hero of the West all the politicians and
the public relations people and the
academics who had all promoted him as a
global thinker suddenly disappear
Gaddafi became yet again an evil
dictator who had to be overthrown his
son Saif said the way these people are
disowning me and my family is disgusting
just a few months ago we were being
treated as honored friends now that
rebels are threatening our country these
cowards are turning on us Colonel
Gaddafi retreated to the ruins of the
house that the Americans had bombed 30
years before and addressed the world
those who loved market Fe is the glory
if I had a position if I were a
president I would have resigned
I would have thrown my resignation in
your face but I have no peace no
position no post I have nowhere to
resign from I have my gun I have my
rifle
and I can to fight for Libya okay I just
coming to share we draw your children
from the streets you know who don't win
welcome take your children back they are
dragging your children they making your
children drunk now if you do that and
they send them to hell your children
will go what for
[Music]
in November 2011 a large convoy was
spotted driving at high speed away from
Colonel Gaddafi's hometown as sent an
American drone controlled from a shed
outside Las Vegas was sent to follow the
operator fired a missile at the lead car
[Music]
it athle then fled looking for shelter
from the oncoming rebel forces he hid
under the road no drainage
[Music]
but instead of becoming a democracy
Libya began to descend into chaos and
the other revolutions were also failing
the Occupy camps have become trapped in
endless meetings and it became clear
that there was a terrible confusion part
of the movement the radicals have
believed if they could create a new way
of organizing people than a new society
emerged but what they did not have was a
picture of what that society would be
like a vision of the future the truth
was that their revolution was not about
an idea it was about how you manage
things
and those who had started the revolution
in Egypt came face to face with the same
terrible fact social media had helped to
bring people together in Tahrir Square
but once there the internet gave no clue
as to what kind of new society they
could create in Egypt the movement
schools and a group that did have a
perfect and was their Brotherhood rushed
in to fill the vacuum the Brotherhood
took power in an election and one of
them Mohamed Morsi became president the
Liberals and the left were shocked and
bit by bit they turned back to the
military protesting asking them to save
the revolution from being captured by
Isis in the spring of 2013 the military
took action they arrested the president
and killed hundreds of his supporters
who protested
and an extraordinary Spectre unfolded in
Tahrir Square
thousands of the liberal activists who
had begun the revolution two years
before summoned by social media now
welcome the military back by waving
their laser pills a helicopters flying
overhead
[Music]
the crowd had been summoned once again
by Facebook
[Music]
[Music]
after the failure of the revolutions it
was not just a radicals no one in the
West had any idea of how to change the
world at home the politicians had given
so much of their power away to finance
and the ever growing managerial
bureaucracies the veil effect had become
managers themselves while abroad all
their adventures had failed and their
simplistic vision of the world had been
exposed as dangerous and destructive but
in Russia there was a group of men who
had seen how this very lack of belief in
politics and dark uncertainty about the
future could work to their advantage
what they had done was turn politics
into a strange theatre where nobody knew
what was true or what was fake any
longer they were called political
technologists and they were the key
figures behind President Putin they had
kept him in power unchallenged for 50
leaders some of them have been
dissidents back in the 1970s that had
been powerfully influenced by the
science-fiction writings the strugatsky
brothers
20 years later when Russia fell apart
after the end of communism they rose up
and took control of the media and they
used it to manipulate the electorate on
a vast scale
for them reality was just something that
could be manipulated and shaped into
anything you wanted it to be but then a
technologist emerged who went much
further and his ideas would become
central to Putin's grip on power he was
called Vladislav Surkov sarkoff came
originally from the theatre world and
those who have studied his career said
that what he did was take avant-garde
ideas from the theatre and bring them
into the heart of politics circles aim
was not just to manipulate people but to
go deeper and play with and undermine
their very perception of the world so
they are never sure what is really
happening
[Music]
circle turn Russian politics into a bull
will ring constantly changing piece of
theater he used Kremlin money to sponsor
all kinds of groups from mass
anti-fascist youth organizations to the
very opposite neo-nazi skinheads
and liberal human rights groups who then
attacked the government surkov even back
whole political parties that were
opposed to President Putin but the key
thing was that surkov then let it be
known that this was what he was doing
which meant that no one is sure what was
real or what was fate in modern Russia
as one journalist put it it's a strategy
of power that keeps any opposition
constantly confused a ceaseless
shape-shifting that is unstoppable
because it is indefinable meanwhile real
power was elsewhere hidden away behind
the stage exercise without anyone seeing
but then the same thing seemed to start
happening in the West by now it was
becoming evermore clear the system had
deep roots every month there were new
revelations but most of the bank's
involvement in global corruption of
massive tax avoidance by all the major
corporations of the secret surveillance
of everyone's emails by the National
Security Agency yet no one was
prosecuted except a few people at the
lowest levels and behind it all the
massive inequality kept on the growth
structure of power remained the same
nothing ever changed because nothing
could be allowed to destabilize the
system but then the shape-shifting began
[Applause]
thank you very much so nice so amazing
so amazing why that's ok we I love you
more ok the campaign that Donald Trump
ran was unlike anything before in
politics nothing was fixed what he said
who he attacked and how he attacked them
was constantly changing and shifting
Trump attacked his Republican rivals as
being all part of a broken and corrupt
system her politics wherever one could
be caught using words that could have
come from the Occupy movement
you've also donated to several
Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton
included Nancy Pelosi you explained away
those donations saying you did that to
get business-related favors and you said
recently quote when you give they do
whatever the hell you want them to do
you better believe it so what
specifically didn't they do if I asked
them if I need them you know most of the
people on this stage
I've given - just so you understand a
lot of money I will tell you that our
system is broken I give too many people
before this before two months ago as a
businessman I give to everybody when
they call I give and you know what when
I need something from them two years
later three years later I call them they
are there for me so that's a broken
system but at the same time come use the
language of the extreme racist right in
America connecting the people's darkest
fears pushing them and bringing those
fears
[Applause]
ya fuckin pussy huh many of the facts
that Trump asserted were also completely
untrue the Trump didn't care he and his
audience knew that much of what he said
or little relationship to reality
[Music]
this meant that Trump defeated
journalists because the journalists
central belief is that their job was to
expose lives and assert the truth of
Trump this became irrelevant not
surprisingly Vladimir Putin madness
sister Salvador my dad Donald a tumblr
known yahoo chinchilla excellently would
be sick so mean
minashi develop ridiculously particular
theoretically next non-observant
illegitimate one click on gallery at
some store pushes it boom Oh erroneous
machinima national I see Nora who model
at the previous equation my the previous
insecticide in Ripley is PVC euro
Bharati each stone is posted yeah
fortunately popular mr. Cesario sure
ascetic miniature Gila attenuates the
security you know fine area the Liberals
were outraged by drama they express
their anger in cyberspace so it had no
effect because the algorithms make sure
that they only spoke to people who
already agreed
[Music]
instead ironically their waves of angry
messages and tweets benefitted that
large corporations who ran the social
media platforms one online analyst put
it simply angry people click
it meant a radical fury that came like
waves across the internet no longer had
the power to change the world instead it
was becoming a few that was feeding the
new systems of power and making them
evermore path but none of the Liberals
could possibly imagine that Donald Trump
could ever win a nomination it was just
a giant catalog and then of course
there's Donald Trump Donald Trump has
been saying that he will run for
president as a Republican which is
surprising since I just assumed he was
running as a joke
definite rump often appears on Fox which
is ironic because the Fox often appears
on Donald Trump's head
Donald Trump owns the Miss USA pageant
which is great for Republicans because
it will streamline their search for a
vice president
Donald Trump said recently has a great
relationship with the blacks that would
let the blacks or a family of white
people
I bet he's mistaken
but underneath the liberal disdain most
Donald Trump in America and Vladislav
Surkov in Russia had realized the same
thing that the version of reality that
politics presented was no longer
believable but the stories politicians
told their people about the world and
stopped making sense and in the face of
that you could play with reality
constantly shifting and changing and in
the process further undermine and weaken
the old forms of crowd
[Music]
and there was another face that was
about to dramatically reveal just how
weak politics have become in the West
sirree
[Music]
you
[Music]
the attack happened here at a central
police station in Damascus police say
the Balmer came up the stairs police
then opened fire and then police say he
detonated the explosives and the damage
is here to see behind me the pockmarked
walls were the ball bearings hit blood
splattered on the wall and the force of
the blast holds walls to collapse and
everything is topsy-turvy everything's
destroyed I'm up by now Syria was being
torn apart by a horrific civil war
wasn't started as part of the Arab
Spring had turned into a vicious battle
to the death between Bashar Assad and
his opponents and at the heart of the
conflict was the force that his father
had first walked on West suicide bombing
so ever harder
[Music]
back in the 1980s Russia Assad's father
had seen suicide as a weapon he could
use to force the Americans out of the
Middle East
but over the next thirty years is it
shifted and mutated into something that
had now ended up doing the very opposite
carrying Arab world
Hafez al-asad stream of a powerful and
United Arab world is now destroyed in
Iraq extremist Sunni groups had used
suicide as a way to start a sectarian
war and now groups like Isis brought the
same techniques into Syria to attack not
just Assad son his fellow chefs
[Music]
like his heart Bashar Assad retaliated
with a vengeful fury and the country
fell apart
of
[Music]
I love Allah Allah
[Music]
my fellow Americans tonight I want to
talk to you about Syria why it matters
and where we go from here
faced by the war Western politicians
were believable they insisted Bashar
Assad was evil but then it turned out
his enemies were more and more firmly
fit than him the question before the
house today is how we keep the British
people safe from the threat posed by
ISIL this is not about whether we want
to fight terrorism it's about how best
we do that so Britain America and France
decided to bomb the terrorist threat The
effect of that was to help keep us out
in power
[Music]
then it became more condensed suddenly
the Russians
President Putin sent hundreds of planes
and combat troops to support Assad but
no one knew what their underlying aims
they seem to be using a strategy that a
Vladislav Surkov had developed in the
Ukraine
he called it nonlinear water which was a
new kind of rule where you never know
what the enemy are really up to all of
the underlying aim circle said was not
to win them but to use the conflict to
create a constant state of destabilized
perception in order to manage and
control
in March 2016 the Russians had me enough
for the great fanfare that they were
leaving the concert was held in the
ruins of tomorrow to celebrate the
withdrawal in reality the Russians never
they're still there still no one knows
what they really want another again and
within Syria there was a new Islamist
ideology who was determined to exploit
the growing uncertainties in Europe and
America he was called Abu Musab al-suri
the Syrian we'll miss Elodie a copy
Kathy lemon eddakath dev and levena Toto
and yakumo cortez jihadi no pretended
years well my mother fuji well al serif'
had originally worked with her sama bin
Laden in Afghanistan but he had turned
against him al Sri gave lectures that
had a powerful effect on the Islamist
movement
he argued that bin Laden had been wrong
to attack the West head-on because it
created a massive military response that
had almost destroyed Islamism instead
al-suri said independent groups or
individuals should stage random
small-scale attacks on civilians in
Europe and America
the aim was to spread fear uncertainty
and doubt
and undermine the already failing
authority of Western politicians
[Music]
the effect of the attacks shocked Europe
and America and gave powerful force to
the new politics uncertainty and anxiety
I'm sure that you with me share the
absolute horror and total revulsion at
what happened in Paris last Friday and
I'm afraid there is that we have to be
honest and frank about this and talk
about these things without being fearful
there is a problem with some of the
Muslim community in this country there
is a problem and we have to be honest
about it our politicians I'm afraid
haven't had forgot this could be the
great Trojan horse of all time because
you look at the migration study it look
at it now they'll start infiltrating
with women and children both the brexit
campaign in Britain and Donald Trump in
America did exactly what al-suri had
predicted they used the fear to
dramatize a world where everything even
going to a restaurant could become a
risky event and what had been seen as
doomed campaigns on the fringes of
society that could never win became
frightening the real i am genuinely
freaked out right now about this whole
brexit thing because we had all been
told that it wasn't going to happen like
it was going away was going away from
Breck sitting and on to the stain and
because I had this like bedrock belief I
have friends who like live and work in
London I said oh don't worry we're very
sensible people this isn't going to
happen it's a lot of talk but that we
don't do that so stuff here they were
wrong
and I really kind of crushes my view of
like what can happen that it's bad that
we don't think is going to happen like
it's just not supposed to happen I feel
like we're watching this sharing
especially in Europe again and I can
United they never thought it would be -
it would be America America the people
who must say I do Ottoman I am so ha
[Music]
you must be my PowerUp don't
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
don't help me
table mother's silver whore man - homie
[Music]
turn out the light and go
[Music]
bring your video
say bye Heather
[Music]