one one person who visited me during the
break had a question that was a good
knot but all the other questions weren't
good but this one is a question of good
general relevance so do you want to
repeat your question right yeah well
it's a really good question so the
question is Nietzsche said God is dead
and he believed that things would fall
apart as a consequence of that and I'm
claiming for example that people have an
implicit religious structure and they
act it out
okay so there's actually a lot of things
happened as a consequence of the fact
that that's a reasonable issue a good
question
so one of the things you might think
about is that so Nietzsche's claim in
dostoyevsky's claim were quite
straightforward
they said that once you took the
foundation out of something it would
fall now it might take a long time to
fall especially if it's a big thing so
you know you could make the claim for
example that the Soviet Union basically
fell in 1970 but it took 19 years to
topple over because it's a big thing
right it just doesn't crumble all at
once and so Nietzsche and Dostoyevsky's
claim would be once you hack out the
basic assumptions and question them that
it's only a matter of time until the
entire structure decays and you could
think that perhaps you know if you have
a habit and then you become conscious of
the habit and you practice a new habit
then you can have a new habit and so
what that means is that you can use your
conscious mind to restructure your
implicit beliefs it's hard or you can
use your conscious mind to destroy your
belief in the value of those implicit
actions and demolish them across time
okay so that could happen and I think to
some degree that has happened it's
certainly happened enough so that people
are very confused about what they
believe or even about what belief means
because there's
contradiction between what people think
and there's a and how they act so okay
that's one tangent so to speak young
actually took that question very
seriously in some sense because
Nietzsche here's the flaw in Nietzsche's
argument I think that's like I hesitate
to ever say that because like I said he
was a staggering genius so but nature
believed his proposition was that once
the religious edifice fell that people
would have to create their own values so
he believed that the over man the
Superman so to speak would be a new type
of human being like an existential type
of human being who would be able to
accept the fact that there was no
ultimate meaning but create their own
values okay what the weird thing about
that is you don't actually seem to
create values that's what that's where
Nietzsche's flawed I think that's where
he implicitly accepted the
presuppositions of the rationalists
because if there's no real source of
value then it stands to reason that you
create values but you don't not easily
like you know think about your own life
you know so let's say you make a new
year's resolution you say well I'm going
to study like three hours a day it's
like you're trying to create your own
value structure right but then you find
out it's a lot harder than you think
because you don't listen to yourself
it's like you wander off and you know
play video games or watch something on
YouTube you know and and you know why
are you doing that
what's because you're led by values you
don't create now maybe there's a
co-creation you know because it's not
like you can't change yourself at all
but we should be very careful before we
jump to the conclusion that values are
or even can be something that people
actually create now the phenomenologist
s' like Heidegger and Jung as well would
say no no let's let's just not get too
hasty about making the presupposition
that we can or should create our own
values now one reason you might be
hesitant to do that is that Hitler
created his values so to speak and so
did the Soviet communists
and North Koreans you know they're
trying to impose a rationalist value
structure on a society and the
consequences of that have been you know
people debate about how many people died
in the Soviet Union as a consequence of
internal repression and as the Marxist
revisionists rally back to the original
beliefs the estimate keeps going down
but you know it was tens of millions of
people so and in China who knows it was
maybe it was a hundred million people it
was a lot of people and then of course
there's the knot season you know so the
the act of attempting to rationally
construct a value system and then impose
it that doesn't seem to work out very
well so you know on a sociological level
we seem to have evidence that that's
dangerous and then on a personal level
it's like yeah you're so sure you create
your values I would say to a large
degree you discover them and so you know
here here's here's an experiment you can
try it one I told you last week I think
to try to watch yourself speak for I
think you should do it for the rest of
your life you know because words are
very very very powerful and they lead
you places so you should be careful how
you use them but like here's another
really interesting experiment is watch
what you're interested in try don't try
to control it so much just see where it
is because like in the phenomenologist
certainly made much of this is like for
them like for Heidegger value is
something that manifested itself in the
world and attracted your attention you
know it wasn't something you precisely
created now I believe you have a hand in
creating it we'll talk more about that
later because you're not you're not a
deterministic entity precisely so it's
like you can participate in the
construction of the value system but you
know you have to take your biological
nature into mind and you have to take
your cultural nature into mind and you
have to take other people into mind and
so you know you have you can vary the
game but I don't think you can really
change the rules that's a reasonable way
of thinking about
now what you did in many ways was he
said well maybe we have to go back down
into the deep symbolic substrata of the
human psyche to find the origin place of
the ideas that we used to hold as
religious it was a hypothesis in some
sense and so there the psychoanalytic
hypothesis is something like it's the
it's the psychic substrata the
pre-linguistic psychic substrata that is
the source of ritual symbol and
religious ideas and so that you can go
back to the source in a sense to
revitalize those ideas and that strikes
me as a wiser approach than the rational
approach which says you can just create
your values it's like we tried that it
didn't work it really didn't work it was
murderous so and then the alternative of
the no value proposition as well then
you're going to be nihilistic and that's
not
I think nihilism is a form of mental
illness it's a sociological it it's
caused by sociological conditions but
fundamentally it's a mental illness
you revise what you mean by believe
that's part of it and that's what we're
going to try to walk through now this is
a very is a linear argument in some
sense so there's going to be a lot of
tangents I want to I want to show you
how that might be done and and what it
might mean meaning who knows what it
ultimately means right there's just no
going there but my experience with these
ideas have been that once you understand
them and it's a different way of
categorizing ssin I would say all sorts
of things that you didn't understand all
of a sudden light up for you and it's
really helpful you know because for let
me just give you a couple of examples
you know I would say that it's a
unspoken proposition of much of today's
socio ideological thinking that there's
something pathological about human
beings you know like I've heard people
say like human beings are like a cancer
on the planet it's like I went to a talk
a TED talk at Queen's a TEDx talk where
one of the professor's who was a radical
environmentalist of sorts you know he
told the whole audience they were all
people about your age that if they had
any ounce of ethical if they had any
ethical standards whatsoever they
wouldn't reproduce it's like huh you
know really he said well we've only had
one child and for me I thought that was
one child too many for him but you know
I thought that's bloody pathological
when you stand up in front of a whole
bunch of young people who have their
whole future in front of them you say
well you know you're such a horrid
creature in your very core that it would
be a moral violation for you to
propagate it's like you know so I mean
one of the things that that's happened
to me is like I kind of like people you
know they're peculiar and weird like
hippopotamuses and and rhinos and
penguins and all that but you know I
certainly don't think that we're some
sort of cancer on the planet I really
think that's a that's a pre genocide
elide eeeh as far as I'm concerned it's
like the planet would be better off
without any people on it it's like hey
glad you're not near the old thermo new
your button yeah really really you know
it's like that's an archetypal idea Fire
will cleanse everything it's like that's
what Hitler believed that's why all
Berlin was burning when he committed
suicide it's like that was what he was
after from the beginning
click cleansing fire it's like beware of
those ideas boy you know and so I can
see the intrinsic dignity of people and
and their intrinsic value and how that
can be expressed across time and you
know and I value that it's it's it's
it's something pristine and remarkable
you know and understanding I believe
that understanding these ideas properly
can give you that kind of orientation
you know I mean everybody's flawed and
useless and half crazy I mean obviously
but you know that's not exactly the
point there are reasons we are flawed in
useless and half crazy you know life is
hard and we're finite and we just we
have big problems that confront us it's
like I don't think any sane person
cannot be crazy so to speak but having
said all that the idea that there's
something intrinsically pathological
about human being is like that is an
absolutely what's the word apocalyptic
idea it's like beware of people who tell
you such things you know so and it's
certainly not something you should be
thinking about yourself god
it's like who knows what you're up to
you know maybe some of you will be great
people you know good luck with it so so
I want to walk you through what I think
these ideas mean and I'm not asking you
to believe anything I tell you it's like
don't hack away at it man see if you can
see where it's flawed I can't I've tried
so because I don't want to be standing
on sand and so what I've tried to do is
to look at human history and prehistory
and to see what it is that we need to
move forward and we have to be united
with our history human beings are
historical creatures and so if there's a
divide between us and our history then
all sorts of weird ideas are going to
invade us you know it's like it's quite
funny because again with the rationalist
atheists you know they basically think
that if we dispense with religion every
but he would turn into Rene Descartes
you know it's like we'd be all rational
it's like are you out of your bloody
mind look at the New Age people you know
that's where we'd be going first
it's like we'd be like surely what's
your name McLane who I read once
believed that the reason that there were
so many allergies in San Francisco was
because of aliens it's like oh that's a
much more likely place for human belief
systems to end up than like poof were
all ranae de cartes like that's not
going to happen you know one of the
things Jung said which I just loved he
said the purpose of religious structures
is to stop people from having religious
experiences now that's a smart that's a
smart saying so anyways so we're going
to walk through this and you know what I
what I've come to believe is that the
archetypes we're going to talk about
because I believe they archetypes a
pretty good way of thinking about them
constitute the fundamental presumptions
of human being you can't not presume
them that's why they're religious you
can't escape from them now that doesn't
mean they're right but it means that
there is right as we are and how right
are we well we don't know you know I
mean there were people that I read
somebody in the 1970s he was a
journalist he wrote a book called the
ghost in the machine you know and this
was a fairly common proposition at the
time his idea was that well you know
we're animals that have become self
conscious and that may be particularly
drove us in cura Blee insane and so
we're like an evolutionary dead end and
it's only a matter of time before we
extinguish ourselves it's like that's
possible you know no other animal has
ever become self conscious it's a big
burden you know what it does Drive
people kind of crazy and no wonder you
know because you have to contemplate
your mortality all the time or at least
some of the time and also you're
completely aware of how useless and ugly
and you know all these other things you
are compared to whatever the ideal might
be it's a lot of burden but it seems to
me too that human beings are peculiar in
that we can actually choose we have some
facility for choice I think we can
decide whether we're an evolutionary
dead end or not and I also believe that
grounding our thinking in
these ancient ideas makes it far more
likely far less likely that we're going
to fall prey to ideological possession
which is extraordinary dangerous and
it'll also give us the meta framework to
conceptualize what might constitute an
ideal and well so you know that's a
because I wanted I wanted to find out
what's an alternative kadhi ology and
nothing is the wrong answer because
people can't live on nothing life is too
hard you have to see that your being is
justifiable in order to thrive and given
that your being is characterized by
suffering that's no easy matter
suffering and limitation that's the
basic truths of life it's a Buddhist
doctrine for that matter
right and it's yeah it's not it's
certainly not something that the Jews
would disagree with and it's central to
Christian thinking as well you know most
religious structures think you're doomed
and there's going to be a lot of pain
along the way it's like yeah that's true
okay now we've got that out in the open
what do you do about it well that's the
question so let's see what do we have
for time 3:45 is that about right this
old computer I'm not sure it's accurate
yeah okay so question
oh yeah well the thing is you know
sometimes conceptualizing a problem
brings it into focus
there are multiple ways things realize
themselves right you know you know how
it is if you if you learn something
complex you think you've learned it and
then a little later you articulate it
more and you think oh I I didn't
understand that completely and then you
know you think you've got it then three
years later you think oh no I really
didn't quite have that I'm going to
articulate it more so knowledge comes
into focus so okay so let's move away
from from the this philosophical
evolutionary discussion for a moment I
want it I want to start again with a
series of propositions so it's three oh
okay good good good 3:38 all right fine
so now when I first started to construct
this representation I'd been reading
heavily a book called the neuro
psychology of anxiety that's written by
Jeffery gray Jeffery gray was one of
hands izing students and Isaac was one
of the founders of modern psychometric
personality theory for a long time he
was the most cited psychologist in the
world and Jeffery Gray was no Jeffery
gray who died recently was uh he was a
literate guy man the neuro psychology of
anxiety is a tough read because he was
sort of a master of neuropharmacology
neuroanatomy neuro psychology and animal
behavior
so he's behaviorist and cybernetic
theory although I don't really think he
knew exactly that he was a cybernetic
theorist he sort of knew it it took me a
long time to figure out that he was a
cybernetic theorist cybernetics emerged
as a consequence of the work of someone
called Norbert Reiner who was an who was
at MIT and he wrote a book called I
think he wrote I think the book was
called cybernetics actually anyways you
can look him up and there are cybernetic
principles that I extracted out of gray
and started to utilize and then I only
found out later that they were actually
consequences of Winer's thinking now he
infected lots of people so Luria who was
a great Russian nervous
call just was basically a cyberneticist
and there's a couple of other Russians
Sokolov and vinegared OVA who discovered
the orienting reflex which was like that
was like discovering a new planet or a
new continent it's like an important
discovery they should have got the Nobel
Prize for it as far as I'm concerned
it's a big deal
and so Norbert Winer's cybernetic
thought really spread everywhere and
it's like pops up PSA is cybernetic in
many ways and there's there's modern
personality theories that are
fundamentally cybernetic so this is
basically a cybernetic model and
cybernetics cybernetic models
hypothesize that active organisms they
basically perform according to the
following schema they pause at a target
and move towards it and then they
regulate themselves so they don't
deviate too much from the trail so
that's what this is as far as I'm
concerned so so here's here's the basic
framework within which you live as far
as I can tell and I don't think you can
get out of it
you carry this frame with you all the
time and you're looking at the world
through it and the framework has a
couple of sub structures and one is you
have some sense of where you are and
that's like a theory it's a theory of
where who you are and where you are it's
a theory of the present these are the
present conditions now you might think
you observe the present around you and
those are factual observations and so
your conceptualization of the present
isn't a theory it's a fact but don't be
thinking that you know it's a theory you
might be wrong about the present the
person you're in love with might be
having an affair right so there can be
massive gaps in your assumptions about
the present you know you think you're
healthy but maybe you're not you know
you think your boss likes you but maybe
they don't you think your degree is
going to be useful but maybe it isn't
you know
well but it's just it's just it's just a
straightforward observation but it's an
important one you could be wrong about
now okay because one of the things we're
going to try to figure out is where is
it that you could be wrong and what does
it mean that you could be wrong all
those places
and what should you do about the fact
that you could be rolling all those
places and then we're also going to try
to figure out what happens if you find
out that you're wrong
so for example you're going out with
someone you love them perhaps they've
made promises to you and you know poof
you find out that they've been having an
affair with three people for the last
five years it's like hey you're wrong
and so now where are you what does that
mean that you're wrong well it means a
lot of things it means you're means a
lot of things that you it might mean a
lot more things than it means which is a
very strange thing might mean that
you're so clueless it's just
mind-boggling you know and that you're
blind is a bat so that's one possibility
and that you're like that and you've
always been like that you better do
something about it quick that's a
possibility might be that you hooked up
with a psychopath right which is also
something that you should avoid and but
that would mean you don't understand
people well enough to know when they're
Psychopaths or not or maybe that you're
fatally attracted to them in some
bizarre way you know it also means that
whatever future you're envisioning that
was really a delusion because that's
gone and it also means that you've blown
out most of your past at least insofar
as that relationship was part of your
past because nothing that you thought
was happening was what was happening so
then you might think one moment you're
somewhere then you get the realization
and the next moment you are somewhere
else and so one of the things I would
propose to you is that those are
actually two important places the one
place is the place you are when what
you're doing is working and the other
place is the place you are when what
you're doing is not working and I would
also say in some weird sense those are
permanent places and I'll tell you why I
think this but I think they're akin in
some manner to explored territory and
unexplored territory and that's their
sort of biological basis because we know
that animals are territorial right
almost every animal has a sketched out
territory if social animals have to
organize themselves within that torrid
territory with other creatures like them
so part of their territory is almost
always a dominance hierarchy but they
have a territory and they don't like
going outside of it so I can give you an
example so
mom my parents had that dog in a cat and
my dad used take the dog for a walk all
the time but the cat really liked the
dog and so it was kind of irritated that
the dog would leave and so the cat
started following my dad around on his
walks and so it was really interesting
because the first thing the cat did was
when it was following it wasn't right
behind the dog there's no way it was
going to do that it would slink along
all of the building so it would follow
about 30 feet behind and it would keep
one side right against a building and it
would sort of zip across the intervening
spaces of the houses right and you might
think well why was it doing that and the
answer is it didn't know where the
bloody predators were didn't know where
the big dogs were it didn't know
anything about the new places it was
going so who's going to stick its side
against one hard wall so that the
complexity was cut in half and it was
going to go really slow on the off
chance that some massive hound came out
and ate it so it's been very careful so
that was pretty cool so it did that for
quite a while and then because nothing
massive jumped out at ate it and because
it started to understand that territory
knew where it could hide it got a little
braver and over a couple of months it
got to the point where to actually
follow the the dog because it had
mastered its it had expanded its
territory and mastered its knowledge of
the territory but then I was walking
with them one day and they had a root a
and my dad we had the dog and he wanted
to take the dog a little farther than he
would normally go with the dog and so he
was taking the dog across the street but
the cat just stayed on the corner and
cried because it Hill was meowing
obviously but it was very upset because
it wasn't going out into that weird new
place that it had no knowledge about and
so it was you know making its fear
really known and animals are like that
you know so here's something to think
about this blew me away when I first
conceptualized it was one of the things
that made me understand that
psychologists are always asking
questions backwards I'll give you an
example it's like why do people take
cocaine that's a question right I think
it's a good question it's a stupid
question the question is why doesn't
everybody take cocaine all the time
that's the question because we know what
cocaine does right it activates the
prime
very incentive reward systems and almost
everything you do is in an attempt to
activate the primary incentive reward
system so you've got this white powder
and there it is it's like you should be
nose deep in that stuff non-stop but
you're not why what's wrong with you
people
you know so so that's one example of
where psychologies got it got it
backwards we know why people take
intoxicating drugs it's dead simple
sometimes it reduces their anxiety
sometimes it reduces their pain
sometimes it cranks up their incentive
reward systems you know it hijacks the
system it does it biochemically
perfectly obvious so that's one example
now another example is this how do
animals learn fear it's a prime
behavioral question right it's the wrong
question because it presumes that the
the standard animal is calm why would
you presume that why wouldn't we presume
instead that the standard animal is
terrified and that the animal only
learns how not to be terrified with
difficulty and under very restricted
circumstances well that's a much better
way of thinking about it and it makes a
lot more sense because the animals in
danger especially if it doesn't know its
territory so so here's how you teach an
animal to be afraid if you're a
behaviorist and I am NOT making fun of
behaviors a lot of what I've learned
about psychology that's actually real
has come from behaviorists like their
rigorous scientists and and they learned
an awful lot from analyzing animal
behavior that was incredibly profound
and they laid the ground for modern
neuroscience the real stuff not the fMRI
stuff you know the real stuff so okay so
basically what you do to train an animal
to be afraid is you take a rat let's say
the rats in his cage and you put you put
a little electric shock pad in the rats
cage so it may be electrifies the bottom
a little bit and you turn on a light and
you electrify the bottom and the rat
jumps into the air and then you shut it
off and then you wait awhile and then
you do the same thing turn on the light
then you turn on the
the electric sharp mechanism in the rat
jumps in the air and you do that 10
times and then when you turn on the
light the rat goes like this freezes
because it's learned right light equals
shark everyone knows that you know
that's basic conditioning um so the rats
learn to be afraid okay that makes sense
except here's your experimental box
right he got the electrification going
on in there and you grab your rat and
you drop him in the cage what does he do
first he freezes because he's afraid
he's afraid as soon as you put him in
the new environment that's the normal
rat the normal rat is like this and why
is that because things like to eat rats
so you know they don't like light they
like it dark and they don't like being
exposed and they don't like being a new
damn cage because god only knows what's
in that cage and so the a priori rat is
this so then what is the rat do well
it's like this for quite a while it can
be really a long time I'll tell you a
story about that he's like this and then
maybe he sniffs because rats mostly
knows most animals are mostly smell
oriented right human beings are weird
because we're visually oriented but
almost all animals it's all smell their
whole brains are organized around their
olfactory system so it sniffs and if it
can't smell anything rats man they can
smell so there's experiments indicating
that if you take a rat and you poison it
and then it gets sick and another rat
has smelled its breath that rat will not
eat the poison that the first rat ate
now that's why it's hard to get rid of
rats they're smart and they have great
senses of smell so the rats checking out
like is there anything here that smells
like something that might eat me so cats
for example rat doesn't ever have to
meet a cat to be afraid of its odor rats
hate cat odor and so you can take rats
in there like a box and blow a fan over
a cat so the tea odor wafts into the box
and let's like the rats are all like
this because god only knows what a cat
smells like to a rat but it ain't good
whatever it is so the rats like
then he sniffing and he's looking around
and if nothing happens then he starts to
relax a little bit but not that much he
still oh crouch down and he's still like
a tentative rat and then he starts to
look around a bit and then he starts to
loosen up and then maybe he starts to
move and his theory is possibly it's
safe enough here so a rat that's careful
can move and nothing painful or damaging
will happen and then he starts to move
and nothing happens and then he spends a
bunch of time sniffing around every
corner of the cage and you know sooner
or later he thinks rats aren't going to
die here now and then he's sort of a
relaxed rat and then the behavior says
you are now a normal rat we can teach
you to be afraid it's like you don't
have to teach me to be afraid I know how
to be afraid I have to learn how not to
be afraid now that's a good way of
thinking about your brain so you could
think about the underlying motivational
and emotional systems in your brain as
default on systems they're like a
nuclear reactor like the core of a
nuclear reactor you're ready man except
when other parts of your brain are
telling you just to keep it calm so but
you don't need to learn to be afraid any
more than you need to learn to be hungry
you need to learn how to be calm and
secure and that's really worth thinking
about because you got to ask yourself
for example why are you calm and secure
in this class what are the preconditions
for you not being afraid here so think
about it why are you not afraid well the
floor is solid that's a good one the
roof is probably not going to collapse
why well it's actually because you could
rely on the structural engineers who
built the building that's kind of
interesting why you know in the Soviet
Union they used to make cinderblock
buildings out of old radioactive waste
and then of course they put way too much
sand in them so that if the earth went
like this once it'd be like collapse and
so the typical Soviet couldn't be
reasonably fearless in this room because
the walls were radioactive and if the
earth moved a little bit the whole thing
would collapse and so part of the reason
that you can sit in here without
fear is because the system that
regulates our construction enterprise is
actually not very corrupt so that's
pretty cool so you know so you think
about that that means that one of the
preconditions for your relative
fearlessness is your implicit belief
that the builders who built this
building can be trusted and that's
really unlikely you know if you look
around the world how many countries are
there that aren't corrupt I mean you
know the West is corrupt - there's no
doubt about it but compared to a really
corrupt place you know we don't even
register as corrupt so what else well
look at the people around you you know
you guys look a lot the same all things
considered you know none of you are have
painted your face in rainbow colors and
you know you're not decorated with
ostrich feathers and you're not wearing
some outlandish Victorian costume and
none of you are stark naked and most of
you aren't foaming at the mouth and you
know like fundamentally you're in a
uniform and there's some variation of
the uniform allowed but not much how
many of you are wearing jeans rights
like 50% of you why are you wearing
jeans it's so other primates don't think
you're insane that's why I'm telling you
it's a big part of its it's acceptable
and so most of you are wearing clean
jeans I presume or they're clean enough
anyway so that if they're not clean it's
not detectable which is another sign
that you're not completely insane right
and so you're manifesting markers like
mad that you're basically a normal
primate and that you live in accordance
with a set of well understood implicit
rules and that for the purposes of this
set of interactions you're not going to
violate them so everybody can come in
here like the terrified primates they
are the first class and they can look
around they see the desks are all in
order so that means order prevails here
the desks all face this way so it's a
standard lecture theater you know what's
going to happen here people walk in they
all sit properly in their tables most of
them don't talk
it's another rule how many of you are
sitting in the same chair that you sat
in last week right and you know pretty
soon you're going to figure out which
chair is yours and then if someone comes
in here and sits in your chair you're
going to thank that person's in my chair
and you know the reason for that is is
you're trying to stabilize the
environment you've learned that that
chair is safe and so are the people
around you and so now you feel kind of
comfortable in that chair you sort of
think it's your chair and so we do
everything we can to structure the
environment so that signals that you're
safe are radiating at you like mad and
that way you can be calm enough despite
the fact that you're a crazy chimpanzee
you can be calm enough to sit here and
not be distracted by fundamental
motivational systems that are out of
control and maybe listen and intend and
like you just think about how much work
just think about it how much work went
into building this room for you to sit
it you know it's like there been
universities for about a thousand years
so there's a thousand year conceptual
history of the university that's one of
the preconditions and then we had to
figure out how to make all this stuff
and then people actually had to put it
together and then you all had to be
socialized for like 19 years so that you
could sit here relatively quietly while
you're listening to a lecture and you
know we had to build the idea of the
university into our culture and you know
somebody's got to keep the lights on and
look at this technology that works it's
like there are people out there just
Slavin themselves to death to make sure
that this little box that you're sitting
in is sufficiently predictable so that
you don't have to be terrified it's like
good for them you know and it's all
happening so invisibly that you know
you're probably irritated because your
internet connection doesn't work that
well or something like that you know so
so it's really really useful to know
that it's a the idea that your normal
state is calm and well regulated is
highly debatable it's highly debatable I
would say there's very limited
preconditions under which you are going
to feel safe and then I would also say
you're highly motivated to maintain
those conditions and you're also highly
motivated not to go somewhere where
those conditions don't apply right
you're just not going to do it because
that's a different kind of place and I
would say that place is chaos
the place where the rules do not apply
that's chaos and it's a real place
that's unexplored territory and people
you have you're hardwired at an
instinctual level to deal with
unexpected exposure to unexplored
territory and you do that by going like
this
it's a startle and fear you're frozen
and the reason for that is you're a prey
animal and you have sub-circuits in you
that are millions of years old that are
there to protect you from becoming prey
and that could be prey of other people
that's for sure but it could be prey of
anything that would like to eat you you
know and part of the reason you might
understand is that it's not there aren't
that many large predators around anymore
you know what's part of the human
desperation of the planet is that mostly
people don't like having their children
eaten by Tigers you know so and it's
it's not because there's something wrong
with us it's because that's actually a
rather unpleasant experience and so if
you could have a tiger around or not
have one you might well choose not to
have one especially if you have some you
know certain amount of love for your
children who although lovable also
happen to be delicious right so well
okay so it's a proposition I want under
mine because I want to start with the
presupposition that fundamentally as a
biological creature you're like a wild
animal and you're like a prey animal
things might happen to you and you're
ready for them and then what we do with
society is we construct up an edifice
that has multi-level some of it's
actually instantiated right and the rest
of it is cultural and ritual and
behavioral so that you don't have to be
a prey animal you can be relatively calm
and assured that nothing terrible is
going to happen to you in the next 10
seconds and that's worth fighting for
so all right that's probably good enough
so now we've got we've got some basic
presuppositions laid down you know and
so let me just review them briefly one
minute stability is not your normal
state it's an abnormal state and it's
very very difficult
to maintain okay you maintain it at
least in large part as a consequence of
being enculturated and to be
enculturated means to adopt a value
system that works for you but that also
works for everyone else it has to fulfil
those criteria furthermore it should be
the kind of value system that allows you
to move up dominance hierarchies if you
can manage it a lot of constraints on
your value system if your value system
is producing the kind of behaviors that
fulfill those criteria you don't have to
be terrified now it's not just terror
because I've also learned that a lot of
what culture is controlling is discussed
that's actually not in the book because
I just learned that so and I want to
talk more about I want to talk to you
more about discussed because we've
learned for example that people who are
orderly temperamental e which is an
element of conscientiousness are very
sensitive to disgust and I think part of
the issue is that it isn't only that
things can eat us it's that things can
infect us and so we're just as prone a
priori to repel anything that's
disgusting as we are prepared a priori
to keep at bay anything that's
frightening one of the things I learned
which was terrifying to me I read
Hitler's table talk which was a
collection of his spontaneous dinner
speeches that were taken down by a
secretary it's a very interesting book
but one of the things I realized once we
kind of made the disgust orderliness
connection in my lab about two years ago
after looking for the biological basis
of conscientiousness forever
Hitler basically used a bodily metaphor
to under pin his entire political
philosophy so for Hitler who was hyper
orderly bordering on obsession he bathed
four times a day for example he was a
vegetarian which actually is relevant
because he didn't want animals to be
hurt you know he was sensitive to
disgust and that was part of what
underlies vegetarianism uhm he construed
the Aryan race as a body like that was
his metaphor it's a body it's a pure
body
has pure blood so there's purity ideas
that that you know made part of what he
was saying motivationally significant
and it was under assault from parasites
and the parasites were well for him it
was anyone who wasn't part of that body
so it was discussed gone mad it was
really was you know and so that forced
me to modify my theories the theories
I'm going to present to you because for
me a lot of what society did was control
anxiety you know and hunger and a lot of
other things obviously but I didn't
realize to what degree society also
controlled disgust and how powerful
disgust is as a political motivator so
there is a paper published in PLoS ONE
about three months ago five months ago
maybe more than that now it showed that
the correlation between totalitarian
beliefs in any given geographical locale
and the prevalence of infectious disease
was about 0.7 and that was true not only
across countries but within countries if
you divided the places up by how likely
there were to be infectious diseases in
the relevant States 0.7 so prejudice
xenophobia fear of foreigners all of
that huge chunk of that is disgust
sensitivity gone mad so anyways so we're
going to talk about that too as a part
of a control mechanism yep what's that
applause one PLoS ONE Oh any it's a
public journal you can find it look up
infectious disease and totalitarianism
there's a lot of work done on that now