right welcome to Wednesday's morning's
live broadcast I do this every morning
at 8:30 but today is the first time
we're doing a solution raising live it's
the seventh solution raising I've
participated in a solution raising is an
hour-long conversation we spent 15
minutes talking about what we currently
do as individuals in society then 15
minutes talking what we'd like to do in
an ideal world and then we'd spend 30
minutes talking about a jayson possible
something we could do right now if we
had 10,000 people in $100,000 and I try
to keep to those rough time periods so
I'll be moving us along as we finish
those time sections but I kind of do it
a little bit like the idea cafe where I
give everyone a chance to to share
during each section if there's only four
of us so if anyone would like to start
as to what mental / emotional health
looks like right now whether that's open
19 or precoded 19 whatever comes up for
you well it's a bloody mess isn't it I
mean we still have this it's very
significantly what's the word I'm
looking for
stigma attached to attached to mental
health issues you know I mean it's like
buckle up and get on with it kind of
thing is still a very widely prevalent
attitude and so yeah it's kind of swept
under the carpet to a very large degree
it seems to me and not really talked
about and not really acknowledged and
lots of people who probably have mental
health issues choose not to investigate
and get the diagnose get them treated
because they feel ashamed because of
that's a very same stigma and so yeah
it's a bloody mess a light needs to be
shown on it not in a oh look at them
look at them kind of way but but you
know that it needs to be seen more
clearly I think
or generic yeah alright um so from my
perspective I see where we are with
mental health kind of like where
internal medicine was 150 years ago like
we look back at 150 years ago and look
at that they would do bloodletting and
use leeches and stuff like that
in order to treat people I kind of see
that that's where we are in terms of our
evolution of mental health I think that
up until this point this the the tools
that we have had for mental health God
asked me where we need like have gotten
us has served their purpose I had you
know the medications and treatments that
we used I think worked because they
suppress everything which is kind of
what was needed until we had more tools
more more options more things available
which is I think what we're starting to
have now and we'll talk about that when
we get to it
right now what we're doing is we're
dealing where we're dealing with when
when you go in to get treated you are
they don't really know what to treat us
so they'll start with something and
depending on on what the side effects
aren't then okay maybe this works maybe
doesn't without a few more few more
things in there to balance out the other
side effects with what this medication
is doing for you and there is a this
blunt idea of a blank on the phrasing
know that there's something something
wrong with the neuro chemicals and well
yes there's more to it there's more to
it than that and right now the the
doctors don't have a ton of visibility
into how is this medication going to
affect this individual they just don't
have that visibility and so what you're
left with is people who are given the
medication said said sent home and said
here try this for a month and see how it
works and then they come back in a month
either you know with whatever side
effect that it might have it might yeah
there is a
there is a a side effect from Medicaid
from certain medications called
akathisia it is one of the most painful
things we have ever experienced in your
life because it is like there are bugs
crawling under your skin and sometimes
they think that and sometimes listen is
like the best option that people have
that is something that's very common
with medications that treat
schizophrenia and so it's a first night
and then and the other side effects with
the idea with are massive amounts of
weight gain or a just like absolute
deadening of your senses and so right
now this treatment that we have we're
going to give you this medication we
don't really know how it's going to
affect you and and it might have these
horrible side effects but it will at
least prevent you from demonstrating
these behaviors that make everyone else
uncomfortable at least that's my
projection and then you know and then we
also have you know that yes there's the
stigma and there is yeah I don't know
how long I have so I'm gonna leave it
there because I could go on for a really
long time on this particular subject I
think I agree with all of both what you
said and I just wanted to add to that I
guess is I think currently we deal with
mental health it's like the person's
problem it's the individuals problems
dealing with the mental health issue and
I personally feel that it's a result of
our society our current conditions and
the loss of any control of that really
adds to it and exacerbates it and I feel
I think we're at a point where we really
need to do more group processing more
group work with mental health and I
think that's really successful because
not only are you not alone you also see
other people going through the same
thing and how they're dealing with it so
I just wanted to put that in there and
hope that we touch on that a little bit
yeah just just before Jubilee shares I'd
really like to amplify what you just
said there that the mental health is a
symptom of really profoundly ill Society
i reaiiy really agree with that and
really agree with that there are
individual ways to tackle it and
societal ways and you can't really do
one without the other that as
individuals the best we can do often is
get through the day and get through life
and that involves you know first taking
more medication than I think we would
take under a system where we were more
connected in our society was hard
functioning I think there will always be
people no matter how functioning society
is that that do that are on that fringe
that no matter how great societies are
still going to have more struggle there
but the not vast number of people who
have diagnosis or are diagnosed but but
have these these conditions it's a
societal problem I feel like they're
lacking something as a I know for me
I've been diagnosed with anxiety and
complex PTSD and both of them especially
anxiety when I when I got diagnosed with
that and I went to my doctor was like
well that's what this is he was like oh
yeah I've known you haven't had anxiety
I didn't want to like get you diagnosed
because of the stigma it was like okay
but now that I know this is what it is
now that I can name it I can get like
this stone that's been in my belly my
whole life it's constantly present I can
just be more aware of it and deal with
it and the complex PTSD was actually
diagnosed by psychiatrist in like a one
hour like it's like can you diagnose
something in that time period the mental
health Canadian healthcare system I
think is very good except when it comes
to mental health if you want to get I
had a doctor every doctor I've seen
because every condition I have is either
neurological or mental they don't know
the difference
so like chronic pain is something that's
that's in your it's in your brain but
all pains in your brain it's not like
you who have pain associated outside of
your brain it's just whether there's an
actual injury or not and so the idea is
that if it's mental you should be able
to
you look at and you should be able to
figure that out but actually it's much
harder if you're not like a physical
thing know that you know I can see it on
x-ray can see on and ride the theme
mount that's kind of we go to that all
the doctors give of like it's mental
and then there's no help for the mental
and you're not allowed to really help
yourself right like if we wanted to get
together and have mental health circle
there's some barrier to that because
moments are a psychiatrist right we have
to like put it and not underplay go get
your own medical advice and then come
back and I think that just like how our
medical system works currently where
everyone has their own expertise and no
one kind of passed the buck to everybody
else didn't know but especially that
develop the story I tried this trench
start was that I was told to go see a
psychiatrist I got in it took like who
wants to get in which was really good
and and when I saw him he was like now
you got the idea of calling he what he
was like yes I agree upon he's not the
one who and he's like I need to see
uniquely a minimum of once a week it's
like cool I went out to schedule with
his secretary and it was three months
down the road I was like okay but I was
like okay so can I schedule weekly no so
what's the point in coming in and seeing
you every three months
they heat everything up and I'm gonna go
home and deal with it there's no safety
there there's no like I couldn't really
tackle it so it's it's just a really
weird great area in our society where
they put everything up to it it offer no
help and it's all on the individual and
not on society and it's just makes you
feel broken and having gone through it
I've reduced my anxiety hugely my
complex PTSD I don't know how no it's an
ongoing thing it's doing medical
pandemics not necessarily helping but I
would love to see what we come up with
in the next two sections so we know a
few more minutes here at anyone else
that
yeah I mean I guess this source is
somewhat spills over into the next
section but it was just it was occurring
to me as you were talking there do
believe that it would be nice if we
could view those who rather than call it
mental health issues call it I don't
know different different cognate
different cognition or something like
that right a somewhat more neutral term
and value it in the sense that they see
the world in the way that very few other
people do and that potentially gives all
of us access to a rare perspective you
know what I mean who knows what the
value of that could be and so rather
than seeing it as a problem seeing it as
you know a valuable difference that kind
of thing I think we do Duke we're
starting to do that like one Kyra said
rubber in the bloodletting event I like
that they chose like for autism and a TB
especially we talked about it in terms
of neurodiversity and that there is that
that gift that you bring to society even
though there is a lot of ableism
surrounding it and people that are like
whoa but we want to cure autism right
but we want to like not have a TD right
and I think it's even harder like it's
hard to get it around that and then it's
even it's like well at least it's not
rain damage at least it's not
schizophrenia at least it's not and it's
like that's just more ableism of like
you're everyone's brain is me every
single person you actually can't know
what anyone else's brain is like you can
kind of only go to a doctor and get a
diagnosis or read the symptoms and get a
diagnosis and it's their best guess and
like I like what you said Eric that like
it is the diversity that's that I think
is gonna save us but there's like this
neurodiversity side and I'd be like no
no this side we have to heal and I think
it's all actually under the same
category your diversity is part of what
you're here to give if you're willing to
and the rest of the Western society
catching up and being there would make
it a lot easier for everyone dealing
with any kind of neuro diversity or
neurotypicals which I don't think
actually exists I hope because I'm not
one so I'm like I couldn't possibly
imagine what a neurotypical brain is
like a bell curve isn't it right and the
neurotypical of the 80% in the middle of
the bell
currently a typical of you know at the
outliers at the extremes but yeah you're
absolutely right no there's no yeah yeah
there's no sort of template of normality
sort of thing and this might bleed into
the next section one of the things that
I've come across that I really like it's
you know John robic he's got his serious
awakening from the meeting crisis and he
talks about how so many other crises
come from original you know art or
stemmed from that that's where why we
have the associate political crisis and
the economic crisis and you know the
addiction crisis the mental health
crisis because there is you know
underlining I mean that they're kind of
the crux of some of his argument is that
there underlying the structure of our
our cultural grammar there are there I
don't seem in the word that's coming up
with a mistake and I don't think that's
quite right but it's like there there's
one underlying fundamental
misunderstandings about like how to
derive meaning in your life and so
there's this thing around you know it's
like for a lot of people like they have
all these feelings you know from my
perspective what mental health is is for
a lot of people there's a lot of these
feelings that are coming up they don't
know what they are they don't know how
to describe them they don't have the
language for them and so oh you're
you're feeling anxiety here's a pill
take two in order to deal with that I
first got diagnosed when I was 15 or 16
initially with depression then later
with bipolar disorder I've had diagnosis
of PTSD bipolar disorder not otherwise
specified I mean like there's just a
whole bunch of different things and I'm
actually now off of all of the
medication because I learned that
because I cleared out that I needed to
deal with it another way for me and
that's but this meaning crisis I think
is a place
huge part in the mental health crisis
because if you're looking out in the
world and going for me it was realizing
at one point oh wait a minute
I'm trying to all of the things I've
been told on my life that are supposed
to give me meaning don't actually make
me feel fulfilled in any way and I have
been trying I've been suppressing these
emotions since I was 16
trying to achieve the the American dream
or whatever it is and but I was feeling
that all of these equities feelings that
because my system was trying to tell me
what you're doing isn't great for you
and I didn't know that I didn't know how
to have that conversation and so that
meaning Chris so that meaning crisis
thing I think is a huge part of it is
we're trying to tell people know you
this is how this is what's supposed to
give you meaning in your life and yet
and and if you have all of these
uncomfortable feelings that he's ready
you're anxious or you're depressed or
you're this or that
maybe it's your system trying to tell
you that what you're pursuing is
actually what is going to serve you and
why so we are at the 60 minute mark we
can switch over to what we would like in
our I feel version of our lives or
society for for mental health and
emotional health and it doesn't need to
match so we don't need to again have
like a boat on as to what our future is
gonna look like they can be different
it's just about what 5 10 100 years down
the road what would you like it to look
like when we're not in the leech letting
part of mental health
bloodletting leeches well I could I
could talk for an hour in the last
section so it's probably good I didn't
but going forward I would really love to
see more personal development education
I think and self-awareness like
recognizing your your body signals and
how that is actually guiding you because
I think here is exactly right
this meaning crisis that we've directed
everything funneled everybody into
certain systems of competition and
like all the doctors had to be very
successful in this competition based
system but yet there might have been
some other people that weren't so good
in that system that would have been
really great doctors just for example
and if they maybe could have been more
self-directing and even from a very
young age because we're we're mislead at
a very young age and therefore if you're
not part of the accepted ways you kind
of feel unseen unheard undeveloped in a
way so I'd love to see that and as an
artist now I realize art is a wonderful
way to get you there because it really
helps you get inside yourself and see
who you are even though I mean I can
find art until I was in my late 30s so I
mean anyway I just think the art is a
huge key into as as well as listening if
we can listen to people and what their
desires are I feel like we could develop
as human beings a lot better through
self direction and learning what self
Direction is at a young age I have to
let my cat out I'm dead I mean I
completely agree with all of that I just
wanted say yes and there and add to it
rituals and rites of passage you know
meaning there are many rituals rites of
passage woven into the fabric of the
culture because I mean we have we've got
nothing do you know what I mean the
weddings and the funerals and and and
the you know the the coming-of-age
ceremonies that we do our empty shells
of rituals you know what I mean they
they long ago absented themselves of any
any real meaning and so yeah that feels
a super-important to me but yeah the
educating people as to just opening
their minds to the huge possibilities of
development and and you know in
self-improvement that are out there
rather than focusing on examinable
content right you know the development
of character being central to their turn
to the notion of Education yeah
one of the things that I would I want to
see is the III like the direction that
we're going
in terms of the use of psychedelics in
terms with with mental health and seeing
continuing down that path but I think
that there is but where my concern comes
in is that take dealing with the mental
health and or taking psychedelics and
treating it in a clinical setting
whereas I think that there needs to be
more it needs to be more something
that's included as part of a as John for
Vickie says included in a wisdom
tradition you know because there's a lot
of knowledge in our medical system but
there's not a lot of wisdom and how do
we continue to cultivate the acquisition
of knowledge and towards the cultivation
of wisdom and including in that is you
know that that there are certain points
at which the use of psychedelics
I think can be a valuable asset in that
and you include in that the ritual and
the ceremony that type of thing you you
know that those including that I also
think that moving in the direction of
something like something like universal
basic income but I don't know but I
don't quite know if that really makes
sense because giving people you know
this security to be able to pursue the
other aspects of their lives because one
of the things if all you're doing is
working to survive then that exacerbates
the mental health the Gunkel health
issues and I agree with moving away from
the or diversifying in some cases if
they're you're doing you're truly
dealing with a mental health issue I
think in a lot of cases
there you're dealing more with us with a
spiritual issue than a mental health one
but right now the only tool we have is a
hammer so everything's a nail and so
everything is treated like a mental
health issue because we have lost any
sense of spirituality and so which
everything as though it's a mental
health issue that is very tied I know
for my journey I was so obsessed with
knowledge just based on Who I am as a
person and what I wanted to do in the
world that I crammed all this
information in and it wasn't until I
truly didn't have the option anymore to
do that due to my brain changes which
aren't considered mental illness they're
actually brain damage um I was able to
sit and really cultivate wisdom and it's
weird cuz it doesn't for me anyway it
doesn't look like a stage sitting on a
mountain like it doesn't look like that
peaceful I have all the answers now it
looks very different but its wisdom and
now I have my own shadow side of not
being able to handle when other people
are like read this book do this I'm like
I'm done with knowledge
I just want wisdom I know that they
interact with each other like you have
to have both like we're so regimented
towards seeking knowledge that we don't
do any wisdom and so it's like well you
know Darwin says thick's and mark says
this like what do you think what do you
think and so a world that I would want
to live in to UM realize from sticking
to the topic there is one where whatever
whoever you are as an individual is
honored and so the four questions I've
been playing with and I'm yet to know
how to like bring them into the world in
a way that's powerful is that we would
have the tools and the community to be
able to answer the four questions and
for Who am I at a deeper and deeper
level I think that's a spiritual and
emotional and mental that we are diverse
and it is who we are both as unique
individuals and the groups that were
part of that maybe were not unique in
but the combination of what we are
seeing and the without the next question
is like who are my people where can I
find my connect
and can we help people truly find where
they belong especially because a lot of
what looks like mental illness is just
you be different than everybody else and
sometimes those differences are amazing
I know when I found my artistic
community who's like all these are my
people
like I can and then gain B is not my
autistic community but I'm able to talk
about my special interest which is an
autistic thing in the community was just
so big I can't imagine if everyone had
that or they're like you know they want
to talk about trains all day every day
talk about trainings go ahead are ours
mine just happens to be like saving the
world they create a world that works for
everyone including everything that's
broken wrong with it
and so a world where I people are able
to figure out who they are who their
people are as well as what their purpose
is ubi helps with that because your
purpose isn't necessarily something you
get paid for that is only under our
current ecosystem and so you have like
it's here's your unique purpose unless
it's in that realm of you know what's to
be paid for it's not gonna it's not
gonna be there then the last question is
what resources do I need and so under
the mental health umbrella that could be
connection the connection to people and
knowing who I am and self-help groups
and psychiatrists if I need one and the
drugs if I need them but not in the
widespread system it currently is and so
I would also like those drugs to be very
focused very where it isn't just like
throwing things and seeing if they stick
at the wall like actual tests that show
hey you have this genetics this drug
would be the best one for you and then
feeding that back into the system so
that every new person who has to go
through that actually gives more
information so the next person has to go
through it a little bit last thing when
you those drugs start working you can
find find new ones and honoring that a
lot of the conditions are though
spiritual physical societal and dealing
with the full big picture of our
individual health which encompasses you
know the mental the physical the
emotional spiritual and then those
pieces in society as well so that's a
bit of what I would like the future to
look like and maybe there isn't this
stigma towards mental health because it
isn't seen as separate it's
you know schizophrenia is not seen as as
a deficiency in your character whereas
cancer isn't it's just is there as n
psychedelics I think psychedelics have a
powerful course if they want if we were
if someone wants to use them I don't
think being prescribed mushrooms but my
doctor seems like that would not be
great but being willing to have them and
take them myself is a different a
different category and that I mean in
all medical stuff I would like to be
more in partnership with my medical team
rather than this hierarchical structure
of like I have the medical degree I know
what I'm talking about it's like you are
an expert in that but I'm an expert
you're an expert in one of them and
although I'm not an expert in any of
them I know the combination for my body
more than anyone else can and to honor
that that expertise of the individual
this is EV a society of topic but that
cycle you outlined of Who am I Who am I
people what's my purpose what do I need
so it's a it's a it's a really really
powerful cycle that I was thinking and
I've heard you say it before but it
occurred to me just now as you were
saying it that would work really nicely
as the sort of beating heart at the
center of what an education system is
right I mean that that you could build
curricula around that spiral because
it's iterative right and it's not like
it's not like you go around it once it's
it's a constantly thing right and so
that's what I mean I think that that
sort of spiral thing working in the
middle of Education would be awesome I
mean that that that boils it right down
to what you're actually trying to do
when you're educating someone to develop
them right and also the notion of
Education going on for your whole life
is also embedded in there right it's not
just the school thing I I think that's
 great
are you should roll that out into the
education discussion Jubilee I didn't
think about in terms of education but no
I know it's just occurred to me that's
what I mean I think it's really
brilliantly in that domain
nobody else is gonna go though I would
like to in my perfect world I already
see this others value system functioning
for us so it's interesting because
you've all connected in my mind part of
it whereas like the universal income
with mu VI or whatever in my system that
I've thought of to support kind of our
humanitarian side our collective
connective it is like the feminine
version of what our competition our
competitive side is more than masculine
and I think think of this as the
feminine and so I believe like having
this structure in place is a wonderful
way to value these things also a way to
for education like in my mind it's a
multi-level value system so there is one
level of it is like an income that
everyone gets that's the same let's say
so there is this part that you can
exchange for services or whatnot in here
you have these hubs that are actual
physical places that you connect with
your with other people in your area as
well as you have the Internet you can
share your findings widely you can track
all this information as well like for
educating people like you're saying the
whole your whole life is an education
time and even for children right now who
not able to learn at school I feel like
we can teach children how to learn and
then let them decide what they're
learning and be able to track it through
this system so they're showing yeah I'm
wearing these things even though it's
not what society expects us to be as
long as we're developing and finding our
own way and I think that's another
wisdom because I think knowledge is what
you're told to know and I feel like
wisdom is what you learn and the
connections you make within yourself
about how you've learned it so how you
got there it's not as easily
told even though people can share and
then you can kind of make connections so
I feel and we're probably all seeing
this new world this new game be whatever
you want to call it in all of our own
ways but I feel like we are all to
describe the same thing in a way that
we're able to get to this new place I
just wanted to say I love the wisdom of
making these connections like there is a
way that we can get to this better place
that's a great segue into the next
conversation which is what could we
actually do right now if we had 10,000
people and $100,000 and although it's
not part of the structure the idea is to
create something that's voluntary
something that isn't you know top-down
hierarchical these 10,000 hour rule the
world input it's like in creating a
solution or something for 10,000 people
with 10,000 people and then hopefully
inviting the world but the only real
parameter is that it's doable with
10,000 people and $100,000 right now I
usually concentrate on tech just where
my mind goes clearly we can't make it
right now take six months you know to
make it but like it's feasible to make
it right now I'm not relying on some
technology that doesn't exist yet or
some capacity and human nature that
doesn't exist yet it's just can we find
10,000 of these people that was a lot of
us feel so anyone would like to have an
idea on what could be done right now
with 10,000 people and $100,000 mental
health emotional support well more an
emotional support the mental health I
mean I that the the notion that the
curse it's nothing new it's kind of an
exchange right and so I mean it doesn't
apply to all mental health conditions
but certainly to a lot of them problems
you know of loneliness isolation lack of
social contact that kind of thing is
part of it right and so it seems to me
that could be relatively easily
alleviated on a volunteer basis right
people volunteering to go around and you
know hang out with people go for a drink
in the pub with them go to the cinema
with and make dinner for them whatever
it means just that you know a couple of
hours of actual intimate contact
that seems to me to be something that
would be pretty doable without too much
effort technology or financial and yeah
I mean you would need a bank of hundreds
even thousands of volunteers right to
cover any appreciable area but that
could that could make a real difference
quite quickly I would volunteer to do
that oh my
I would totally volunteer to do that as
well but I'm wondering when I'm in my
loneliest places when I'm in like right
now I'm like wait everyone's home why
aren't I reaching out to my friends and
having a conversation of like partly
because that's done via the game be like
I'm like I have connection it works but
also it's not quite the same as like my
in-person connections that I'm someone
should be cultivating would people reach
out and say yes I need someone to go to
the cinema with me because it feels like
that is putting stigma on it whereas if
we're all just agree that we need more
connection in our lives and we're not
it's like how do we connect people on a
peer-to-peer basis as opposed I'm
volunteering out of the goodness of my
heart
to be your friend for the day which
feels to me more like a this would be I
mean I would say been you know but much
better as an ongoing relationship right
once or twice a week on a regular basis
kind of thing that much much more like
that and yeah it wouldn't need to be
reaching out to a specific person we
would need to do if you if you were
someone who wanted to help all you do is
register on a on a website or whatever
somewhere you know and someone in your
area would get in touch with you and say
hi my name's whatever what are you free
let's hang out sounds sounds good I was
interested is something like that where
it's just saying when let's say what
topic you want to talk about so I think
that's more above that's the word okay
structure that helps to like organizing
something that brings people together in
a way that everyone feels included in a
different I'm just like the example
that's coming to mind is when people are
hungry and we send them to a soup
kitchen right and we'd like give money
in a soup kitchen and those are
volunteers versus like what I do a
cohousing which could be done with
people of various economic
status right like it doesn't need to be
we've given money and now this is your
pot of like charity stew right it can be
what is it
mutual aid instead of charity I remember
there was one that like actually rhymes
like that and I'm not saying what you're
saying is that but like there's part of
me that's putting it in that category
it's then hard for me to wrap it around
of like that's fine that's where we want
to go from it is mutual aid though right
because the person doing the
volunteering and doing the helping get
something very real and very valuable
out of it also right I mean it's it
isn't it is not one-way traffic what you
guys heard me talk before about like
kind of the 12-step model and you know
there's something different in that you
know you're going and saying okay I have
an issue you know I go to this place and
there's a you see you're saying I have
this this issue and there's a whole
bunch of other people who have that
there who have that issue and although
there is a bit of the I'm I mean you
know I need help and there's people
there to help it isn't it sort of it's
diffused in a way that I think I noticed
a similar response to Jubilee to Eric
your suggestion I like I like that and
there would there was something about
like yeah that the I mean people have to
one of the one of the things that
happens with the 12-step is like you
have to be really really hurting to be
able to say I need help to go to this
thing and so how do we create an
environment where you don't have to be
hurting quite so much to say I need help
how to end and yeah and that I guess
even asking for help is a step towards
like oh I have to acknowledge that I'm
lonely and I think loneliness is so
rampant in society that it's been normal
as opposed like you're maybe with people
but you're still lonely
as opposed to creating things that give
us connection without you needing to
first say that you're lonely because I
a lot of vulnerability that goes within
that and reaching up for help and
there's even more that then when you
don't get that help it feels so much
worse than having not asked in the first
place and I like the ABE so that the a
model of like one everyone kind of shows
up and they're equal even whether
they're one day or thirty thirty years
sober but at the same time there's that
other structure of finding a sponsor
that's and so having something where it
is more of a common base and then you if
you feel you need more and you're one of
the people who can be like listen I'm
lonely I need more there's tools for you
but it's more designed broadly for to
increase everyone's connection right
everyone who is my people helping you
move in that direction in my ideal a
flat budget you know if we're talking
about what can we do now is you know
10,000 people and $100,000 the I was
reminded something that somebody did a
couple years ago there was a hash tag
that said what anxiety feels like and
like a whole lot of people started
posting like what anxiety felt like for
them and what would it look like if we
had ten thousand people who posted what
loneliness feels like to me and made it
something where we're we're talking
about it on you know in our social you
know in our social groups and and
describing that and and then you know be
at the bottom saying if you feel similar
reach out to me making yourself
available so having 10,000 people who
are making themselves available to say
hey I've had this is how what loneliness
is felt like to me if this sounds
familiar
let's talk
it doesn't take $100,000 maybe but it's
finding the 10,000 right it's all right
you still got saying you still finding
10,000 people who are willing to admit
to themselves that they want to enter
into this kind of arena right I mean
it's pretty much the same you know it's
the same issue that you brought up
before this there's still a you know
having to having to acknowledge the
thing and step up to a place where you
are looking for help right yeah is there
a difference though between looking back
and saying here's what I felt when I've
been lonely versus reaching out when
you're in loneliness right I think we
can all admit to having been lonely but
it's harder in the moment to be like
unloved
come play with me which of course is
impossible right now but you think
there's still ways yeah I like that
distinction of you know it doesn't it
doesn't have to be I feel lonely right
now it's this is what loneliness has
felt like to you know that you know this
is what lonely feels like it's you know
something that I have felt I may not be
feeling that right now but I have felt
it and so then because it is much easier
to empathize with someone if you have
actually experienced it yeah and so if
somebody shares what it felt like to
them and somebody goes oh that's what
I'm feeling right now so it's more about
people who are willing to admit oh yeah
I have felt loneliness yeah okay so how
is a Facebook group not the perfect
vehicle for this then yeah a Facebook
group you know he started off i-i've
felt really lonely today blah blah blah
anyone else felt lonely and get it going
on a phase break that sounds to me like
the perfect vehicle for this otherwise
you're starting a website I'm lonely
calm or whatever asking people to come
and relate their experiences of
loneliness and creating an environment
where I mean I understand once people
are in that environment I completely get
the point of the shared experience it's
a much safer feel to the whole thing I
completely understand all of that but
it's still the the moment of stepping
into that environment whether it is an
exchange of you know those volunteers
and people that need help or whether it
is a communal space for people who have
experienced loneliness maybe not feeling
it right now but you know want
you know are attracted to the idea in
some way of talking about the loneliness
that they've experienced it seems to me
a similar barrier to entry if you know
what I mean I think maybe I'm thinking a
bit more along the lines that for me to
movement I'm thinking about you know
hashtag lonely hashtag what loneliness
what lonely feels like something like
that then Switzer you don't need to
create anything yes right you know
anyone can you know I mean me too that
was just something that it like exploded
now the question became you know I mean
there's a bit of chance in this of like
is that is this the moment when this
subject so three weeks into lockdown is
the perfect moment for it so yeah I I
mean if you're on Twitter I don't do
Twitter but if you're on Twitter I you
sold me I think it's a really good idea
you've sold me I think I could that is
the perfect opportunity to try something
like that yeah and one of you know and
and just along the lines of you know
something to do now one of the ways to
make that happen faster is if you know
someone who has a high follower you know
do that yeah I mean that's kind of with
the 10,000 people at $100,000 for us
regular folk to find 10,000 people it's
next to impossible it has to be the
right thing at the right time it
happened to go viral but the reason me
two took office is Alyssa Milano tweeted
it and then she and then people like
wait you weren't the first one they
credit it back to the woman from like
months or years ago and she had done it
but really Alyssa Milano started it like
it's like because if she didn't put her
voice to it she wouldn't have had it it
wouldn't have the reverberations it did
so finding like one celebrity to do
something like this is literally like
that's how it takes off but then it also
then what comes after that
is partly so I like the idea of a
hashtag that talks about like people who
things ie talks about loneliness what
else could we do with 10,000 people in
$100,000
I like some of the loneliest times I
have felt are when I've gone through a
major life event and I think they're
common the death of a loved one and
health dissing on having go through
surgery or chemo or radiation in my dice
a divorce although I've never been
divorced like having a club of people
that you could actually get like here's
a bunch of men who are going through
divorce right now you can talk to them
once a week and actually coordinating
that between people because everyone has
life events if you stuck with one life
event and you're like okay we're going
as I think some of the perfect people to
help with any life event or those who've
already been through it and can say
here's what would have helped me in that
moment kind of like the loneliness thing
right like looking back I can say I've
been lonely but in the moment it's
harder what helped you in your divorce
what helps you with the loss of a child
the loss of your parent you know like
that kind of that's just pure peer it's
just showing up and having a
conversation around that thing and going
through it for a year together or
however long until it kind of just okay
it's about protecting those people I was
participating in another discussion over
the weekend there's something like that
and it was and they were talking about
building mastermind groups and
mastermind groups being like okay
there's some change I want to make or
something that I want to do differently
in my life and the issue was you know
how do you find the people who are
interested in what it is that you're
interested in or what it is that you're
going through similar thing and it's
interesting so when I was a senior in
high school I I wasn't actually going to
my high school anymore because I
couldn't go to the Community College but
I went back and I was doing a thing
where I was trying to figure out how do
you find out what all the front--
incoming freshmen are interested in and
getting their names to the appropriate
clubs and groups because how do you
because how
how do you know what people know how do
you get the shy kids involved in
something if you don't know what they're
interested in and so we like gave out
these surveys and and in order to like
find what people were interested in I'm
not necessarily advocating for doing
something like that but that's you know
it's how do you create a centralized or
what a centralized I don't even like
that word that word but how do you yeah
because there's not just like there's I
think there's a stigma with loneliness
but there's something else like I needed
help when or something like that like
getting people to talk about the things
you know that they needed help with or
you know yeah I think there's two types
of relationships that could be foster
that would help it would choose the
peer-to-peer right we're all going
through divorce let's have a
conversation and I've been through
divorce I can offer you something like
the mentor mentee relationship and the
peer relationship what came out to me
when you are talking was the four
questions again having a simple website
technology that puts you to with what
unit like that you have a goal in mind
right you want to gain weight you want
to lose weight run run marathon you want
to organize your house whatever your
goal is finding other people who have a
similar goal matching up working through
that process together is like you're
already finding your sense of self
because you you know what goal is
important to you you find your people
based on who else has that similar goal
the purpose is just that right it
doesn't need to be I'm gonna be a doctor
I'm gonna it's like no my purpose is to
gain 20 pounds to lose you know like
this is actually the purpose and the
resource is that what else came up
because I don't like central D central
authority centralization is like central
government it's so what came up as the
vs. was concentrated versus dissipated
so like a concentrated group of people
so that you can go into those individual
groups right a big enough 10,000 is a
big enough group that you'd have someone
available who has us and
old especially if you started with one
goal in mind or you know like one series
of goals um as you were saying that I'm
sorry I just realized I don't make sure
that anybody else doesn't want to share
so Jubilee what came up for me and what
I like your questions and there's
something as someone who in my darkest
moments and even when I am NOT in my
darkest moments doesn't know how to
answer the question what might what is
my purpose sometimes the only thing I
could figure out is okay what am i
working on next what's the next what you
know what's the next thing I'm going to
you know what what's the what's my in in
12-step they talk about what's the next
right thing I couldn't handle that
because I'm too much of a perfectionist
I freaked out when they asked that so I
said so I could handle what's the next
indicated action like what's my next
indicated thing because if you're in
that like because I know that when I was
in that darkest place if somebody asked
what my purpose was I would flip out and
and not - and like I like that now from
where I'm at I absolutely like that
question but in that place that question
was too overwhelming for me and so what
would be a slight variation like to meet
somebody where they're at with that you
know like because those are those are
awesome questions and if you are barely
able to get out of bed and take take a
shower those questions are beyond like
and I love Eric's thing of you know it's
still that in the education system so
that you know it from you know like
you're asking yourself that from you
know kindergarten but you haven't don't
have that foundation oh yeah and that is
when I look at the most questions what
is your purpose is like a verb what do
you want to physically be doing and it
could be take a shower and it could be
but I get what you're saying the
grandiose nests of it is itself kind of
a barrier
is that like what's the perfect thing to
do as opposed to what is an action you
can take that would help about swear I
liked the idea of a purpose goal because
that that is already the purpose without
you need to ask it right it's just like
behind the scenes these questions are
getting answered but the technology is
just connecting you to it to a verb a
thing you're doing a goal with people
who have a similar goal and in so doing
you're gonna find out more about
yourself and the resource is to be able
to do that so it's like it's the me the
group the verb and the things I need to
do any of those three right so it's like
and to live my life so I can do any of
them as well but I like yes a different
wording than purpose is probably well no
it's just it's just a question of
remembering that it said that it's an
iterative cycle right and so when you're
asking yourself what is my purpose
notice what is my grand you know what is
my Dharma you know what I mean it's not
about those you know what what am I
trying to accomplish right now you know
what I mean and then if you're in a
position to ask yourself bigger
questions from from from a you know more
bird's eye perspective then then then
great but I mean it needn't be that the
fact that it's going on all the time all
the time all the time at multiple
frequencies if you like simultaneously
generally and that's that I think it's a
really really really powerful model is
it's it's burning into my it's burning
into my lens making system you know what
I mean is it's it I think I think it's
super powerful Jubilee I love it the
other things that comes up for me around
mental health specifically is that like
we've talked at the very beginning the
stigma associated with it and I think a
lot of what can help with that is
finding your people so if you've gotten
diagnosed with schizophrenia or bipolar
and finding other people who are further
on in that process to be able to say
write life-changing when you find out
but you couldn't get like to now feel
normal ish because you are normal right
like you there's tons of people who have
that diagnosis but how do you find them
it's all on you to find them like it is
to find any community and you're
probably in some of your lowest
loneliness point at that point it's the
hardest to find them being able to
actually because because as
I feel like it's a different level than
the lowliness if like you have to admit
you're lonely you just admitted that you
have schizophrenia right you just you've
just got the diagnosis you have brain
tumors which is a whole other side but
like anytime you're diagnosed with
something that can have a devastating
impact on your life as they all do
getting in contact with other people who
are again either that mentor mentee
relationship or peer race right oh
you've all been diagnosed with this
thing here meet up have fun or someone
who's who's been through it and I would
do that in both instances if I got
diagnosed or something I would love to
connect with people have gotten it and
I'm happy to connect with people on any
of the diagnoses I've had that I've
dealt with and then you also know that
it's not like I'm not the spokesperson
for acoustic neuromas but I'm one person
who's been through it and here's my
experience well and then there's another
interesting variation of that which is
you know the you know there are
different ways of addressing certain
things you know I have one of the
12-step groups that I'm involved in is
ACA adult children of alcoholics and
dysfunctional families everyone in those
groups or I would say 99% of them are
dealing with complex PTSD that they and
so like but there's this interesting
thing of helpings that we you know it's
like okay well I have complex PTSD and
then there's options but there's
complexity in terms of how people might
how people might feel in relation to
this group that's it's like wait a
minute what's this and you know so it's
but again in the you know in being able
to talk about it and normalize it and
say yeah this is my this is this is my
experience and there's also an
interesting thing of the people who are
that there's because there's multiple
stages because there's people who are
realizing oh wait a minute I have
anxiety I have bipolar I have whatever
and then there's some people who have
been on medication for years haven't
found any solutions and I realize it
quick wait a minute this isn't like
there
that model isn't working for me and
figuring out something you know figuring
out something else that includes the art
the this the that you know the the
meditation art the exercise the you know
all those different pieces yeah it was
one of the things that we is a potential
solution for 10,000 and 100,000 is a
database of options without critiquing
them necessarily what are how do you
reduce your anxiety how do you you know
like for me I know meditation works well
for other people there's like to my
thoughts is the worst thing ever it's
not about because most things out there
like a one-size-fits-all take vitamin D
it solves everything take iron insults
everything as opposed to hey I had this
and when I started taking iron turns out
I had energy like just and I'm thinking
more mental health some more like
meditation yoga tai chi a like any
literally anything that can fit under
that umbrella what are the pros what are
the cons which ones are gonna I'm gonna
respond to you the best and that's more
more than a database and probably more
than hundred thousand dollars but a
database itself could be well and and to
and this is one that we haven't really
talked about and this kind of actually
goes back a section a little bit this is
just a thought that occurred to me one
of the fun one of the things I have a
really hard time with is you have
anxiety there's a very big difference
between I'm experiencing anxiety and I
have anxiety anxiety something that you
have that you have to get rid of
experiencing is something that you're
moving through and right now what we
have is a the dsm-5 you know they had
there's this giant book of disorders
that people might have and we're gonna
put this thing on you and say this is
what you have and you're stuck and
you're stuck with it whereas there it's
something like it might be a page that
you're going things that you're going
through and so how do you yeah
that goes back a step but it was just a
part that occurred to me
we only have a few more minutes left
Shiloh would you like to say anything
you know we've been are we is it closing
we have just four minutes
ot - but I mean if you have something
you want to say if it's not in the
closing umbrella you I guess it's on
topic but it's also not if I had ten
thousand people in a hundred thousand
dollars I think that I would want to
develop this multi-level value system
just the technology of it and then I
would want to go to communities and
introduce it to them through like a
workshop of art of course because that's
who I am but other people talking about
different solutions and share with them
how by anchoring ourselves to our
location and each other we can grow this
better system so that would be my way I
guess of actually attracting more people
would be because they're giving them
this gift in a community where they can
value each other themselves their land
it gives a real sense of wealth and I
believe that by including everyone it
gives us a way out of our mental illness
like you're saying maybe it's just a
phase we're trying to work through some
things that aren't working so I feel
like that's a way because for me when
I'm at my worst points I have to find a
way out through the future through what
I can do in the moment at the same time
so working towards there but starting
here anyway I guess that's what I would
say or the ten thousand and ten hundred
thousand how her that is
they're really quiet googly oh sorry I
was also am I'm still really quiet no no
I can hear you okay maybe I was like
talking further back anyone to give any
closing statements before I wrap it up I
guess one more I think I wrote this down
last night I popped in my head do what
feels right for you
and if you don't feel right do something
different if it doesn't come from me
it's never the right thing because it's
like then I'm doing it for an outside
source but not doing it because it came
from outside source isn't also listen to
me though it's finding what does feel
good and finding the next best action
for that is the one that comes from
internally for me anyone else have any
anything they would like to add all
right I would love to do a lot this
every Wednesday at this time with a
different topic do a different solution
racing and do it live and of course you
three are more than welcome back and
anyone else who wants to participate and
then I'm the other days that I'm live
I'm figuring out what that looks like
maybe one of them will be devoted to the
questions and one of them I'm still
figuring out what it is I'm just putting
my button to see and showing up for an
hour so thank you for doing the first
live solution raising with me and I will
see the rest of you tomorrow same time