[Music]
so I was thinking today I like what I
really wanted to well I've been thinking
all week and listening to your book your
audiobook and thinking about what I
really wanted to talk to you about and
what comes up the most really is is
America America yeah the United States
of America or let's say America as a
concept America as a as a country the
dystopian and the utopian qualities of
America I think you're uniquely
qualified to talk about that because you
spent so much time in sort of subculture
America or let's say alternative America
I don't know what exactly to call it in
search of let's say X status community
tasks either some of the words you use
in your book a lot yeah yeah and you
know and I don't usually you know might
in my current public biography kind of
stuff it doesn't usually feature very
strongly but I mean I was all but done
on a dissertation in American history so
so I'm actually trained academically as
an American historian and cultural
anthropologist oh how interesting
in addition then personally we also went
searching for the last best places in
America and following that kind of
Promethean thread revival culture you
know and again academically studying it
from the 17th through the 20th centuries
experientially going and checking out
all these seeming hotbeds and bubbling
ups of that kind of culture coming out
of the 50s and 60s mm-hmm so both as a
participant observer and then also from
an academic perspective that's kind of I
found myself almost like a sort of
Alexis de Tocqueville you know that the
famous a Frenchman ooh who came to the
u.s. in the middle of the 19th century
and wrote about America as a concept as
a meme in a way that Americans obviously
couldn't
because they were in it so yeah I mean I
think there's so many different ways to
slice and dice this I mean in some
respects I think Gary Snyder the poet
who wanted Pulitzer for his collection
total Island and was one of the
preeminent beats and I mean arguably one
of my most that one of the leading
lights of the 1960s counterculture I I
admire and respect the most and he has
that beautiful beautiful poem of his I
went into the maverick bah it's like
least I think it's his most anthologized
poem but there's some lines at the end
and he says he says America your
stupidity
I could almost love you again and he
said that he said like and he leaves the
blog because he's talking about like
dancing in this kind of redneck bar and
the intersection of the counterculture
and and the locals and he says he says I
went out you know he was out on the
highway in the shadow of the bluffs
under the tough old stars I came back to
myself to the real work to what is to be
done mm-hmm and I think that kind of
juxtaposition of America's adolescent
stupidity yeah right as a country bigger
than its own brawn and never quite
knowing what to do with itself and
believing its own press clippings but
also you know the kind of Noam Chomsky
critique actually exercising hegemonic
Empire languaging of liberty and freedom
for all you know it's it's a it's a
decidedly complex and mixed bag well as
Stegner who is one of the kind of
leading literary lights of the american
tradition he was the graduate professor
of writing at stanford he's the one that
actually taught ken kesey
when Kesey showed up at stanford they've
then kicked off the whole psychedelic
explosion on the west coast sure he had
a he had a great phrase you know in
writing about the American West which
was kind of his domain he said he said
it's the perennial project is can we
create a society to match the scenery
you know you just think of just the
sheer rugged beauty and abundance of
North America as Turtle Island as a con
yeah then how the hell do we do the
human Inge on top of that and can we
actually live up to the purple mountain
Majesties and every way this oversized
beauty and rugged nature and then it's
almost like the people haven't learned
to live there yet yeah there seems to be
such a there seems to be a real
connection or separation between the
urban you know all the urban ugliness of
the urban suburban society and then this
utopian project that keeps trying to
install itself but never kind of lands
or yeah I mean I mean going all the way
back to the 17th century and good old
John Winthrop and the famous city you
know shining city on a hill thing that
then Reagan dusted off and you know and
rebooted the idea that in fact America
is in physical in physicality the actual
place and also in concept or ideology
the potential of the fulfillment of the
judeo-christian Redemption narrative
mmm-hmm and everywhere else is decline
and decay and that here is a chance for
fresh starts new beginnings getting it
right you know and fundamental
attainment and that is one of these
stronger mimetic drivers of the
unfolding of the history you know and I
think that that's that's you know it's
both sort of beautiful and inspiring and
also deeply problematic
yeah and prone to prompting pathology in
its articulation or expression and so
you get nativism and populism you get
all sorts of things chauvinism you get
all the isms schisms yeah springing from
you know a stance like that but it's
deep yeah if that's good I'm glad you
brought that up because because you know
the other thing that kind of I'm
interested in is is religion and
spirituality and it seemed like like
America is always trying to escape
tradition in some kind of way like blow
up blow open the doors of perception and
and and all that and meet meet God or
whatever you want to call it the divine
directly and in
not that that's part of the problem
wanting to sort of storm the temple
temple gates to heaven or whatever that
expression is is that yeah I mean look
very very few mainstream humdrum
centrists were in any wave of migration
to this country yeah they were usually
wack nuts and misfits and zealots you
know or they wouldn't have rolled the
dice and and interestingly I mean just
you know and in fact there's this and
there's a couple of books I'd recommend
for folks that want to take a scholarly
but still informative take on this one
is john butler's awash in a sea of faith
and that basically goes back to you 17th
through 19th story basically the
american blueprint of religiosity and
spiritual seeking including the the two
Great Awakenings and the idea that it's
it's weird is hardwired for like
basically eschatological revivals so
like it's always the end of days and
we're all gonna shed the old skin and be
reborn into something new and and then
the other one is Howard blooms the Yale
professor omens of millennium mmm-hmm
which is a fascinating book just
basically describing he goes deep on to
Mormonism because Mormonism mystical
insights the idea of just how wild
American spirituality has always been
and still is I mean if you do that you
know Time magazine level surveys you
know 60% of Americans believing in Satan
active Satan you know and angels and
UFOs and or either like you're like it's
way off the charts for a Western
democracy as far as what is in what is
in our cosmology and it goes back
centuries so it is it's a it's a
fascinating and then you know and that
was you know that begat Jim Jones and
and you know and the Moonies but also
Joel Osteen and Tony Robbins uh-huh and
the dead I remember like in the 90s I
hitchhiked to see the Grateful Dead and
I I felt like I was I felt like it was
in the presence of something kind of
biblical you know just in this kind of
rock
concert you know all these people
swirling around and psyckadeli and I
mean I'm Joseph Campbell did those guys
as the modern day a loose Indian mystery
yeah anybody said look this is kind of
the closest we have and you know and and
Kesey and those guys beget the Burning
Man culture so it's alright yeah that's
that's the lineage yeah but that's so
different than corporate American isn't
it isn't it I mean corporate America
takes that and uses it but but but it's
kind of communist in spirit you know
again that's kind of the paradox I'm
talking about it's like share everything
and all this and then make all this
money at the same time there seems to be
a there seems to be a real communist
aspect to America or at least communal
and unil ism yes I'm saying communist
which probably you know makes you think
of you know messes and complications
that makes you think of Marxist Leninist
but but but actual communalism or
something seems to be a big aspect of
America which is again paradoxical to
its intense individualism or or you know
yeah well actually that that tees up a
beautiful point because you asked me
kind of what you know what are my
thoughts on America in this kind of big
picture long sense and that dialogue or
dialectic right that tension between
individualism and communalism is
pronounced and is actually baked in so
not to rehash things but you're asking
like how do I see what's going on in
America right now and we've talked about
the city on the hill and some of these
things I lay this out in some detail
with the guys at rebel wisdom and and
it's it's a video if you want to check
out war on sense-making three I kind of
tee up what I think is actually the
biggest crisis worth at least culturally
and ideologically which is the challenge
to the infinite game of the
Enlightenment project basically all men
and women are created equal and entitled
with the same in aiding rights they gave
us the Olympics and gave us the UN right
and gave us all general and you know the
Geneva Accords and all sorts of
generally decent things where we
believed that all humans count and
matter and are entitled to a fair crack
you know not the human experience best
Express and how that is actually coming
under attack from the right on the left
you know for the for the extremes of the
right and left you are both saying we
don't want to play that in
in a game and we don't believe everybody
is equally deserving and we want to
fracture break this thing up and grab
what's ours for hours and those are
versions of the finite game so that that
had a you know that's a super quick
digest of where we are which is we're no
longer because I mean if you go back to
George Bush 9/11 right and his
discussion that he's going out of his
way to say this is extremist terrorists
Muslim citizens Muslim green card
holders are all good people they're your
neighbors right I mean it seems
positively quaint compared to our
climate as of today talk about Chinese
viruses and foreign invaders and you
know build walls and listen that so like
we've had a palpable sea change even
from conservative to nominal
conservative points of view let alone
you know party systems so do you think
it's a decline it's in decline in
America it's like the decline of the
American Empire or do you think you
think do you think it's it's going to
still be like the leading country you
know for many for I mean not a chance in
hell his American to maintain its
unchallenged dominance post-world War
two all right yeah the collapse of the
Soviet Union that was a historical fluke
pops America I think I'm speaking more
in terms of the American Dream being
something that people are sort of
looking to you know you know Nike
running shoes and whatever at whatever
is America you know people are still
trying to grab it and eat it up still I
mean is that gonna continue or well as a
generator of cultural novelty aka
Hollywood and acha ting might you know
to what extent will the bloom fall-off
that rose and or center of gravity's
just shift to elsewhere especially in
distributed media where you don't need
top-down centralized sources of
fabrication like a big studio complex or
anything like that those are open
questions right and even I mean even
things like techno utopians like
singularity University and like hey the
future is coming and it's amazing and
whiz-bang and flying jet packs and 5g
and you know a
you know like even that kind of
boosterism for a whiz-bang future that's
coming soon kids but buggy to buckle
your seatbelts even that is feeling
remarkably anachronistic well I was
thinking about your book actually and I
was wondering if your vision had gotten
darker since you wrote that book or or
because it seems to have it has both
those aspects it has of a utopian sort
of aspect and it has a big respect for
for all the let's say Vanguard
experimentalists of American culture but
it also that also shows the dangers and
it shows a very dark side as well do you
think it's getting again it's my same
question is it getting darker is it
getting more dangerous is it oh I mean
for sure
you know like in the sense that I mean
you know stealing fire the book you're
referring to was both a you know my love
letter to this sort of hidden mystic
lineage yeah from that seem to ought
never to just live in one culture or
society indefinitely but it would sort
of pop up in one place and time go
underground pop up in another but if you
kind of knew what you were looking for
you to sort of connect the dots from the
Greeks and the rights of the loosest you
know all the way to Grateful Dead in
Burning Man you know and everywhere in
between throw in some Aleister Crowley
and ger G for a no-show and you you're
like oh oh oh I see what's happening
here like it's you know it's unstable
and but but volatile when you see it so
half of it was that just connecting
those dots that were the result of my
own like what is this thing you know
curiosity and the other half was trying
to kind of breadcrumb to the future of
what's the toolkit so if you could read
between the lines of say the second half
of the book it's saying hey it's ever
been thus there's always been this
cat-and-mouse game between the priest
and the Prometheans no matter what
always been mMmmm
number two this stuff always gets
commodified or weaponized or he denies -
he denies being a made-up word but just
you know we become victims of our own
excess pleasure-seeking
but the commodification and the
weaponization are perennial threats and
thesis of the book the only shot we have
this time kids is to open source open
sourcing right these technologies ahead
of any attempts to prevent or co-opt
mm-hmm and even in the featuring of the
Burning Man as an event as a cultural
moment I didn't say it's amazing and you
get together and you heal and you you
know all these things right what we said
was hey look at boners Without Borders
these guys did disaster relief response
they coordinated with DARPA they went to
Hurricane Katrina and volcanoes in South
America hey look at what they did in
Afghanistan with open-sourcing data it
was very very specifically - this is
your proofing okay I guess that's my
question then is is is do you still have
that optimism about open sourcing or
does that the source of open sourcing
also have a very dark side of dark
possibility to it it's like leaving
people to their own you know leaving
giving people the power has a certain
kind of danger as well I mean you can
criticize government and you can
criticize corporations and then and then
the third element would be open source
would be self-organization right huh
yeah I mean it's also dangerous I mean
no isn't it I mean I mean I think I
think the realities are and some smart
friends that I am have you know given me
the kind of the maxim anything that can
be weaponized will be will be right
right that's what Daniel expected Berger
is often saying it's yes okay can be
weaponized and it can be no but even
more specifically anything that can be
will be a little bit like I don't know
if there's some goofy law online of like
anything you can think of someone's made
porn about it there's a there's a law
just a little a little bit more
consequential
yeah well that's it porn porn is a bit
you know that's what you're you said
that is a kind of a joke but it's the
Porta fication isn't it
things that are sacred or the movies you
know but that idea of what you're saying
which is hey does this mean that in fact
we end up being responsible yes
Yeah right it does and in fact you know
I was thinking as recently as last night
I was like oh because I mean like our
our our models like what lens or what
kind of like narrative and who are the
characters and what's the basic plot
that we apply to reality fundamentally
shapes how we see
and what patterns we look for what and
what what bubbles up and typically in
the psycho-spiritual Jemaine
it's the religious format there's a
priest or a teacher or a guru there's
the word or the protocol and then
there's a sort of quest or an
expectation or assumption of purity
awakening enlightenment attainment and
so anytime anybody falls shyam it's seen
as a you know it's a it's a collapse
it's gurus with feet of clay it
invalidates the premise of the teachings
if the if the mortal humans can't live
up to it fully all that kind of stuff
and so it's a very it's just a very it's
a specific lens but if instead you say
okay if we're talking about open
sourcing and by the way I'd like to come
back to the American experiment stuff
and the infinite yeah but we're on this
thread right now yeah um which is if you
talk about open sourcing ecstatic
cathartic technologies right and whether
that's sex drugs rock and roll biotech
medicine you know immersion you know
immersive VR aru you name it but we can
do it these days and so unlocking post
conventional consciousness has gone from
this aspirational pipe dream to kind of
a table stakes commodity it's doable
infinitely through about a dozen
different pathways and is it doable in
the sense of Huxley's sort of pleasure
you know we get hooked guns on some kind
of easy easy easy easy fix well this is
the thing right I mean he famously said
about his fictional soma which was based
on the ancient Indian one but the idea
of like the drug that sort of eases all
your consumer aches and pains he said oh
you know all the benefits of
Christianity and alcohol with none of
the side effects right so right so is
there the trance for Eden ization we
become lizard brain fat monkeys pushing
buttons you know to our nervous system
100% happens all the time yeah but I
think a better model than the Puritan
crypto puritanical religious problem
uh-huh right where any setbacks and
stumbles or signs of unvalidated the
whole thing and they were shutters and
halogens charlatans and you were Dukes
to follow and that kind of thing is this
think of it more like rock climbing
like this is hazardous terrain you know
that if you wanted to stay hiking on the
level trail stay hiking but if
you want to go climbing then gravity's
in the mix and and suddenly like when a
a here are best practices here's how you
use ropes and anchors safely here's how
you belay each other here's backup
safety to make sure you really don't
forget to do the right thing even when
you try to and then if somebody decides
to just go up there and clamber around
drunk on the rocks and they peel off and
kill themselves
no one says ooh rock climbing bad we
should stop this whole thing and blow up
all the mountains so no one can possibly
hurt themselves again they're like that
was a dumbass who didn't know what he
was doing inconsequential terrain right
so there's that there's just baseline do
you have the skills and the basic
training to even engage the content and
then at the other level which is the
masters of the game yeah that's what I
was gonna ask you about teachers yeah so
responsible and and and yeah we're all
responsible we also need teachers right
yeah so so think about Eddie Aikau write
that the famous Hawaiian Waterman
lifeguard surfer and Quicksilver has a
huge Eddie Aikau classic Invitational
taunt you know contest at pipeline there
are Quicksilver bumper stickers on lots
of cars that say Eddie would go right
and because what he did right there was
a huge storm it was that kontiki that
rough that they actually built back in
the 70s was on that Geo on the cover
right that was tore hide all that
Scandinavian who built the rough to try
and recreate the Pacific Islanders
navigating by stars and sailing to the
Hawaiian Islands it was a big deal back
in the day and they got up shits Creek
in the in the channel I think it's
between what is it is Molokai Channel so
gnarly gnarly ocean Channel and Eddy
paddle out on his surfboard as a
lifeguard to go find them and he was
never heard from again hmm
and and this end you know Alex Lowe who
was basically the Michael Jordan of
Alban Alpine mountaineering the year
before we were in in Tibet on Everest up
go actually the year after got clipped
on shishapangma by an avalanche the
Cutlass 3,000 meters above him and wiped
out him and left his climbing partner
Conrad Anker
when those things happen you don't say
oh they were stupid they were
selfish they were fakes yeah because
they went down in the line of exploring
high consequence terrain it's a hat tip
to a fallen warrior yeah saying he knew
the odds he was doing everything
possible to mitigate the odds and Kaali
bit him in the ass for 40 on the curb
range yeah so to me these are
high-performance people who know what
they're doing
and that's a very much different than
toasting a lot of people with acid and a
Grateful Dead concert or whatever I mean
yeah it's there do we draw the line I
mean where do we draw the line in this
business well which line which one I
mean let's say recreational psychedelics
and and and you know at this point I
would I was I wouldn't take recreational
psychedelics myself personally but I but
but I I would say that if there was some
kind of journey some kind of process
some kind of you know stages and that
kind of thing then it would be a
legitimate it could be a legitimate
practice that's how I see it yeah I mean
I mean if you want to get that granular
yeah I mean my sense would be is that
putting them back into cultural context
is helpful recreational is arguably the
least interesting domain or or use
category I think therapeutic is
potentially profound and some form of
initiatory or sacramental news you know
ineffable and so what does that look
like in today in America in modern world
well I mean I think the most if you if
you really want to talk about scaling
this like let's just be super disrupt
here for a moment and now we're just
playing the game it like culture
architecture and you're like okay we
have loot Lodge ask gatherings in
megachurches all around the country
mm-hmm with tons of like dudes wearing
snazzy jeans and wearing earrings and
goatees talking about Jesus but still
they're peddling it with smokes and
light shows and it really looks
indistinguishable from an EDM or Tony
Robbins concert or conference yeah
they're pushing some old
doctrine yeah you know it still is still
a sin to be to be to be a gay you know
and this and that the other like that
really they're they're bringing their
porting in underneath all the snazzy
wrapping some really outdated doctrine
um if we want to go head-to-head with
that that's right you say that's that's
the test case how do you become the
megachurch disrupter
my sense is effectively you do Sai mean
just may get several steps ahead of your
comfort zone but I'll just lay it all
out we can riff on which is what would
basically a psychedelic yokes yogic
flashmob what would it look like and so
imagine you have a web you have a
website you have a venue right and
you've got the light in the sound you've
got kick-ass sound system good visuals
good all that kind of stuff and you say
hey hey friends and family you know at
noon
next Sunday we're all gonna meet at the
body tribe church whatever the and
it's on you to have secured you haven't
needed to have a relationship like with
like Dan Savage the sex advice columnist
knows about the three G's for
relationship we need some what you need
you need a partner who's good giving and
game right you basically you need a
physician that is curious courageous and
connected AKA can write your
prescriptions for the things you're
asking for mm-hmm right so then you
basically say go get yourself a
prescription be let's just say we're in
a state with recreational or medicinal
cannabis so at a minimum that's what 35
states now so let's just say that's the
default norm so you have access to
cannabis you have access to oxytocin
ketamine nasal spray and you can also
pre purchase a a sexual detainment
device there's there's one that won the
Consumer Electronics Show just last
month that is a woman's device that say
both g-spot and clitoral stimulator and
then there's like these Japanese eggs
for guys you know they're like the
stimulators and a prostate so you'd be
like hey we're not doing anything creepy
and no one's gonna touch you and there's
no time massage happy endings but on the
other hand if you want a truly profound
like integrated trauma release and a
nervous system defrag reset the you know
John Lilly mapped it 50 years ago the
primate arousal system sexual arousal
system Maps one-to-one weather acts are
ecstatic circuitry because evolutions
efficient Maps has done studies with
MDMA and PTSD and found that people in
the MDMA state while revisiting trauma
have high bay depressant high prolactin
high oxytocin closest profile as post
orgasm okay that's interesting
no cold prowl see who's a PhD who came
up through the Kinsey Institute has been
researching woman's orgasm as a set as a
replacement for prescription
pharmaceuticals do you like okay
interesting so like working with
evolutionary drivers that happen to
include sexual arousal which are
generally super problematic and
virtually nobody gets right
right can you do this in a cool way and
we were I was just for the hell of it
because we have a potential podcast with
goop coming up so I'm like oh my god
okay I got to learn a little bit about
this other than like the snide you know
thing on goop
so we watched the one where with a
interview and work with Betty Dodson
who's like who's 90 years old and she's
one of the pioneers of female orgasm and
and sex positivity and all this 90 I
mean she's a firecracker she's dropping
f-bombs she's funny as hell unbelievably
interesting you know force of nature but
she pioneered a what she call it the the
rock and roll mode of orgasm right so
it's basically spinal undulations pelvic
stuff with breathing and they took it
they took five hundred and hedonic women
basically women who were unable to have
cultivated orgasms with around 476 of
the 500 were able to have an orgasm
during this during this process so now
we've established the baselines that
people don't freak out that I'm saying
something bring you well let's be very
happy for those women you know hundred
percent right you know and the idea that
it is highly pro-social and highly
provider like you know you reset your
vagal nerve you decrease inflammation
you boost white blood cells in the
immune response you shift
and reset your default mode network and
do a whole host of salubrious things for
you know basically it's a ream a milling
process for humans right um so now you
say okay so this is the flash mob this
is the psychedelic flash mob yoga Jam
right so you say at noon right
bring your gives your punch list you
have sativa edibles or some other form
of cannabis that you're allowed to have
you have your oxytocin ketamine nasal
spray and potentially ketamine lozenges
you've adopted and you've come locked
and loaded with your sexual stimulation
devices on board and you're still closed
and everything else layout your logo mat
now engage in this rock and roll breath
work process right as you are doing this
as we pump eventually the equivalent of
the Grateful Dead show great extend do
your oxy Tosun bonding and ketamine and
now we're gonna create we're gonna
reverse engineer a religious experience
for epifanov experience but up to now
through all of human history people have
always led with the story they've led
with the meaning making but we're in a
post we're in a postmodern to meta
modern space right now everybody's so
you start with the ecstatic experience
and there and then you try to make
meaning of it afterwards rather than
event it yeah so rather rather than
starting with the narrative as a
monolith right Moses came down from the
mountaintop and hear that you know the
Lord gave me 15 smash ten Ten
Commandments right instead of doing that
you could work backwards from the
experiential protocol so do these things
in this order in this combination if you
don't like any of them if any of them
freak you out just back that one out you
just have to do the other ones longer or
more intensely to compensate do it and
then you know literally like you could
even have like a neon sign like believe
what you want to believe just never lose
the faith and so the idea is that makes
it like from the mimetic level it's open
source we're not going to presume to
tell you what is disclosed in your own
interior lived experience we will have a
set of ethical gah so you're talking
like open source religion kind of open
source be whatever religion you like it
could go in and you
you can skin it with whatever you can
have you could see Jesus and then
suddenly become some kind of Christian
mystic or you could have you know
Buddhistic experience has become a month
or you could be you know a Zoroastrian
whatever well and smarter you could have
just have you could have a bunch of them
all you're gonna be sort of a Hindu that
has different gods or yeah well and also
I mean - like not bury the lead
this isn't hypothetical we've been doing
this in communities of practice and
right or radically then you can
imagine and you can create you know
highest level epi fanuc breakthroughs
with basic combinatory stacking of these
protocols so what it does is you end up
with at least two things happen I mean
really it's that X dose is catharsis
communitas mm-hmm lie wheel so it
delivers you it sends you into a realm
of the simplest way to describe it as
you know plato's realm with ideal forms
it's a sort of you know the infant
archetypal world or yeah liminal space
whatever you want to call it and what
hyper cognition pattern recognition and
inspiration like to up to a batshit
crazy level that is so gobsmacking it
can also knock you out of it because
it's so gobsmacking you're like I am in
fact gobsmacked so it's that ridiculous
and then it also allows the deep reboot
of our nervous systems mm-hmm as we
spend so much time and perpetual
fight/flight hyperactive executive
function default mode hamster wheel that
just to go quiet and to go quiet in a
clean reboot of our system the feeling
love basically feeling safety security a
longing you know pleasure
enoughness it's profound it's a gift and
then you know whether it's the oxytocin
or the interconnectivity or anything
else to realize that I'm not alone and
that we're doing this together and that
we're sharing this profound beautiful
thing together
leaves us rebounded as a couple as a
family as a community and allows us to
get back up
and go back outside where the wheels may
be coming off and be a little bit more
resourceful yeah sounds like what
religion should be or something yeah or
that's the sequel to stealing fire I
mean I'm basically sharing thesis of the
book I'm writing right now but it's but
it's because that after stealing five
and it also sounds like a bunch of
stages that people kind of go through
like I'm just speaking thinking
personally about you know you kind of
stumble on to mystical experiences and
then and then later on you try to figure
out what they mean you know when you're
younger well yeah and we're terrible at
that
right cuz very few of us there's a lot
because there's no support system for it
particularly except perhaps traditional
religions and they don't give you a
support system for those kind of
experiences in fact they tend to be
afraid of them or or yeah I mean and
that you know you asked what has shifted
or changed since the writing is stealing
fire I mean one of the things is to
realize at that point you know and
obviously there's like a two to three
year lag from the conception of a book
to other people actually seeing in and
reading it and so that was you know 2014
2015 was the origination of that like I
think this is happening it's starting to
happen and there seems to be a there
there to this collective distributed
revolution since then what we've seen is
a basically a Children's Crusade a lot
of under informed people with poor sense
making shooting the moon indulgently
erratically coming back with
gobbledygook magical thinking and and
effectively like everybody's trying to
build a spaceship in their driveway you
know and so discernment meta structures
academic information understanding of
lineage traditions you know post
conventional discernment and clarity and
waiting you know complex interconnected
equations most folks are there just like
learners would Amazon I said an amazing
time and now I'm gonna quit my job but
now I'm gonna host a podcast and you're
like mmm yeah that's probably not gonna
cut it and so there is a real sense of
you know if we want to do it yourself
madness kind of well yeah but on the
flip side
to be back into empowering like this is
on us yeah what is an open-source
operating system so what's the
psycho-spiritual equivalent of
blockchain mm-hmm right so we talk about
that with economics and governance and
organization but what's the
psycho-spiritual version of blockchain
or Linux right so it's an open-source
code you can use it for free you can
modify it you can mutate it you know and
it will continue to grow if it's useful
and so we kind of realized that you know
if you wanted to like if you did like a
design thinking approach to rebooting
meaning you know meaning to point out
like if meaning 1.0 was organized
religion and that's kind of been
collapsing all over the place and you
could even say that the religion of
neoliberal consumer free-market
capitalism is also collapsing mm-hmm
right
but nonetheless the old the old gods are
crumbling and creaking but we have a
profound need for that healing
inspiration and connection that that
those organized institutions used to
offer yeah exactly
right yeah my my friend John for vague
he calls it religio like we need the
religio part yeah of religion and you
know sociologists and anthropologists
you know people who are belong to
communities of faith or healthier
wealthier happier so it does mimetic lis
just as a survival mechanism about
believing despite what Christopher
Hitchens and Sam Harris might have said
right believing is actually a pro-social
vital rational choice yeah yeah agreed
yeah right so the question is is as
though all the old gods of class and the
old institutions are shattering or
mutating into other weird things the
question is what do we need what's and
what's a Design Thinking toolkit so so
like instead of what would Jesus do like
what would I do
do you know and and you think okay well
you or a little idea what's the idea is
is kind of like the world's most famous
design firm okay and they've been
responsible for also you know billions
and billions of dollars
so yeah just bringing design thinking to
it right from an agnostic point of view
like we don't have a dog in the fight
as far as storytelling and sky gods but
we do care about humans
waking up growing up and showing up so
how do we hope that happen and my sense
is you need a metaphysics
you need some way to map and model and
make sense of the nonsensical or post
conventional so how do we do that and
that's one we're really really bad at
right now you know cuz people just leap
to magical thinking or the old crutches
or you-tube spirituality or whatever it
would be I think John various is
meaningfully far along on helping people
map that in a good and rigorous way yeah
right so so it's stuff like that and you
know we also have some short hands and
some kind of fun checklist but you also
need an ethics because when you get rid
of the morals binary literal thou shalt
and thou shalt nots right you need
something to replace it you can't just
all become rone in you know like
samurais without a temple
those are dangerous some cultivate that
much power without deference to a code
and so you need an ethics you need
sacraments what are the actual and you
know do you need tradition I mean do we
need tradition I mean in your last
discussion of rebel wisdom I felt like
you were arguing for tradition a little
bit like yeah you said something like
you said you know we have to bring back
like cricket or something or well it was
the idea that was the it was the it was
riffing on this country or sportsmanship
or more respect for the past and respect
for tradition or respect for the human
story or hmm yeah well that's up to you
what let me just finish sharing excuse
me and we can then we can comment on
what are some helpful ways that it might
propagate great so one sort of culture
architecture judo of like what's the
easiest way to get that kind of momentum
happening so so you need the metaphysics
up top how do we make sense of the nfo
how do we f the ineffable as Douglas
Adams once said we need the ethics to
replace morals because to say that I no
longer mom you know agree William
William Blake said it right he said one
law for the lion and the Ox is
oppression yeah
when you cast off your you know your
oxen yoke now you're like the man
it doesn't mean that the lion just gets
to eat all the babies crank the low not
shallow morality but but true sort of
reflected ethics yeah
then you need sacraments right with
which as Michael Pollan recently said he
said all we've got these days are
placebo sacraments they don't work
graduations confirmations Bar Mitzvah
marriage is very few of them reliably
transform the people between one phase
of their existence to another via
contact with the numinous they're almost
always wrote social productions yeah
right
so what are sacraments that actually
work and then we need some relationship
to deities some relationship to
basically archetypal forms mmm doesn't
have to be cowering from a superstitious
sky god it can be you know like like
Tibetan Buddhism right the deliberate
contemplation of wrathful and benign
deities you know or in the Catholic
tradition the veneration of the saints
which are all they're similar psycho
technologies which is ideally we become
what you behold yeah indeed so how do we
interact with some of these archetypal
forms that are complex and multiple
multi-layered and give us insight into
the human condition and ideally allow us
to kind of transmute qualities from them
to us mm-hmm in that contemplating in
that recursive loop and if you have
those things then you're like oh that's
the toolkit now we just get to color
them in now you get extra bonus points
for either coming up with a novel
innovation or dusting off a lineage
tradition particularly your own right
and revitalizing it with the Living
Light of gnostic initiation and so back
to the jute now we're at the judor level
which is anywhere possible I'm a huge
fan of going back dust finding the gems
buried in our traditions dusting them
off holding them up again and revalorisé
in them because they already there's
inertia behind them and so people they
will feel truthy long but long before
you've had to do a Michael Bloomberg and
spend half a billion dollars trying to
get a new point across
that's not sticky so so for instance
like the American experiment city on a
hill that is a moment that is a meme
with a ton of momentum so if there's I
think like the way Abe Lincoln did it in
the way Martin Luther King did it the
way even Obama attempted to do
which was in times of crisis dust off
that beautiful gem of a concept and try
and encourage us to double down on it
you don't do the Noam Chomsky and say
the American Empire is dead and it was
always corrupt and bankrupt and we do
something else and I was like okay well
that's a withering critique I feel
totally bummed out or maybe angry and
for reasons I don't understand but now
what well we need I guess you need you
need mythic language you need mythos you
need because it's but it's it's a way of
making transparent you know the
complexity or something and and giving
giving people a vision of something in
the future or rather than just the usual
kind of forensic analysis of the
situation like you can feel it right
away if it's if it's mythological know
yeah exactly and I think that's where
Jordan Peterson you know hit such a deep
you know deep and resonant note yeah
like what you're talking about is
finding your father at the bottom of the
ocean or something like that right
that's what Peterson was always speaking
about that's rediscovering the living
part of the tradition or or and in and
you know integrating it and then going
forward into the future well yeah and
now to bring all these things together
so we talked about like the the flash
hub synchronized consumption of
prescription pharmaceuticals in a hive
environment you know to to song and
movement and arouse like all that and a
reboot because like and that literally
is the closest I can come to what would
be like instead of like the Anarchist
Cookbook you know of like here's how to
build a bomb with you know what's under
your kitchen sink it's like here's how
to blow yourself sky-high and initiate
you into Christ consciousness with
common common household materials knock
yourselves out and if and when you do
you may get to an experience of Gnostic
initiation which you know Plato said
this of the loose in Ian's mysteries
they said it doesn't just teach you how
to die a better death the mysteries
teach you how to live a better life and
so if you can get to that place of
becoming a twice born human yeah right
then you've entered the realm of life as
anthropos right or in the Kabbalistic
sense like adam kadmon right that the
the fully the second adam or something
yes though fully awakened and
man with the capital yes old person I
think yeah yeah exactly
yeah which by the way ties in perfectly
with Gandhi's notion of satyagraha soul
and and what MLK called soul force you
live soul force because you're no longer
seeking pleasure and avoiding pain your
note you hold no cherished outcomes and
you're simply here with an awake beating
heart to play your part and that by the
way is also arguably the mythic endgame
or apotheosis of the American experiment
mm-hmm right because on the collective
it's the city on the hill but the
individual has always been I mean it
gets it gets secularized in the horatio
alger pull yourself up by your
bootstraps anyone could write and you're
born in a log cabin now there the
president anyone who know it to be an
astronaut it gets secularized into that
mm-hmm that is really a compressed
version of the American spiritual
tradition mm-hm and so that notion of
the perfectibility of men and our
ultimate apotheosis to to manifest and
usher in a heaven on earth that one's
deep in the structure mm-hmm yeah yeah
it seems like that's it seems like
optimism's exists in America somehow
whereas whereas in other places it
doesn't uh well they live in France and
I'm not I wouldn't call France and
optimistic country by any means but but
I feel like optimism still exists in
America even though it's far more
fucked-up and dysfunctional and
in a lot of ways well I mean the Maginot
Line and the Vichy regime are hard ones
for the French cheese to get over um you
know because they've actually stared
their own weakness in the face and you
know and the reign of terror they've
done some shitty ass things and they've
and they have to live with it and it
undermines and so all they've got left
is like cynicism and arrogance which you
know it is I mean that's a sweeping
generalization but you know I'm ENGLISH
I get to take the piss out of the frogs
and so that's a that's a punch line and
so I do just you know in the time we
have left I want to kind of tea up three
things
which is a buck it'll give me a chance
to defend my adopted country but I go
ahead and a couple of soccer world cups
and a rugby match here or there don't
don't make it right so I mean that's
this that y'all joke my dad you're
forgetting about like poetry and you
know film and and surrealism and that
you know everything fantastic that
French exactly I mean I mean on the
cultural level I would say the French
and the Italians have it hands down on
the other parts not so much so I think
you talked about this sort of almost
schizoid nature to the American
character yes right from this sort of
almost selfish individualism and then
this communalism
yeah that's potentially profound and
really beautiful and sort of and how do
those toggle to create like hopefulness
idealism novelty possibility right and
you know to go all the way back to you
know that the origins of this infinite
game is the American experiment all men
are created equal
which was a random statement and and and
decidedly debatable especially even
within the experiment with slavery and
everything else right but nonetheless
they put their stake in the ground on
that one and you know everybody's
familiar now with Hamilton Alexander
Hamilton because of the Broadway show
right but what not everybody may not
know is that you know basically the
American tradition was schizoid at its
formation between Thomas Jefferson and
Alexander Hamilton who are we going to
be as we try and conduct this a this
infinite experiment and Jefferson was
very much saying hey look at Europe they
are corrupted and decay they're
compromised by alliances and allegiances
and markets our hope for preserving our
virtue is to become self-sufficient
yeoman farmers right not big corporate
agribusiness not dirt Scrabble
subsistence farmers but young and like
like we manage our stuff and we can look
after ourselves and that root lies
virtue and sustainability and Hamilton
said oh no that's hopelessly naive the
route forward is to conjunct into the
mix become a world player leverage our
advantages and do all the stuff and get
into markets get into interaction get
into all these alliances so no surprise
Hamilton won the day
right Jefferson's ideal of the yeoman
farmer has lived on in our mythology it
even lived on in Reagan's election like
the sagebrush rebellion of the report of
the Republican governors and that kind
of stuff on public lands which was a
precursor to that Oregon stuff that
happened a few years ago the Bundy's or
whatever it was like that notion of like
an even the entire mythos of the
American West of the rugged gunslinger
slash homesteader right Springs from
that Jefferson Young an ideal so those
are the ideals and it was a dialectic
and we've gone back and forth in
different political parties have
embodied different versions and which
sort of in agonistic liberalism never
resolving it but always duking it out
around that idea mmm but in the last
thirty years in particular it feels like
we've slipped into it the upside-down so
if you're familiar with the show the
straight stranger thing down parallel
universes right so we slip into this
weird upside-down of the hand America's
in the upside-down right now if your way
the the upside now and and
what's interesting is you're like no how
is this happening because you see
hamiltonian globalism market
international globalism that the upside
down of that has been NAFTA and all Ito
and offshoring and Chinese Global's
integrated supply chains and the
concentration of wealth and the 1% and
basically everyone after Bill Clinton
who said trust me this is gonna be good
for us
and everyone said ok and America got
 and Americans got and what
we've ended up with is late-stage
rent-seeking crony capitalism with the
what point oh oh one percenter or
skimming the till and there is now what
is it I think it's like they can fit on
a school bus I think it's 46 people on
the planet own more than the rest of
humanity
yeah and never in all of history of
evolution of life has ever that kind of
aggregation at a symmetrical aggregation
of resources ever occurred anywhere
full-stop
it's batshit and we still haven't
wrapped our heads around the
implications of that we just say oh Bill
Gates is doing good stuff Jeff Bezos
looks a little more swollen he used to
you know like like it's bizarre and Elon
Musk is kind of like Rocket Man so
there's that so we've had the upside
down mutation of Hamiltonian globalism
but now you took it over
jeffersonian side and this is where it
gets really weird because you're like in
the upside down who is saying that in
fact foreign entanglements will corrupt
our true nature that our source of
virtue is local communal and national
right and that and that we need to
defend ourselves and become self-reliant
and self-sufficient well you've got
Bannon and Trump doing this mm-hmm but
it is not a Jeffersonian version of
anything virtuous it is nativism and
populism blood and soil but
ideologically it is it is part of that
continued conversation so we now in the
upside down have NAFTA slash you know
one percenter rape and pillage of
late-stage capitalism veces blood and
soil populism so back to the same old
thing of memetic judo how can we kind of
dust these off go hey they've got
hijacked by bad actors yeah can we bring
us back to saying how might we both
become more resilient okay cuz you know
anybody that's advocating for something
more abrupt or cataclysmic to clear the
slate is naive as and has history
hmm because degradation of basic
infrastructure and civil society I mean
just as an example you know some some
thinkers have estimated that it took
until 1776 the signing of the
Declaration of Independence for living
standards to resume where they were at
the fall of the Roman Empire so so
anybody libertarians crypto enthusiasts
you name it who are secretly because
they can't figure out how to gear into
the system to help influence it are
somehow thinking that a cold reboot is
gonna favor them hmm
is demented well I I guess I guess the
critique of game B would be that it's a
blank slate ideology and that actually
game B has probably been there all along
yes like I mean other way to do things
that is better and this is just iterate
that was my explicit intention yeah that
was my explicit intention of doing that
since making peace with rubble wisdom
which was hey guys come on this this
idea like it's basically an egotistical
dream to think that all humans ever up
till now have it up badly and we
lucky few we band of brothers it'll be
the ones to sort it all out I mean a
presumptive and you know and be missing
the evolution of this conversation and
the answers are almost always in the
text they're almost always somewhere
back here for us to rediscover dust off
and shine a light on and say hey this
stuff matters and so Jeffersonians and
how do we could to your point about
communalism right how do we create
reliant communities we've done barn
raisings we've got volunteer fire
departments we've got community
supported agriculture we've got you know
multi-generational family living
situations and caring for our elders and
looking after our kids we've got you
know self-defense
we've got good things like let's go back
I mean the Swiss are really good at this
right they've got underground bunkers
that can store twenty thousand people
for six years you know like there's also
with our teas and wells and food storage
like Americans have become very
fragmented very dislocated from their
roots consumers you animals and we need
to get off that one and start really
mounting together and reconnecting
community so you can revalidate
Jeffersonian yeoman farmer communalism
and at the same time we can say hey this
1% late-stage capitalism play sucked we
were sold a bill of goods one hundred
percent and nonetheless we have a
international responsibility to be
participating in this conversation to be
supporting you know humanitarian efforts
however you cut them globally so that
the least of our global citizen brothers
and sisters to stand a chance and that
we can stop the worst excesses of
tyranny despotism violence and cruelty
mm-hmm and so you know flip like let's
get out of the upside down and back to
to the upside right and the final piece
is just that idea you know back to you
the psycho-spiritual component yeah you
know and and and what are our scriptures
right because that's the final piece if
you've got a metaphysics and ethics
sacraments deity worship we also need
scriptures which is essentially the
mythopoetic the story
of how we begin to remember we need that
mm right so so but that's are you saying
that's already already written or yes
this is we have to write it arson
rewrite it or reinterpret it or this is
what's so amazing and the Grateful Dead
is a good example of it right which is
if you think about this crazy polyglot
American experiment over five centuries
who came here willingly and unwillingly
it was all people attempting to take
surviving into thriving mm-hmm right and
so there was all sorts of hope there was
all sorts of suffering whether this is
West African to Caribbean slaves whether
this is religious zealots and refugees
from England and Europe whether this is
Chinese coming in Russians coming in
Spanish and Mexicans coming up right
piling in and Smashing and crashing but
there is so much hope and inspiration
there is so much suffering and
heartbreak there is so much resiliency
and testimony to the human spirit so you
go back to slave spirituals right gogoat
you know see it in Louie Armstrong see
it in Beyonce and Lady gaga see it in
Dolly Parton at the old AHA pre right
see in the band a bunch of Canadians but
seeing Americana better than anybody
ever did see it for dead dusting off
Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger tunes
right from the folk music and the
protest moves like I'm going down that's
tradition now that's again that's that's
the tradition it's it's the it's the
Arkana American folk tradition or the
people division but even there's the
O'Connor Americana it is the secret
scripture embedded in the American
gospel blues solo jazz country
I believe in that I'm a believer I
because I'm a musician and I know that
you when you play a guitar and you you
find these things like you find these
little treasures and they're they don't
come from your individual consciousness
they're they're passed on through other
songs and other artists it's it's a
transmission and Vienna transmission
right and but but there's a there's a
consistent theme if you think about the
anthem
they get people up with their lighters
or now their phones yes this is us right
here right now it's always the I've been
down so goddamn long it looks like up to
me yeah it's the blues in fact right I'm
going going down the road feeling bad
don't want to be treated this way I
fought the law and the law won so what
am i doing singing about it if I'm if
I'm the down-on-his-luck guy what am i
doing triumphantly that's tragedy again
well I guess you're glad you're Greek
you're good the Greek mysteries and this
experience of tragedy or yeah you know
there's a there's a church of Beyonce
that gets together in San Francisco at
the grace Catholic Church and it's
mostly the LGBTQ community so it's folks
who have had hard times and suffering in
their lives get together and they sing
Beyonce songs as hymns it's
gorgeous
mm-hmm right and you think that's the
redemptive power of the human experience
that is the infinite game encapsulated
in American culture and that is our
roadmap to remembering what we forgot
about the true infinite nature of our
soul force that's great Jamie you you've
really given it to me like what I was
asking for I was asking for just that
because because people tend to complain
right a lot about about about culture I
feel in talking to you you have this
mass appreciation for the big spectrum
and I really like that well I mean you
know I lived people and that is kind of
the American you know the good part of
America is is this sort of you know wild
spectrum well I mean I ended up
accidentally literally living this
because my mother was South African and
like frozen back in colonial times my
father was British military and then I
was chucked into like an American
Catholic school in rural Maryland like
what the is this place so I lived
outside of time as a sort of observer of
these strange customs of Americans and
then I got to college and I was like ha
I don't feel contemporaneous with my
American peers they feel like two to
three decades ahead of me like their
parents lived through the 60s mine
Shores
didn't you know like I was out of time
so I went back to the beats like I
profoundly identified with the Jenner
the boomer generation of this 50s and
60s I scoured everything I did
independent right so we find I mean
we're we're millennial I mean we're Xers
right so we didn't have these bookends
none of this had happened yet and
so piecing that together going out west
I mean I saw Robert Redford's Jeremiah
Johnson you know that great movie where
he's the mountain man's who like before
leo was the revenant you know Robert
Redford was Jeremiah Johnson and it was
his time in those Utah mountains that
prompted him to start the Sundance Film
Festival and Institute I saw that and
I'm like oh my god where are those
mountains I have to go like change my
grad school plans we moved to Boulder
went there instead instead of New Haven
like did it and and then followed
rainbow gatherings and grateful happy to
you I took a Greyhound bus across from
Montreal to to San Diego Frank where is
this the Oregon Country Fair like weird
what is this thread what is this
electric thread red Gary Snyder read all
about all the beautiful people
testifying to the American West and this
beautiful experience so um yeah I'm a
huge I have I have profound love and
care for the transformative potential
that is embedded in American culture
it gets calcified it gets encrusted it
gets occluded and corrupted but it is
there at the center and it feels to me
still to be our last best hope which is
can we take the commitment to that
infinite game to becoming all that's in
us to be and to taking stands for
goodness truth and beauty right truth
justice in the American waiver I'd like
that if we're gonna export anything
around the world
let it be that and not beanie babies