[Music]
so Diane I'm really looking forward to
this conversation because I think you
have an experience in so many of the
different areas that we've been covering
on the channel recently we've done a lot
around difficult conversations
polarization and you have a unique
background in that I think you've been a
mediator for several decades
you're also a zen priest with a
background in meditation and you've also
got the integral framework that we found
really useful to make sense of a lot of
these cultural issues thanks for having
me and also thanks for your website I
think you guys are doing a fabulous job
of bringing all these different streams
of understanding together so that we can
have a more comprehensive view of how to
be most helpful so thank you yeah and I
think you're bringing a really valuable
perspective so I'm looking forward to
putting that out as well so just sort of
framing this at the beginning you've
obviously been in the area of mediation
for several decades
do you think that we are in a more
polarized and more difficult time than
before and how would you frame that how
how difficult do you think it is I I
would say yes certainly in my lifetime I
I feel like the polarization politically
and in the public discourse is more
extreme and that there is a kind of
general sense of threat that we've
talked about on both sides of this
polarization I think some of the it's
due to lots of different factors
complexity stresses some of the
existential threats that we talk about
the speed of technology the lack of
groundedness and a relationship to
nature as a way of calibrating the
nervous system and just just generally
speaking the sort of human population
and pressures on the globe so there are
all kinds of reasons for why it's the
case but I think the last time we
experienced this in the States was
during the Vietnam War where there was
intense polarization but the one thing
that was really quite different than in
my view is that the media still held
this sort of third-person empiric
perspective so at the end of the day
there were three
they were reporting on facts and and
that so basically that the kind of
second person struggle was mediated to
some degree by by media whereas now as
we know media is highly opinionated and
filtered and we don't have that sort of
empiric voice which in a certain way you
know our justice system relies on that
you know science relies on that and and
in the public discourse we don't have a
mediating third party yeah and I think
it's even hard to imagine what or who
that might be nowadays and what do you
think of the most relevant tips or
practices from conflict resolution that
that we need to develop well you've
given a lot of attention on your channel
on to and on your website to this
question of the neurobiology and I would
agree with many of the people that
you've interviewed that within a
conflict situation neurobiology drives a
lot of what happens so we really do need
to start there in terms of the the
relaxed resting state or the social
state in terms of fight or flight and
then at this question of shutting down
so I think that working with the body is
sort of the first thing and that can be
individually or that can be working in
small groups but I think it can also be
worked with a little bit of scale
because it's such it's so contagious
when fight or flight or being triggered
or aroused it's happening it usually
spreads relatively easily so one of the
technologies would would be how to calm
an entire room or how to encode a of
people at once that would be one thing
that we really care about in my work I
really am pointing people to the body a
lot to really experience states of
relaxation when the room becomes
coherent when energy is flowing easily
and when the nervous systems are aroused
when there's high differentiation when
the experience of threat or
defensiveness arises and how to actually
not to want one of the differences I may
have with some people is not to
necessarily always seek to
home that differentiation and arousal
but rather to utilize it to bring more
more creativity and sometimes more
intensity into the room so that it
actually can really serve to heighten
people's awareness to bring people fully
into a state together and then what is
the moment where you need to now shift
into some sort of fluidity so I think
the neurobiology is really really
critical
you know the very typical skills that
come from good communication or from
circling skills like listening
reflecting expressing yourself
connecting to your own life force and
energy around what's passionate when you
express yourself learning how to express
opinions that are not necessarily going
to be shared how do you do it in a way
that's respectful of others how do you
also hold multiple perspectives now
right here gets a little bit dicey
because some of these communication
skills correlate to what we we talk
about when we talk about human
development it is not a given that
everyone in the room can hold two
perspectives in their body mind at the
same time without an overabundance of
chaos and tension and will naturally
collapse into one so one of the ways
that I became engaged with Ken Wilber an
integral Institute is that in my work as
a mediator particularly around difficult
conversations like race and gender and
social justice and those kinds of things
is I started to observe real differences
in people's capacities some people
couldn't take their own perspective
they'd either been abused or
marginalized some people could take one
perspective their own but not the other
some people could take their own and
even start to be able to hear the
perspective of others but couldn't take
a perspective of a court or a judge and
that was literally that observation I
started to use a stage model in my own
work I started to work with Elisabeth
kubler-ross as stages of grief to talk
about race people in denial people angry
bargaining and then shortly after that I
was introduced to Ken so we have to talk
development whenever we talk about these
skill sets so we have the body we have
the simple communication skills I think
there's a lot about negotiation
that really is helpful and I think the
book that Roger Fisher and William ury
wrote back in the 80s getting TS is a
really simple great model for
negotiation and that's really important
and then questions around Authority and
leadership is another one we have to
look at you and I were speaking earlier
about it's difficult to find people that
can represent a neutral perspective
within pluralist culture we tend to
flatten hierarchies and we want
leadership to emerge from a grassroots
perspective so that's just a basket full
of things that I think are important
differences in cultural sets differences
in rituals differences in how we come
into ceremony together those are all
things that from a big-picture or at
play when we talk about conflict
resolution yeah there was a there was a
lot there that I'm really interested to
dig into the physiology piece let's
start with because we were just talking
a little bit before we started recording
and one of the things that I think is
incredibly valuable from the work that
we put out the interviews that we did
with Steven Porges and reflecting on his
polyvagal theory and the somatic
experiencing work
there's this idea about either being an
exploratory or defensive frame of mind
and you you've sort of disagreed with
that and I I think it's really
interesting that you you raised the
question of well sometimes we need to
have a little bit more disagreement or
elevate the the energy in the room and I
think that I'd love to hear a bit more
about that yes I would agree and now and
I I this is how I think a little bit and
keep in mind I'm I'm a mediator in the
trenches I work with people I'm in great
admiration of theorists and magnet map
makers I rely on them but in really
really crude strokes so I've learned
tremendous amount from from Ken Wilber
as you know and others but I I just do
it on the spot and what I've observed
there's an idea that you know that the
universe kind of creates itself through
this incredible feedback loop of
sameness and difference right that that
at any one moment you know we take
something like a great sports play
there's a tremendous amount of coherence
and there's also differentiation right
because if there isn't
Ferengi ation someone doesn't receive
the pass and and go for the basket so
it's both
you know it's sameness and difference
all the time and these these are these
correlate to the body so this sense of
relaxation of coherence of sameness and
the feeling of psychological safety is
really important but the arousal in the
nervous system is also similarly
important in terms of our growth so we
differentiate in order to grow and
expand so one of the things that I've
been exploring and working with this the
idea that the brain also evolves that
way that it evolves through that kind of
highly coherent systems and then new new
pathways emerge and then those pathways
become integrated so my proposition is
that we're capable of being triggered
and either through extending awareness
as coming from meditation practice
feeling triggered and being super aware
and expanding ourselves to include the
whole experience of the space or giving
a cognitive hue like I know I'm
triggered right now but actually I'm
going to continue to listen to what
someone's saying to me and I'm gonna
look for the moment when relaxation sets
back in again and I kind of believe that
doing that is creating some new pathways
in the brain I could be wrong you know
cuz I really I'm not an expert in that
but the sense that you can actually get
to where you can do both because that's
what we can start to do is we do these
we move to more complexity so it's one
thing to be super relaxed in the nervous
system and not be able to receive
information it's another thing to be
triggered and actually capable of
hearing information that then affects
the nervous system so that's how I think
about it whether it's true or not I
really don't know it is in my experience
I'd also like to talk to you about
collective intelligence which is
something that we've been discussing
quite a bit on the channel recently and
had a lot of really interesting
contributions from people like Jamie
wheel Daniel SHM Acton Berger Jordan
green hall Bonita Roy and quite a few
others and yeah I know that you've got a
few perspectives to offer because I
think you've also seen some of these
these films so I might be interested to
just ask you
kind of freestyle a little bit on what
you think of the important distinctions
and the important differences between
for example coherence and collective
intelligence the nature of difference
and the nature of coherence and how it's
important to balance those and and how
do you start how would you frame what
collective intelligence means to you
before we sort of go into those
distinctions I see collective
intelligence as basically the capacity
of a group regardless of size to
function optimally and holistically and
compassionately for the well-being of
the whole that's how I would define
collective intelligence and again it can
be it can be within family system it can
be within some sort of creative
enterprise or it can be a nation state
you know what what is it how is the
group functioning as a collective and is
it is it for the benefit of the entire
group
and Bonita Roy drew out a really
interesting distinction when I spoke to
her that there's a difference between
collective intelligence and what she
calls collective insight practice which
is more about getting a group of people
together and then entering a space where
what comes out is more than was present
in any one of those people before they
they went in so it's it's kind of a
almost like a group mind process which
is a slightly different thing I think
it's a really valuable distinction have
you had experiences with those kind of
processes well you did I mean yes I mean
in the sense that I would say that my
probably my earliest training with
collective intelligence was as a kid
being an athlete and that I was a
basketball player and so a lot of what
we were being trained in was collective
intelligence how we we gave and received
to each other in order for us to to
perform I'm less interested in content
lots of times and I'm more interested in
watching how energy is moving and how
life force is moving when is the group
becoming flat and uninteresting when is
one side becoming victimized and the
others
becoming somewhat sadistic when is there
some burst of tremendous creativity and
how do people organize and integrate
that so really watching the way in which
life force moves and changes because you
become super important but I think
collective intelligence sometimes people
have the idea that we just perform as a
group and what I'm trying to say that I
think individual autonomy is essential
to collective intelligence I think they
they can't be separated and and also I
think you know this is in the context of
transformational workshops but I also
like to look at transformational
workshops to see what lessons can be
taken from them that can be applied in
culture generally speaking like the way
crisis gives way to new openings you
know or how I always like to say that in
my seminars there's you know and they
could be you know a very small seminar
say under 20 people or 20 people all the
way up to seminars with you know 600
people is that there's always just the
right amount of trouble you know there's
always just the right amount of trouble
there's never too much you never have in
it let's say in a workshop of 50 people
you never have ten problematic people
you always have to you know or you
always have three and I think in some
ways I don't know if that's just what
happens in groups but for some reason
everybody there's always just enough
drama and not too much so I'm just
interested in how those insights can be
applied outside of transformational
containers I don't know that they can
yeah yeah I'd love to come back to that
cuz there are a few things that I've
learned through the workshops that I've
led and the workshops that I've been in
especially from a teacher that I'm good
friends with who's been doing this for
about 40 years there's a few things that
he says that that have kind of entered
my way of thinking about the world for
example one which I think is really
powerful is that everything registers in
the field yes mm-hmm I agree absolutely
true and just says you if you register
if you're feeling something then if you
don't address it it's going to play out
in some way at some time which is a
really crucial realization I think yes
and
to some degree when we start we start
working with groups in this way where
everything plays out in the field and we
trust the unfolding and we attend to
crises and we give the right amount of
support but not too much and we allow
the natural impulse toward the natural
evolutionary impulse to express itself
it is amazing amazing how much people
transform I do really wonder how those
principles could be applied on a
different scale if possible you know I
really wonder about that it's a deep
deep inquiry of mind and you you
mentioned before I think maybe in a
previous conversation a little bit about
coherence and difference and how you
maybe have a slightly different view to
the one that was expressed by daniel
trachtenberg or and jamie wheel around
this would you like to expand on that
yes so Jamie has done tremendous amount
of work on the flow and you know I think
his his three characteristics of flow
that and maybe that it comes from the
the other person whose name I can never
pronounce but effortlessness
selflessness and timelessness right and
that when we are experiencing states of
flow and are highly coherent you know
that we're efficient that there's a
pleasure to it that there's a
willingness to go further that there's a
quality of easy and good relationships
and that so therefore we want to
understand as much as we can about how
those states work and the only thing
that I've experienced is that coherence
is really important to human efficiency
but differentiation and struggle is
important to human creativity and so the
question that I have and that I bring up
a lot in the groups I work with because
I've come from the conflict field is how
is it that we can take something like
difference which is naturally occurring
in human systems I mean when a child is
born a child is joined with the mother
and the very first act of being born is
differentiation when we talk about human
Robert
defines human development as
identification or sameness
differentiation we become separate or
different from the the group you
originate in and integration when we
look at brain sciences it's the exact
same thing you have a coherent brain new
neural pathways are created those neural
pathways are are integrated and the
brain continues to evolve so this is a
this is a principle that's at work all
the time so whenever we talk about
coherence I want to make sure we're
talking about differentiation at the
same time because they're always part
and parcel to each other and so how do
we create coherence and and learn to see
because differentiation is exciting in
the body until it isn't
and that's one of the differences I mean
the same is true of coherence as well
you can it can be very satisfying and
safe but if there's too much of it it
becomes kind of complacent and
stagnating and so I like conversations
in which coherence and differentiation
are placed together and that we actually
learn how to work with it in a way that
that contributes to the creativity of a
room and to the new emergence in a room
but it's harder because everyone when it
starts to stimulate fight-or-flight as
we know we want to leave or conflict or
as we've talked about shutdown when it's
too extreme so part of what I have to
work with is the right amount of
difference in a room like when do I
almost like an acupuncturist as a
facilitator when do i stimulate and help
stimulate a group by bringing up
difference by saying hey if I were you
I'd be mad about what he just said you
know or hey I feel you might feel fine
about it but if I were you I'd feel
betrayed you know like when do I
actually take on the perspectives that
aren't in the room because you can't
quite get them in there and I just take
it on as the facilitator and represent
it and create actually a little more
conflict in the room and when do I say
let's take a moment to breathe and to
feel and for just a moment turn to the
person next to you express what it is
you're experiencing and your partner's
going to receive you really deeply and
then you are going to flip and I bring
listening into the room to settle and
soothe everyone so that play is really
really important to me so I don't know
if I disagree with Jamie and Daniel as
much as I just have this
on the utilization of differentiation
you know and it can be related to gender
socioeconomic status or how we perceive
healing or whatever it whatever it is
you know it can have to do with national
identity we could talk about the
relationship of America to Britain and
how do we feel and really having to let
some of those differences come out
because inevitably when you navigate
those well you create deeper trust as
soon as differences can emerge and
people can find out how to work with
them they trust each other more and then
it becomes a even more safe group than
it was previous yeah I got a really good
vision of maybe your facilitation style
then that you're sensing into what the
perspectives are that are maybe under
the surface or are not being
acknowledged and then bringing those in
which i think is it sounds like a really
like really valuable skilled thing to do
but that also that sounds like a very
dangerous thing to be doing as well how
do you know that you're not imposing
your stuff on to it and and how are you
doing that in a safe way well the in my
in my training what I do is I train
people in to this very very important
principle which is always stay open to
feedback because every gesture we make
creates a reaction as we know right so
as a facilitator what I have to do is
whenever I take a risk like that is
really stay very attuned to how the
group receives it and usually what will
happen is if I take a risk like that and
I say something that's unspoken that's
in the background or that is
controversial or that you know people
aren't going to be able to tolerate what
I do is notice the extent to which there
that it's exciting without becoming
threatening and if it's exciting I
continue and if it becomes too
threatening I'd back off and repair so
you're always working in relationship to
the feedback and from that perspective
it's like art you're always in
conversation with your own gestures you
might say yeah and I was also kind of
playing that edge as well yes absolutely
and the edge is really really important
because that's where the emergence is
it's at the that we like to call it that
frothy
edge it's that little tremulousness you
can collapse back into what's known or
you can you can emerge into what's new
and that but you have to be able to know
how to stay there and how to navigate
that yeah that's really interesting yeah
one of my meditation teachers chögyam
trungpa said a very important thing that
always stuck with me said be yourself
the world will give you feedback that is
completely reliable it brings up a
question as well of because there's a no
real acute sensitivity required to be
able to do that and something that I
thought what a bit about is the gender
difference in these areas in particular
the collective intelligence question cuz
I think the first piece that we did had
mostly all men we've since then
interviewed Benita Roy but that seems
that that being in the moment of real
emotional openness feels more like a
feminine a bit something that women
might be better at than the men doing
that kind of work but then do you have a
sense about what the gender difference
is or whether there are differences
between men and women's not suitability
for the work but but different skill
sets within this kind of area I mean I
think I think the differences are really
important I think some of them some of
them could be gendered in the sense of a
particular kind of emotional sensitivity
or an ability to strategize quickly and
to imagine tactics you know relatively
efficiently so I think there are those
general trends but I think the biggest
lesson I've taken away in terms of
training mediators is to simply share
how I work and the models that I'm
working with and then notice how the
individual facilitators integrate and
express those through their own
intelligence whatever it happens to be
and lots of times I'll be watching
students of mine and I'll think what are
they doing like this is a disaster in
the making and then they just pull it
out and I'll just be amazed and so it's
a little bit of kind of trusting that
the way people train and receive the
information and
integrated into their own way of working
kind of works but I have a I have a hard
time being able to always understand so
in that in that very specific
intelligence of a body mind that
includes a national identity that
includes a history of trauma that
includes gender or non gender identity
that includes whatever it includes that
somehow these kinds of intelligences can
go can take hold and can also manifest
so I really trust that and you you
mentioned before as well about the
dialogue between coherence and
difference and how I think you also said
that you need coherence first before you
can introduce difference is that sort of
creating safety or is that creating
connection between people in the group
and then introducing more difficult
topics to explore what does that look
like well for well for me I think there
there are certain things that have to be
in place prior to working with any group
and so one has to be a shared intention
what is the purpose for being here
the other is it the the kind of ground
rules and so one of the ground rules
that that I work with is that we're
being for everyone and realizing that
everybody has a responsibility to
determine the outcome so sometimes for
instance in conversations on race
relations or issues regarding equity of
those kinds of things I have to really
make sure that everybody's bought in to
the process and that everybody's bought
in to everyone else because if that
isn't in place and there are certain
things that just will not get
accomplished and then coherence is
important because we are so embodied and
we're so sensitive that when we are
functioning as one and when the body is
relaxed and extending and there isn't a
really hard and fast boundary between
you and me but we're relaxed and we're
sort of the animal of the tribe is kind
of intact and then the mind is empty and
usually what you find in high states of
coherences the mind is also empty it's
very present it's what we try to
cultivate in mind
from this meditation the mind is empty
available present and listening is
happening easily and spontaneously if
you can help people have that experience
and this you know psychological safety
or a sense of belonging then from there
we can actually start to differentiate
because we have a state to return to
that everyone can recognize so if you
come in differentiated lots of times the
first task is actually to relieve the
room of the differentiation and to bring
people into coherence and then to return
to it and really map and help people see
and experience what's happening in their
bodies and in their minds you know and
people start to trust that we literally
are one mind you know we can
differentiate and be very separate but
we also could be in exactly the same
point of view that doesn't mean our
cognition is functioning the same way
but it means our awareness is completely
continuous with one another and that
that's a really optimal state for people
to function from I just want to return a
little bit to the question I asked
before about the delicacy of if you are
facilitating in that way where you're
kind of taking a risk you're saying
something that you think might need to
be expressed and maybe potentially
bringing in anger or bringing in
whatever the emotions that is that I've
seen that go very badly wrong in the
past I've seen like the whole idea of
like crazy wisdom where you you have a
like someone like chögyam trungpa who
was a tulip master of that way of
working is an exception but you do the
idea of crazy wisdom just gives a lot of
people an excuse to be behaved really
badly and it can go right I've seen I've
seen people who are saying I'm just I'm
just speaking for the collective when
it's quite clear they're actually
speaking from their own personal
sociopathic behavior and how do you tell
the difference and what other dangers in
this kind of space well I think you just
described what the dangers are you know
is that you know for instance somebody
somebody asked me that I was just
recently in an event in Los Angeles and
facilitated a group of a hundred and
twenty people and we were doing this
experi
of going back and forth between sameness
and difference and somebody said to me
afterwards but you know how are you sure
that everybody's integrated that and
that people aren't necessarily really
stirred up and usually the way I do that
is by just simply listening to the the
kind of feedback that comes my way you
know I trust sort of the field you might
say what you were talking about a little
bit earlier the danger with crazy wisdom
as crazy wisdom is interpreted as some
really kind of immature thing if I'm
just going to do what I want and let the
chips fall you know that's that's what
people mean by it crazy wisdom I think
is just sometimes utilizing that which
is more unconventional in the service of
the whole so you still you know Trump as
his intelligence was really deep and
really broad now I think there are
probably things that happened that we're
not so great but for the most part my
understanding is is that invoking
something unconventional to actually
support a group in going further in
their experience together can be
important and I have done it night I
can't say that I've had very many
experiences in my 30-plus years of
mediating that have gone terribly off
the rails I've certainly had moments you
know but then I found ways to bring
people back I don't I don't have a track
record of leaving people in a chaotic
heap for the most part one of the things
that came up in the conversation Bonita
Roy was she said that one of the blocks
to collective intelligence practice or
collective insight practice is
autobiographical coherence by which I
think she means this need we have to
make everything consistent with our
story we're telling about ourselves what
what do you make of that well I think
she's right you know because to the
extent that we're telling a story
cognition is preoccupied with that story
and and our awareness cannot be extended
as openly as it would otherwise and that
there is you know the ego is a
fascinating thing you know what is what
exactly is the ego you know I try in my
own teaching in my own work to say that
the the ego is not wrong but the ego is
limited and that the ego does create
division
in the mind because where there's a
narrative that narrative is separating
us from our immediate experience so for
instance someone will come into a group
and make a statement how I'm an
introvert and therefore blah blah blah
and I'll say to them great so let's make
sure that we employ some techniques
where you get to think on your own and
you have a few minutes to think before
you speak and I'm also wondering would
you be willing to suspend that idea that
you're an introvert and extrovert for
the purposes of what we're doing and and
that sense that oh I may just I could
actually be free of that category I've
put myself in you know is really really
important because as soon as people
start referencing this category they
become less available to what's actually
happening and if they're doing that
they're probably in some state of
needing to protect or plan or strategize
safety so I think that if you can
increase the safety and the actual
embodied experience of well-being in the
room that sometimes will take care of
that yeah and there's there's this
constant dialogue I guess between our
personality structure and then moving
beyond it into connecting more with what
you might call the essence or the the
potential beyond that my friend yeah my
friend raffia has another way of
describing that other things really
beautiful which is that the ego was an
intelligent strategies to survive in the
environment we grew up in so it's not
wrong it's just out of date oh that's a
good one I like that too I like that too
I think the Buddha the Buddha's insight
was it was a good one his insight was
basically that to the extent that we're
self identified the self by its nature
is is not continuous with reality the
self is separate and where the self is
separate the self is also stressed the
self is also striving in a certain way
to survive so that when that can be
relaxed and the experience of more
continuity with what is in the natural
environment and in the immediacy of the
moment that we actually function much
better so that quality of the analytic
mind dividing us from our immediate
experience I think is important too and
the other distinction
Bonita drew out that I think was really
useful and I've seen various people
makes a similar point is this that there
has to be a difference made between an
environment that is based around
belonging needs and one that is
potentially able to go into new
territory and I think David data talked
about this as well like trauma and and
yoga is a very different thing you can
either be in a process of dealing with
our sort of wounds and trauma but if
we're going into a space of genuine new
emergence where something that maybe has
never happened before and we're pushing
ourselves to our edge those two things
are completely distinct and and
collective insight practice where we
might be wanting to generate new ideas a
new genuine novelty is in the latter
category and belonging needs we have to
be at a stage of development where our
belonging needs are taken care of before
we can enter into the genuine emergent
space does that scan I think so III like
those distinctions that David's made the
the kind of healing or more therapeutic
environment I think he uses the word art
which I use a lot too which has to do
with you could talk about growth but you
can also talk about you know breaking
into new territory and creativity and
novelty is a different imperative and
then I think he also makes the
distinction of of spiritual awakening
which is moving beyond identification in
his in his mind discovering the absolute
that which is unqualified belong
conditioned and utterly indestructible
and then how to manifest that in the
world so he distinguishes between
therapy art and spiritual practice I
think those are very worthwhile
distinctions for my work
[Music]
rebel wisdom is a new sense making
platform bringing together the most
rebellious and inspiring thinkers from
around the world if you're enjoying our
content then you can help us make more
by becoming a subscriber which will give
you access to a load of exclusive films
also you can then join our group zoom
calls to discuss the ideas in the films
and you can send us ideas for questions
for upcoming interviews and if you're a
regular viewer you'll know we talk a lot
about the value of embodying or actually
living out the ideas that we talk about
so that's why we run regular events in
London check out the links on the
website for more and hope to see you
soon
you