[Music]
so there are a lot of no tropics that
are commercially available both
individual no tropics and then stacks
some of the stacks we think are good for
specific purposes some of them are even
good for general purposes when we
started this we can light any stacks and
this was true today it meant to call it
particularly what we wanted to achieve
there's a white space alone there seem
to achieve which was all of the
different things that we wanted to
effect at the level of one to affect
them and specifically through endogenous
pathway supporting so that were working
to increase system resilience and
capacity as a court our goal was that
Wow people would take this because it
would meet some immediate need and if it
didn't meet that immediate need if they
had to take it for months to see in
effect it just weren't going to take it
our goal was that while they were doing
that over the course of some period of
time there would actually be systemic
and structural benefits that would lead
to lasting them the temple they got off
the product no-smoking Interpol is
upgrading human capability and human
experience
[Music]
[Music]