all right hello YouTube joined by Mark
Fraser and Eric we're gonna discuss
infectious disease and what we can come
up with or a solution within the next
hour so for the first 15 minutes we were
gonna discuss what we feel is currently
happening what we think and feel is
currently happening and that's both good
and bad in the infectious disease base
so if anyone would like to start I
actually wrote notes out because this is
the one that I haven't spent a lot of
time thinking about unlike every other
issue
I'll just contribute one small notion of
the start there's just the idea that
there are two separate things here right
there's a health of people this is the
one thing and then there's the strain on
systems is the other part of it right
and obviously these two things are
linked but in many ways there are
conflicts with each other right I mean
good example currently would be
somewhere like Italy who has basically I
understand shut down the entire country
I mean the message is everybody stay
home pretty much basically understand
its message Italy so and and in one way
of looking at that might be to say that
you know alright we know the economy is
gonna get slammed here but paramount to
our concerns are the well-being of the
citizens and not overwhelming the health
care system right whereas in America
it's been pretty much the opposite you
know go about business as usual playing
it down it's no big deal that kind of
thing so it's so that I think that and I
would read that as their primary concern
is not collapsing the stock market you
know I mean not not not creating you
know not creating too much damage to the
economy in the short term so yeah that
that's that's my early view on it
well I've I've gotten thoroughly
headlong in into a number of groups that
are exploring steps that people can take
individually and this households and
with their neighbors and then looking
into also opportunities for innovation
in the way we're approaching this in a
more systematic form and so I I don't
want to get too much into the weeds but
I think some broad themes for me are the
way we're dealing it now has been very
dependent on sort of gatekeepers and
arbiters who in the case of the US and
in what the state of Washington CDC
prevented because of FDA rules prevented
state from innovating to come up with
their their test kits when the
bottlenecks started to be clear that CDC
had dropped the ball there was
essentially an edict saying we will not
allow efforts by by state governments
and by private providers to come up with
solutions and that contrasted horribly
with what South Korea did which was
almost from day one say look we
recognize we're gonna need all hands on
deck so part of their success in getting
detection of of the problem was that
they did encourage a lot of different
players to to innovate and they
responded in days where we were
essentially a flat-footed for many weeks
and in the case of washed state of
Washington it was a state decision to
defy this rule and they went ahead with
their own test kits and because of that
on their
this disease which already had galloped
far more than a Troodon did finally get
resolved through this this initiative at
state level so my my hope is we segue
later into solutions if we can see ways
to encourage innovations in
breakthroughs on in a full spectrum of
fields by opening this just a month to
innovation but also introducing
accountability and incentives which are
sorely lacking in the failures on that
that we've seen from the central
approach so that that's my view um and
I'm sure it's a controversial one I
think for me I was more of my notes here
more concentrating on just um infectious
disease in general that right now in
society we live a very global society
people jet-set around the world all the
time no one quarantines we don't have
any we have screening going on to
airplanes for terrorist reasons we have
nothing coming off of of coming off of
airplanes including places once they've
known that the corona virus was there
even in I'm about to go to the airport
tour and I'm sure they have no screening
coming off they've been people who come
back from Italy in China into County the
United States who they basically if they
do anything give them a pamphlet like
here's how you self quarantine and that
is ridiculous with what level we're at
right now our doctors aren't design
aren't really taught how to think
outside the box they're not designed
they're not taught how to innovate when
something comes up like this they're
expecting a memo and so they don't even
know how to deal with this so there's
been many many stories of doctors who
have somebody come in with a fever with
the symptoms who are like what we can't
test you but also like they don't have
the resources to give the person they're
not gloved up there don't have masks on
they don't and they don't put into place
anything that would stop the spread of
infectious disease and then of course
there's the misinformation and media
that because they've been crying wolf so
much everything is is the end of the
world everything is in apocalypse but
now that we there might actually be a
wolf
I listen to it in time in those that did
there's like simultaneously this
overreaction and under-reaction and we
don't trust our I don't trust our our
institutions and I think many of us
don't trust our institutions and those
that do are now seen that there's a lot
of cracks in the system that our
governments don't know how to respond to
things like this because they have to
deal with this is both an illness and an
economic thing and how do they piss off
one side to do another what if they shut
things down too early and hurt their
economy what if they do and it's all of
these top-down approaches that were also
seen that it's more effective in more
totalitarian governments that and
governments or cultures that have more
of a group mentality that it's not all
about you it's about your culture and
your family and stuff as well and so
they're more likely to do the things
that are that are volunteer-driven do
the things like self quarantine and on
and not going out and also coming out
are a lot of potential solutions like
vitamin C and vitamin D and 95 G or
whatever the solutions are we've got no
way to know which ones are accurate
which ones could have a grain of truth
but maybe they're not the place we spend
our resources there especially when
medicines not being available because
it's being made in China if vitamin C is
available and the profit motive to have
regular over-the-counter medication and
vitamins B the solution is absolutely
the wrong message oh sorry it's the
message that they don't want you to get
right like heaven forbid you actually
cure the supply-demand see maybe we
could do that with with other things as
well but the funding isn't there
actually in you know more healthy times
look at what can keep us healthiest what
how do we get everyone an adequate diet
I love all of those things so those are
a bit of my notes
no matter the economic thing takes many
forms one of the ways in which companies
have driven towards greater economic
efficiencies is is this very very short
response time supply chain kind of thing
right where they're you know everyone's
living on knowing that there's another
delivery coming tomorrow right there's
no redundancy there's no reserves at
lots of stages in the supply chain
there's absolutely no redundancy and so
it doesn't take very much it's brittle
and fragile in all sorts of ways doesn't
take very much for it to crack right and
I think this points to an area of
potential innovation and hope again if
if the system is flexible enough to
allow for experiments one of the things
that might be done by virtual cohorts
for example on is to say ok we are going
to test the following it can be the
front loading of selenium and zinc and
vitamin C and so forth vitamin D in the
following ways and they're these these
self-organizing swarms could our
research and they could create their own
clusters and groups and people that had
different ideas in terms of good way
ways to manage risks and good protocols
and it would not be I think that hard if
we had biosensors Arduino you know has
$8 $10 devices on Amazon they can
measure temperature changes in a person
you know link them up with with with you
know Bluetooth and and have these kind
of tracking systems so if cohorts were
to do that virtually and there were to
be ways to track in data vaults
basically and anonymize and so forth um
that would be a way for the system to
learn
without going through these absurd
multi-year hurdles of validating what is
going to be allowed to be offered as a
treatment so I think this kind of
approach also with actual communities
there are tens of millions of households
in Asia in Europe in in North America
who are members of condo associations
homeowner associations housing
cooperatives all of which have very well
set up often system for deciding on what
good practices people should have - in
everyone's interest to make it a safe
place and thriving place to be so if
these organizations were to have the
flexibility to partner with virtual
healthcare providers for example on K
Health is an Israeli company that's
doing telemedicine with live chats with
physicians for $20 if it were possible
for it for these groups to do what
mutual associations did before the the
the New Deal and have the ability to
have bids from different telemedicine
providers who can offer prescriptions
and then for these associations to set
up systems for delivery of prescribed
medicines to their to actually the
individual divorce of people who are are
now sick this would um ease a lot of the
strain on the icy use and others which
now have very little and the frontline
doctors where where we're where people
are coming in and spreading and adding
to the viral loads on the frontline
providers who are totally ill-equipped
so I I think there's a huge potential if
these kind of partnerships where the
profit motive of the insurance companies
is to keep people you know from from
getting sick over life insurance
companies if there were not flexibility
for these contractual associations in
virtual cohorts to start making their
best guesses of what is a response and
then sharing the data on what works I
think that would be a win and Omni win
all around we like how many wins we do
and I think that's a natural segue into
the utopian part I wanna be like Omni
win society when we live in a world that
and it we are still don't need to match
we don't need to agree on what that
actually looks like but giving your your
your vision of what a future that worked
for you and you thought would worked for
a society would look like in however
long you need that to be five ten
hundred years in the future so I have
again some notes here this isn't really
a vision but it's just like more of a
way to think about it so using the
coronavirus as a specific example in
terms of threat to health from what I
understand in healthy populations that
have access to health care blah blah
blah blah the death rate is like less
than noir point five percent what
Telly's are up is the old people and the
poor responses and and so on so it seems
to me that it would be nice if we could
all just relax there's a disease going
around some of you were gonna get sick
you're gonna spend a few days in bed you
can have a bit of a sniffle most of you
are gonna be absolutely fine right and
it's gonna go it's gonna spread like
wildfire this time because there's no
immunity in the population but in the
future there will be widespread immunity
and that will contain you know future
incarnations of it so the fact that we
cannot do that right that we can't just
for various reasons right there no one's
Manning the no one's Manning the tills
no one's Manning the emergency
departments no one's driving the trucks
to deliver the food so that you know
what I mean so that that some of the as
I said it's not a vision but it seems
like a way to think about it would be to
just let there to be enough slack enough
redundancy out there that at any given
moment 10% of people can go down with a
flu and be out for a week and and and we
can absorb that right some that's you
can't do that while everyone's trying to
eat every last penny out of every last
transaction every last hour out of every
employee and so on and so on you know
there is no slack in a system that
that's been doing that for decades yeah
there's a big I mean we had this
conversation on Wednesday Nora make a
group of that in with that mentality
that's where a lot of people are a lot
of people like wellness if I get sick oh
well unhealthy I'm fed this is I have
access to health care should something
go horrifically wrong but there are
demographics that are much more affected
and they quite frankly are the people we
need to be solving these problems
they're people with a lot of years of
experience right the elderly and who
have we need every generation creating
and so so having a system where we where
we look after people who are chronically
ill and old because not because it makes
us feel fuzzy but because they're human
beings and there were there they're
truly worth helping
because what they offer to society is a
diversity of thoughts a diversity of
experience having been through chronic
illness this pandemic affects me both
more and less I know how to handle
stress more than a lot of people and yet
I'm not more drastically impacted I
don't have an immune system problem and
I don't have let me issues me and my kid
would probably make it through but
creating a world in the future of that
we can take time when we're sick right
that everyone no one has to work
anywhere in my vision of the future
you're only choosing to do the work you
want to do so when you're sick like I've
been sick all year I've had a cold and
I've gone on all of my calls because
it's
what I'm here to do I enjoy them there
was one day I think I had to cancel it
it was like oh I really don't want to
like it was and I'm not getting paid for
it
it's not because of financial burden
that I'm showing up it's because I love
doing this and the more were in that
world
the less people are going to be going to
work sick the more we can take care of
people who are sick and the more were
able to if we want to live in
communities that are obviously isolated
and that's the wrong word but if I work
I'm part of a community right now and
there's four or five nurses all who work
different places some of the kids go to
the one local public school some go to
private schools around the around the
city everyone you know has different
places of worship these are that's how
we spread it before I mean like nurses
on the front line and they're bringing
it back so being able to have in cases
like this a community where your doctors
and nurses are within that community and
it's and your kids all go to the same
school but there's an amazing school
that deals with them as individuals and
everyone has access to adequate
nutrition so they're at their healthiest
peak without dictating what that
actually is right and I don't get to
take your burgers fries away from you
but I can offer you better better food
and nutrition in a world that we can
trust whatever system we've created we
feel more comfortable to share our data
and do things like Mark was talking
about of I don't want Google having my
data
I don't trust our governments to have my
data but if we had an open-sourced
owned by all of us democratic
transparent company that i could say you
know i can envision a world where we
have our version of Google Maps and I
know that when I get sick I could put in
my symptoms because I'm not leaving my
house I'm not gonna go get tested but I
can say hey I might or might not have
this thing it can warn people can give
you a green to read how likely is it you
have it how should you be self
quarantine and meet people where they're
at well their self quarantine if you're
not able to why aren't you can we bring
you your stuff can we you know like are
you bored coming out of a video chat
with you like what is it that isn't
being met by you being isolated and can
we meet those needs for you and truly
interconnect you and not leaving it up
to our governments and figuring out new
information sources that aren't the
current media the next time there's an
and emic and a doctor sounds the alarm
we figure it out right you know what I
mean like what happened how can we look
at this it with hindsight and not
recreate it in the future what needs to
be in place riffing off that there's
there are a lot of giant companies that
are offering smart city packages and you
know very costly ways in Europe there's
a project in Italy called snap for city
org the number four and this is a a
smart city system completely open-source
that allows localities to track all
kinds of indicators that people
information people put in the system so
for for health for safety for
environmental monitoring these are the
vital signs and I I think one of the
adjacent Possible's potentially on is to
see if we can on have a groundswell to
make a version of snap four city
accessible to neighborhoods into you
know the the condo associations and and
any kind of housing co-ops that are
already organized that would allow them
to have their their sense of what's
going on in a system also for for people
to help one another's you were saying of
the video chats on the ability to to
even have humidity levels monitored in
in an apartment levels that people want
to opt in and have the ability with
smart humidifiers which are on the
market for about fifty or so dollars you
know for neighbors of the choosing there
were friends and family the choosing of
each household or each resident to be
able to have virtual connections and
also
to some degree make sure that the
basically problems weren't weren't
getting out of hand and if they are be
able to summon in on-call physicians
like doctors online or K Health on to be
able to you know take the measure
there are biosensors of the cost around
$10 that measure oxygen levels again the
astir arduino based devices and so if if
these civil society networks are able to
extend the range of sensors on a
voluntary basis and have the the support
networks Laird networks on I think that
would be an enormous reassurance for a
lot of people and and potentially could
save a lot a lot of lives and a lot of
potential train wrecks for the for IC
use that are now seeing people come in
on without the these measures having
been taken before so that that would I
think be good path potentially for for
the adjacent possible I like the idea of
sharing our data I don't like the idea
of it being in the hands of any single
government or a tech firm which is the
only thing we kind of have as the
potential right now and the idea of
Google somehow having my like heart rate
and temperature it means I'm not going
to opt in but if we can find a way to
have those conversations to say what
makes you safe right what makes you what
makes this different than China what
makes this different than the than the
social currency right that it's that
it's voluntary that you're doing good
for yourself and humanity and there is
benefit to you like I want this data
system not just for infectious disease
of course but it's huge for infectious
disease because any infectious disease
there is a cost to having it right like
I've actually just told my community I
was like I haven't been there this week
I need something to mop the floor I'm
you know self containing and they're not
happy
meals and we don't live there and
someone sent me an email like you have
the virus do you think you have the
virus it was like no that's not but I
I'm someone who would absolutely I'd
posted on Facebook I have no problem
doing that so that everyone who had been
in contact me could know and but a lot
of people don't right if your kid has
lice are you gonna tell people you know
you have a sexually transmitted disease
you couldn't tell people if there's a
way to easily let people know that so
they know their risk level and they can
get tested that is a benefit to everyone
but like again Google is gonna know my
health you know measurements I'm not
okay with that I want I want it to be my
good in the good of humanity
I mean I know I know this ship is now
sailed but I mean in the earlier stages
if one is serious about containment then
especially I mean okay again in the
early stages we didn't know this but
with an incubation period of 14 days and
whatever it is 3040 people 30 put
because that people get it are
asymptomatic right and so you know the
only way is to simply test everyone as
soon as there is an outbreak you you
know you create a quarantine zone and
you test everybody in that quarantine
zone you know it doesn't matter where
they got symptoms or not doesn't matter
who they've been in contact with you
know blanket if you're serious about it
I'm not saying that's not without its
problems also but it seems to me it's
the only way no I think it's great point
and a great point and I guess the
partner part of the question is do we
wait for a canonical testing which has
an advantage of having apples to apples
comparisons but it comes at a cost if
it's bungled of of leaving you know
millions of tens of millions of people
at risk when they need not be versus
having a system in the case of France if
you're putting up a building in Paris on
you don't get the the municipal
inspector to to give you a certificate
saying it's safe
what France does is to say if you have
an insurer who's not a fly-by-night and
established respected insurer certifying
that this bill
save that's that's a green light and I
think if we if we had a way for the
insurance company is particularly life
insurance companies to have skin in the
game in the sense if they if they put
their brand name behind the testing a
way of testing I think their incentives
are all lined up to get that out early
and make sure it's effective and there
could be enough learning in the sense of
which which of these tasks that was
rolled out quickly work best and some
accountability by deep-pocket people on
if their their tests grew up that that
to me is a healthier or more resilient
path and then just praying that that
this bureaucracy is going to get it get
its system up and at a world-class level
and we've seen you know what could near
catastrophe is ensued by having this
blind trust that institutions incumbent
institutions can be and do this
efficiently and effectively and
accountably I don't think there's any
accountability in within the public
health system in the sense it's like the
Pentagon you know them you know it's
very keen to assure people it's got the
answers and then trillions of dollars
later you know oh I guess it didn't work
and no accountability for that so I I
would love to see a system that
experiments and innovates system-wide
with new types of transparency and
accountability for those who are
purporting to be acting in the public
public interest yeah I mean transparency
is a theme which we come back to again
and again and again in our conversations
one way or another
absolutely the trust is built on
transparency right and being able to
look at what people said and look at
what people did and
yeah without open education yeah I think
they're also though like there's
narrowing why I'm gonna say pants but
like too much risk we put on
corporations and governments as well
that's part of the reason every the shit
hits the fan is because they know they
can get sued they know these things are
gonna happen so so I'm not gonna put a
test out there what if I get sued for
putting this test out there right so
being able to have a system that is like
listen we're in the infancy of this
disease if you can come up with it with
a test and you know we're going like we
want to test all of them to see how how
positive they are but there's no
fallback on you as long as you are
transparent and open about what what is
how accurate right you're not fudging
the data you're not doing those things
but having a system like right now when
I did my video this morning on all of
the different sectors of society and how
were kind of seeing them break apart and
one huge one is business there are tons
and tons of people businesses that are
going under including the big ones but
now they've been bailed out by 1.5
trillion dollars so it's gonna be the
small ones that go under and I think a
part of that is that the people who
start businesses are those that are that
are higher rent that have a higher risk
tolerance someone like me with a very
low risk tolerance isn't never gonna
start a business where I'm gonna take on
all that risk but if I did I would know
a contingency for every scenario and our
issue is we prop like business being
incentivized to make profit and then
cover up their mistakes is like not a
great culture for having us innovate in
a way that is gonna bring the best ideas
to market and so I think we're at where
exactly at the half an hour mark so we
can talk about the the adjacent possible
which for me is what what you touched on
mark on the how do we get solutions into
the world without the medium to go
through the marketplace without them
needing to if you have an idea whether
it's the like just the sparkle of an
idea that you're because this is
brand-new you were thinking about Cove
in 19 for months ago and think like why
were you thinking about these things
right so if it's a new idea how do we
help you progress it how do we test it
how do we make sure it's the lowest risk
possible that's still going forward
because that's all
what our governments have to deal with
is um like action and inaction right
they if for inaction they don't get as
much trouble as taking the wrong action
including them completely fucking up
over the last few weeks and not doing
stuff soon enough not doing it so now
they're it's more spread they're not
gonna get us in much trouble of that if
they had shut down and then it hadn't
been a big deal like so being able to
say is this safe enough that it's better
than what we are currently doing which
is nothing and then giving permission to
try the thing right I like your idea of
like hey we're gonna take zinc and
vitamin C because that's what we want to
take we feel like that's gonna be our
best option but feeding that system
money that's money feeding that
information back into the system so we
can have more information on how this
thing's rights have more information on
what your best defense is to to not get
it and if you get it to live through it
at all demographics I think it's a both
ends it's what were maybe at the
threshold of seeing with game B is the
emergence not only of the
self-organizing networks in terms of the
purchasing side but also in terms of the
supply side so right now the field there
there are lots of barriers that keep
people from offering services without
jumping through outlandish hoops for for
it education is one example I mean Lee
the cartels that have got credentialing
systems solely to protect you know
they're they're marketed advantage they
essentially make it next to impossible
for non credential alternatives to to
come up but what if there were to be on
places and I'm not that optimistic that
the u.s. is going to be anywhere near
the the front of the packet with this
but what if some societies
that have seen them the extent of
breakdown and failure in the established
top-down systems allow associations of
providers to create their own insurance
offerings mutual insurance companies do
have a history on and it would be
possible I think for groups to form that
say we think we understand this
particular set of risk risks and rewards
and we can offer them group policies we
let's say the game being Mutual
Insurance Company one of several
hopefully on hit upon certain kinds of
good practices that would lower risks
health risks dramatically and then it
could crowd fund org or come up with
other ways to to the source enough money
to say we're willing to take these bets
if you will document in a verifiable way
uploading that you're now doing these
exercises every week or you know sharing
some of the grocery build receipts then
those groups that opt-in in these ways
could get a much better deal to from
from these alternatives the classic
corporate offerings so I think it works
both on the supply side the mutual
associations can can in a freer market
they can they can come in and offer as
well as on the consumer side to let
people buy things in as a group right
now for example if I'm in a neighborhood
that has no condominium association as I
understand it's illegal for me and my
neighbors
to pull together and say we are going to
shop as a group a self-organized group
to get the best deal
the life insurance or the best deal for
liability insurance on what our
insurance you name it that's illegal and
it's because corporations don't want to
lose the the kind of market advantage
they they now have so I would put that
high in the list of reform experiments
within the US and outside the US to see
what happens when when you remove the
barriers in that way interesting to to
see if play out I don't have a lot of
faith in insurance I think when it first
started it was about mitigating a risk
and it started with a purpose and now
it's only in it for profit so unless you
have truly a member owned insurance
which isn't about one person having the
mission and then like they're figuring
out the math and they're figure out the
math to make a profit so they're looking
not to pay you right they're looking not
to pay for your medication and your your
life insurance and everything else
whereas in Canada where we have
universal health care I don't have to
worry about that I kind of its
overarching so it's like what do we want
people to stay alive we can't afford a
million dollars per year for somebody's
medication and we don't fund things that
are brand-new unfortunately but but
anyway I don't want to stir this baby
stay on that because I think that there
is potential there and potential that to
play to free games and find find what
does work within that I just don't know
if you could start a insurance company
with 10,000 people and $100,000 but you
could do a Neighborhood Association you
could do hey how do you in fact there is
a an app that I downloaded I can get an
email alerts from my local neighborhood
and it's hard to find it's like a
Facebook for your neighborhood and so I
get the odd like hey we lost this shoe a
her walk or we have a dog that's not
here to be able to have people sign up
during this crisis so that not only are
they there right now but they're there
after I hate that like now we have these
connected neighborhoods now that I don't
have my one that I Drive to how do I
connect with my actual local neighbors
including in a time when we're actually
less
less capable of actually being there for
one another in a like I can't offer
childcare for somebody else who has to
do it work because we're solve isolating
you know our like if our school closed
down due to a strike I could absolutely
offer child care to somebody else but
having those systems in place having the
ability to coordinate with neighbors and
I envision something about like the
Dragons Den or Shark Tank because I
think what's called an in the States
where instead of having billionaires who
are seeing it well they invest in it and
as is financially viable having
scientists and engineers sedating how
good is this thing this solution and how
viable is it is it better than the
nothing what else are what else is out
there right it's comparing it to what
they know is out there and I think that
could be something that could be started
with 10,000 viewers and you know anyone
who has a solution could come on and be
like hey yes look at my solution is it
the best maybe not
but like it's something and right it's
it's a way to test the krona virus it's
a way to help people self Eisley it's
like whatever the solution is right I'm
not thinking of this just for the
infectious disease but it's something
that could benefit when you have tens of
millions of people watching it which you
start with ten thousand and grow then
you can do things like realize how
ridiculous it is that it we need two
years of testing on something that's
gonna save lives now right that's like
especially when quite frankly they're
not doing that test you don't actual
things in the marketplace that bypass
about all the time when it's for heart
disease and all these other things
because they have lobbyists but now that
it's like people's lives on the line now
we're gonna make sure we go through two
years of rigorous testing that seems a
little ridiculous can we get the best of
can we get the least risk possible and
do people understand this is risky and
are you willing to take it question the
question I have on with this notion of
kind of an open you know here's this
idea here's that idea that on unless
there's a way for it to for there to be
grouped
um that has a sample size on it's very
hard to know if it's let's say there's a
subgroup that that's really sold on
melatonin as a way to minimize risk
another subgroup that's on a combination
of things that unless you've got large
enough samples and reliable data that's
privacy protected encrypted but also
verifiable that it the system as a whole
can't learn so I favor on as an adjacent
possible something that allowed on
cohorts two to form around whatever it
is and that we hopefully don't have
little episodic from tiny you know
things clogging up the the public square
and that in that kind of environment but
rather have competition among systemic
approaches that have opted in and buy
and buy large enough groups either
virtual cohorts or actual places that
opt in to to whatever their choices of a
systemic approach I think that we'll
learn faster what combinations and
things have most results if that's
possible I absolutely agree what I was
in picturing for the Sharks tank dragons
den thing was more like oh we don't have
enough respirators hey I've invented a
new respirator is is fun yes it's not
better than the ones that are on the
market but is it better than nothing
right like more a invention or a system
for people to look at and critique
because yeah you're not gonna know
vitamin C's the answer well unless we
test it we really don't know so who is
willing to take vitamin C I'm healthy
enough I'll take it compare me to other
people I'll give you my data right so
yeah and hobby and that would be one of
the things you could put your Megan's
den right be like hey we want to be able
to form these groups and be able to
report how do we make it safe enough why
we make it this way
having a process to be able to solve
solutions this is mine doing solution
raising and then how do we create the
technology to do this on a grand scale
but right now when we're needing ideas
how do we get the best ideas out there
without having them have to go through
the marketplace where they have to find
their own funding they have to find
their own marketing they have to you
know build their own trust instead of
like is the respirator good I want my
dad to stay alive you know what I mean
like so I want that respirator if the
other option is sorry everybody over 60
gets to die now right like having and
just giving each other permission maybe
with the Jubilee which would not be done
at 10,000 but like hey we're gonna try
these things and illegal or not come
after all of us then right like we're
gonna try these things Eric have you
found online any groups that are
Wellsprings of innovation that you think
would be an adjacent possible to well
it's amazing
that's me well I've been listening to
you guys talk the first is the idea of
cohorts trying out zinc or vitamin C or
whatever it might be
in principle I absolutely agree with it
the problem is and unless these things
are very carefully controlled that
within that kögel okay everybody's
taking zinc but you don't know what else
they're doing that maybe you know Co
impacting or nullifying or whatever so
they're very very very careful control
and analysis needs to be done well the
other thing that occurred to me now and
this isn't really a jacent possible this
is a little bit further down the road I
guess but what you were talking i think
it was you mark talking earlier on about
this you know anonymized information
gathering thing that if everybody I'm
just imagining everybody hooked up to
that and and it's recording everything
that you do right every glass of water
that you drink every run that you take
every shit that you have you know and
what time and how solid it is and all of
this kind of thing right then the
combination of choices dietary lifestyle
whatever sleeping habits
that best immunize you from a particular
disease or whatever again whatever it
might be these things would emerge from
the day so right
or at least correlate or relationships
would emerge from the date they wouldn't
necessarily be causal relationships
right there would have to be examined
but correlate early relationships would
pop up all the time and that would be
excellent fodder for examination so yeah
Jubilees objection which I absolutely
share notwithstanding that you know you
don't want Google having all your data
so they can sell you more shit but if
that if that data could be used in such
a way as to compare habits and choices
with outcomes on a grand scale right and
and use that data not to sell you more
shit not to make not to frighten you
more but not to manipulate your choices
but but but just to help you and inform
you yeah well I think it's within reach
there's a vibrant Facebook group that's
less than 48 hours old or run that I'm
called open hardware kovat 2019 open
hardware some keywords like that but
it's just a geyser of ideas from people
in healthcare techies engineers you know
folks like me who don't have a
background but essentially it's just
effervescent with ideas for these
possible things that could be done one
of which was a toilet seat that wouldn't
flush the toilet and flush unless the
the top were down in it it's evident
that the plumes that come which are
laden with with virus and infected
households these plumes are our twelve
fold greater if people flush the toilet
with with the seat up so to your point I
think it would be possible potentially
in this community of innovation that's
and and people are very motivated to
find things that work that if they were
to opt in to a system that was
essentially a data vault not captured by
by a corporation or government but a
peer-to-peer system where the contract
through through smart sensors these kind
of habits and behaviors it might be that
among the zinc popping cohort there
might if there were tens of thousands
them some of which were using
innovations like the humidity sensors
and the way for her neighbors and
friends to make sure that those were
seeing in a good range and another
cohort that was into the toilet seat
you know scenario it would be possible
with large enough groups to have
correlations emerge not just from one or
two but from potentially myriad
combinations of these these types of
practices and the prize what would be
the benefit for people coming in I think
it the way it could be structured would
be to say all who participate in this
are going to have access within X number
of weeks to correlations to look
interesting and links on you know if you
want to order the $10.00 oximeter or
sensor on eBay which you can you know
here's the lengths to do that or the
Wi-Fi humidifier the smart humidifier
whatever the the combination of things
are and and I know that's a challenge
but I think there's such a focus now on
the part of people worldwide in such big
stakes that it potentially could be
something that would catch on with a few
pilot projects of could scale yeah I
have a little bit of an issue of link of
linking the information to the products
that are gonna that seems like very very
very
closely akin to advertising writer
targeted highly targeted advertising
that it is almost that right we want the
data this is the best place you can get
the data versus the person who's making
that be like this is the best one that
you know taking zinc and living with a
dehumidifier lowers your risk of blah
blah blah but then it's on you to go and
find where you know your zinc and your
humidifier somewhere other that's that's
where I was in each cohort each trust
network on could be the the the the way
and I think part of the problem is this
is such a complex field for people who
aren't up to speed in it that they can
get lost so the the more that their
trust networks can help shortlist
options not say this is the place or
that's the place but to to at least get
two or three you know options if you are
concerned about humidity levels or
whatever on you don't get lost in a time
where time is precious with you know
being a zero starting point to do the
searches I at least I would into a
cohort it's a difficult one because it
is yes it's it's a hop skip and not even
a hop skip and a jump away from targeted
advertising but I but I also understand
exactly the point you're making fair
enough there is an another piece of data
that I would love to incorporate in it's
not new people's DNA people's genome
sequencing has gotten cheap enough that
if you've done it and you can put it
into the system and especially who we
want the genomes of sadly are the people
who died right the people who this has
been a death sentence for them because
what do they have in common and what do
people who are asymptomatic have in
common and that does not mean that we
will we can mimic the inity symptomatic
people but to be able to because a lot
like most of what health is is nature
and nurture right you can't really do
anything about the nature but it gives
us
really important information whereas the
the environment what you do has more
choice in it right whether you're taking
zinc or they were taking vitamin C but
you taking vitamin C might heal you and
it wouldn't heal me right or vice versa
and so having the genome there to say
hey these people have this in common and
just more information and we have among
a lot of people have access to that
information but it's not able to be put
into the system
same with fitbit's and all this smart
data that they if we can figure out like
I should own my Fitbit data yeah and I
should be able to decide what to do with
it and then when a systems design that I
trust that I can upload that into I can
upload my genetic information because
it's mine and that being said there's a
whole ethic of leg mine's also my
siblings and my parents writing to my
kids and all of this stuff so there's
secrets and truths that can come out and
in that information and information we
might find out it's global society that
we did we didn't know as well but yeah
genomes genomes and our environment data
then own the data that is really pretty
sure at the point right now legally Wow
and then that like if we passed laws
then like you can upload yours and then
it doesn't matter if you have a Fitbit
or whatever the alternatives are that as
long as you have a one here's where it's
uploaded and you can see I mean I've
wanted to have this out because I'm
chronically old for a very long time
because I can't solve my health issues
by myself I can only solve them with
cohorts right I can only even if I try
something and it makes me feel better
how long is that gonna last for and is
it placebo is it naseeb oh is it to be
able to say hey is this my genetics is
this is it gonna be changed by diet you
need to have more information and it
involves a population random sorry are
you are you part of patients like me
that's a peer network where people who
have a common health challenge
essentially compare notes online and I'm
it's it's quite a big network now is
that do you see any prospect
that could be a place where people
willing to to have DNA sharing could
could do that and in ways that would
approach the sort of level of
significance and sample size yeah that'd
be interesting I've never heard of
patients like me and I have to say
that's one of the things that I've
wanted to create in the world and so
many of the things already out there but
like I've been seeking them and we don't
know and although that's not this issue
both the Dragons Den thing of like
solutions how do we get Mountain to the
world and a system a platform that
solves marketing for us where instead of
the you know humidifiers telling us
which one's the best we say which one's
the best right which one lasts the
longest which one has the most sucking
in of water from here which one like all
of that information including especially
tech especially like there are these
apps that meet my needs and I don't even
know they exist and then they go under
before you find out they exist even
though they were absolutely amazing and
needed and since like why reinvent the
wheel like just get people to know about
what's out there and an Android Play
Store and whatever the Apple one is
called is not if they're not interested
that they're 1 to 5 stars they don't
care download one download the next we
only care you have our product whereas
we care about the features each one of
them have the cost it has the longevity
of it and the social impact of it right
the social impact I don't even know who
owns PatientsLikeMe
quite frankly Google could own it and if
it's still giving me benefit I would use
it but I would rather we own it right I
would rather be able to trust it and
that's something we can build together
is who owns that how do I know where
this data is going how so that I can
feel more confident sharing whatever I'm
sharing with everybody there's a Boston
company which has gotten FDA clearance
for for a wearable bracelet that tracks
12 data streams 12 vital signs and
they've recently entered into a pilot in
Hong Kong to see
if they can pull from from this in in
clinical trials correlations that that
will lend insight and I know I'm sure
it's a super pricey product but if if
systems are gonna break in public health
and there is this rise of this
crowdsourcing of innovations and maker
spaces and you know people have deep
experience in healthcare I'm able to
create prototypes that essentially allow
for affordable tracking into a
peer-to-peer system that's high I trust
I imagine that that would be welcomed if
in the event that this this virus adapts
and mutates too quickly to come up with
vaccines that like that's actually a
what's the word adjacent possible is all
of people with this out information
already finding ten thousand of them who
are like willings but they're down into
the system and what does that criteria
because it's already there and in any
kind of health crisis whether it's you
know the increasing cancer or anything
like that having people instead of
signing a signature of giving five bucks
to go towards the for-profit you know
trying to pretend you're trying to find
a cure to cancer industry I mean it'd be
like no one give me my data like here I
don't know if I'm gonna get cancer or
not but if I do what a plethora dad I'm
gonna be you know like in this health
crisis here's my information I don't
know if I've grown a virus but you'll be
able to see mine my temperature be going
up if I do get it and so having people
opt into a system and have that be part
of like a call to action and something
like this happens it's like that's
something you can do and then when stuff
goes perfectly wrong with our data how
do we fix that
the next solutions and and for people in
my age group at least thinking of what
one can do yeah if the cards there's no
neuron to participate in projects like
this that
rated value for one's progeny and their
kids so I think the notion of having in
a peer-to-peer system a way for the
early movers to know that the the
insights from this are going to be made
available on a first serve basis to the
families extends families of of those
who participate I think that would be
quite a a welcomed prospect on a
personal note I you know was diagnosed
10 years ago with prostate cancer and
the treatment the preferred treatment
after I researched pretty pretty
carefully was something the FDA had not
approved and the reason it hadn't
approved was a medical device and
ultrasound devices the manufacturer kept
improving it and so since each device
would have to go through a an enormous
ly expensive testing multi-year testing
and then be obsolete they focused on
urine which had a far more open
regulatory system and our parts of the
Caribbean and I wound up flying twice
over the past 10 years to to the Cayman
Islands and to Bahamas for where a
treatment that's absolutely commonplace
and proven in all over the world in
Japan China and Europe and the FDA
because of the rapid pace of change just
couldn't until finally relented and said
we we've got to be more flexible and
they did on but now we're at a torrent
we have exponential change in you know
sensor systems and medical devices and
if if we're road blocking
these pooled crowd-sourced innovations
prototype devices and essentially saying
nope you've got a you've got to jump
through the hurdles that will cost
millions and probably lead to an
obsolete out-of-date device by the time
it does see see daylight I would love
more and more to see
experimental jurisdictions on areas with
different regulatory regimes that all of
us can learn from with with the kind of
data that is not going to be distorted
you know by by vested interests and
bureaucracies and corporations I think
that that could be an enormous growth
possibility and I think one of the
biggest I've sat with this one because
of my health issues for a lot of like
how could we use technology to help us
improve our health and this idea that
people would need to be forced to do it
right we have to put our information and
it's definitely not the road I want to
go down and so if you have a voluntary
system I like the idea because first of
all your progeny are gonna be the number
one people to benefit because they share
your genetics if they share your
genetics or I don't think we call
progeny anything different but if you
choose not to share your data the person
you're hurting the most the demographics
you were hurting the most or any
demographics you're part of so if all
you know white men with diabetes somehow
there was something correlated where
they didn't trust and they didn't share
their data it would be white men without
diabetes we don't have enough
information the system on right so more
information is gonna benefit every group
you're part of and yeah there's a lot of
power in our data and that's why I want
a cooperatively owned technology company
so we can trust in sharing our data in a
way that can benefit me and all of
humanity with it where everyone feels
safe we're definitely past the hour so
does anyone else have any closing
remarks
nope alright say bye to you two for
joining this was a the hardest one we've
tackled so far on solution raising I
don't know if we came up with the
definitive answers we'd usually don't
but lots of sparks of ideas of things
that are have huge potential to help
create solutions on this planet during
this this crisis thank you Mark and Eric
Caen goodbye YouTube thank you to
continue