hello I was only gonna do one more video
on Kyle C's because I did a video when I
first found out about the me to story
and you can see that I didn't link that
in the description I will when I edit it
on the YouTube part of this but I wasn't
gonna do another video I did that and I
did it like a 1 where I envisioned a
coaching community that didn't actually
revolve around a central coach for five
minutes and but now like his lack of
integrity in this whole thing his lack
of authenticity has his need to keep it
secret the other video I was gonna do
was just a goodbye video hey thanks for
the for the memories thanks for the
coaching tools but I'm done
thumbnail for the YouTube video because
I didn't want to upload part of the
story is that he he has put copyright
restrictions copyright strikes against
YouTube channels and have played part of
his own video where he actually
addresses the media stories that was
only for internal use only for the
people who've paid to be part of his $30
a month of coaching and so those were
the only people that were supposed to
watch it but luckily people can record
and someone recorded it he put it on his
YouTube channel and got it taken down he
put it up on Facebook from the cloud and
and then this this guy that I'll talk
about today podcast taught awful did an
entire show yesterday on kyle cease and
at the very end of the two hours I mean
I don't exactly I just sat through the
two hours and 15 minutes of his show and
it's definitely not my cup of tea
he's is way too much like sex humor
about I don't know there's just a lot of
things there especially he just been
through this with that community is not
the best thing to watch but if you want
more information you can see if you go I
did link the video in the cut on YouTube
this one so his podcast awful did a
video he released another video today
kind of saying that he got the copyright
strike now he can't go
live for 3 months which is his
livelihood and he didn't do anything
wrong
he was just talking about Kyle ceases
video and because that that video was uh
there was a partner he also played music
that Kyle sees had gotten in trouble
with and gotten a lawsuit against him
for using this video and he played
pieces of it and so he thought it was
that copyright infringement you can't
you can hear that at the end because he
has it the audio say it so I just
listened to the two and two and a bit
hours of him talking about it so I
didn't get to see the pictures but I
could picture the picture because I've
seen the video I've seen the hour-long
video of Kyle addressing this so for
people who don't know this story roughly
three weeks ago
I will then post it on Facebook her
story with Kyle cease and how they had
had a relationship for a few months and
there was a lot of just like skeezy
details in there that like he plied he
convinced her to use to use alcohol when
she had six months of sobriety she was
paying him to be her coach like she
spent $16,000 is what she was refunded
and yet they were they had an a if it
wasn't for a coach coachy relationship
they had a consensual relationship even
if it wasn't coach coachy convincing a
woman to drink alcohol and break her
sobriety because you can be just as
addicted to sobriety as you can to
alcohol and using in all these skeezy
tactics against against the people who
are vulnerable is not okay
and anyway I feel like you getting all
over the place but welcome to my channel
because that's what I do it's just the
irony is Kyle cease is was one of my
mentors I loved his work I loved what he
brought to the to the community his
stuff on if you go back really early in
my youtube channel then you'll see that
I posted these hundred I encountered
install my story policies I encounter
policies about three years ago and
because of the work that he was doing he
had he had a weekend thing in Los
Angeles my sister lives in Los Angeles
so I bought a ticket to go see my sister
got to stay with her but I needed a one
night in a hotel room paid the five
hundred bucks for the for the course
went to his
I got a lot out of it it was amazing
nothing bad to say about that weekend
itself came back lived my life did this
video called a hundred different videos
called called hundred apples and I wish
it was a wish it was one video it's a
hundred different videos on my youtube
channel really long time ago
because I had bought an iPad which is
like over a thousand dollars and I'm
poor and I said that if I could do these
100 apples which is the ideas an apple
tree doesn't care what you do with its
apples it just for this design it's one
of the cup things I got a pile see so I
was like alright let's see if I can
produce 100 apples and if I was able to
do that I think in the two weeks was the
timeframe I gave myself then I would get
to keep the iPad otherwise I had to
return it because I have like a 30-day
return policy and I did that hundred
apples that were all like world change
made basically all world-changing tech
ideas cuz that's what I'm here to do
over the course of like two days I was
just like on this huge high is probably
the most energy I've had in the last
five years I was like just over the two
days like I went for a walk and I
recorded like I think twelve or fifteen
while I was on this walk it's just like
you can see the truth like I'm in this
one yes not all the ideas are great but
that's kind of the point is some of them
are good and I didn't think I had a
hundred tech world saving ideas I
thought maybe I had a dozen but no I had
a hundred and I have both of his books
you can see on the thumbnail I put them
on my toilet and took a picture said any
want the copyright infringement so I was
like I don't want to use somebody else's
photo of him and I'm really bad at
crediting people but I'm also not a
millionaire not don't have hundreds of
thousands of dollars given to me so I
give it myself a little more flag for
that we don't be able to hire a personal
assistant we will not be doing copyright
infringement and even now it's like I
had music and stuff on so this thing
came to light there's people on both
sides who were like this is a consensual
relationship how dare she tell her story
and like I'm sorry the man's brand is
authenticity how did he think he could
he could keep this a secret and he was
and he there's like other stuff that
came to light too like well they were on
these meditation calls that people spend
hundreds of dollars a month to be part
of there's like the $30 a month fund
that gives you access to this Wednesday
night call and then
there's I don't even know how much the
other one is that these 50 people
probably mostly women were in this every
morning I think it's called the 201
groups that he was have two hundred and
one of these calls of hours they had an
hour every morning I think they were
gonna do it for a year and she was in
this group and there's other people who
are in this group and her story like
definitely meshes like she slept with
him this night before this event that he
had and he didn't show up till 3:00 p.m.
the next day because he was he was
triggered he was having a breakdown but
he didn't say why he was happy to break
down well so he then so this thing comes
forward I friended her on Facebook and
so now I can see her posting what what
she's been posting over the last few
weeks which is her healing on this her
truth she did another video a few days
later she just posted the other the
other day this this thing about how
she's not as strong when she looks right
now and it was actually really really
beautiful and I was like this is
actually what strength is like when I
say you look strong I don't mean like
bravado you don't break down like this
is strength this is actual strength
instead of what society says looks like
strength it's always ironic like people
with critical illness know that or
critic that's been your diet isn't it
chronic illness that's the word I'm
looking for where they realize like
society looks at you as weak and yet you
have more strength than your average
person just to go through the day and
that seems kind of strength just takes
place again and again in society that
like when you don't need to look like
the epitome of strength and society
that's true strength that's you're not
doing it for outside approval you're
doing it for whenever the inside
privileges anyway so the hidden on her
Facebook page his brother commented like
like standing up for his brother and I
remember what icons but he took down the
post within a few hours but someone in
screenshot at them so they put the
picture of them back up and it's it's
come to light since then in Kyle's only
video he's like and thank goodness my
brother was there for me that my brother
has kind of tried to bring this stuff to
light right after this came out Matt con
post
did a you know some people on those
lines someone again screenshot it and
shared it that was like I'm basically
pulling my support for Kyle's niece and
this is gross this is and I had tried to
have an intervention like basically I
tried to tell him this is skeezy
behavior months ago and our friendship
broke over up over it and then he took
that down whether he got legal stuff
from Kyle sees I don't know I'm too
small to give a I mean way too
small I have a hundred subscribers good
luck I'm not I don't have the ability to
even edit if I wanted to put clips of
your video in here so anyway so then
this is how all these people comment
there's this division because it's oh
that's so sorry then a week and a half
after this came out he had his regular
Wednesday night call I guess it was less
than a week after don't think you had a
Wednesday fall in between where he had
no comments he didn't usually there's
comments you can upvote comments so that
you can he'll answer the talk comments
questions and that's what the whole hour
is for it's like for him to coach
someone and everyone else to be watching
and learning and basically for this
whole hour he talks about how he's a
little boy and he didn't think that he
was he was in a coaching position that's
engine it wasn't how he thought it was
himself but now that he knows I totally
forgot to mention that she's not the
only one so what she gave her story
which people are highly critical of
because they're like well this is a
consensual relationship how dare after
the fact you air your grievances in
public
well because the person she's airing
grievances talks about authenticity but
then he's asking people to keep it
secret is plying people with alcohol to
other women at least in this thread came
out about yes I have similar stories
stories of him pouring alcohol in
people's drinks without them even
knowing and that's not he's like I'm
just a comedian I used to sleep with
people for my comedy shows so I just I
didn't even think that this is a problem
right except both your brother and at
least Matt Khan had talked to you about
it so it's not like it was a complete
blind spot yes it was a subconscious
blind spot maybe where you don't think
of yourself as a coach despite the fact
your entire livelihood is based on it
you're getting tens of thousand
dollars among and you're going live
every morning and how many people pay
you to be present with you but yeah by
all means think of yourself as a little
boy just looking up to his mother which
is his shtick like it's what he it's his
brand authenticity and like evolving out
loud that he's there to do it in full
public view and it's a kid where I got a
lot of my time in no way a Miss talented
as he is clearly I'm not as easy and
able to like get the camera charismatic
following either and I I was kind of
felling away from the community before
this not from anything dramatic I just
kind of outgrew him he released a book I
have here because I took the pictures of
it on the toilet I'm called
money the illusion of money and the
documentary was all right in the book
but it's like the whole coaching thing
and money it's like well if you are
doing your passion your genius money
will follow and I call BS on that
because it's I don't remember what the
blind what the because the word is the
bias is but it's it's like survivor bias
I think is the one where you're only
looking at stats of people who've gotten
millions of followers gotten thousands
of followers are making a living off
better like I could do it why can't you
it's like right out of the thousands of
people's who are living in their
integrity living their truth and able to
just speak really well on stage how many
of those people can make an actual
living out of it very few and so just
because you're living your most
authentic self doesn't mean you're gonna
get money out of it in fact many people
many geniuses in history died poor and
unknown and now we know them it's
definitely not a guarantee that just
because you're living your genius or
getting money so that was mine just like
the money stuff rub me the wrong way and
that's my own I was like that's my own
 I'm good I don't need like there's
no need to badmouth him or or the policy
or sorry the young the vision right that
like I get the entire self-help
community feels that way the issue is
then they feel bad that they're not able
to make money like I'm not living in my
truth
I'm not following my the secret right
it's like if I can envision it it will
happen I'm like that's not that's not
the case at all who says that and this
is where I mean with me of my chronic
illness and my poverty that I'm not even
looking for the money I am looking for
the health but it doesn't it's what the
universe is giving me to act
teach me what I'm here to learn whom I
like be like no not that lesson I want
the lessons I get for being rich and
healthy that's not how it works you get
the lessons are given to learn what
you're here to learn to give your genius
and your gifts to the world and that's
definitely out the message I get from
these these people I'm a little angry at
the moment and I'm definitely just like
done with spiritual men like done with
the like not all like not but the ones
in the public eye the ones that are even
if they say I'm not your guru not your
teacher there's still like Tony Robbins
Ken Wilber and now Kyle sees like I'm
done I'm just gonna follow women teal
Swann has had like a because of her
stance on suicide her community fell
apart a little bit but not because of
her like she didn't fall from grace
because everyone who was following her
knew her stance on suicide so it was
like the the public outcry around this
cult half it's just it's not the same
Britney Brown doesn't fall apart like
I'm like I'm just gonna follow the women
they seem to be actually authentic and
I'm sure there are tons of authentic met
out there doing this work but the three
that I followed and phone from grace oh
I'm done I'm just gonna follow maybe if
there's a trans guy out there I might
follow him but like seriously Oh Kyle
just his whole video is like I'm here to
love and here to be in my heart and he
has all these ticks and get PUD awful I
wouldn't suggest he says some highly
triggering to me things like just gross
language part of what he's doing is like
making fun of him for his looks and
making quite a because his eyes are
closed in the moment I'm like that's
really not the problem he's showing up
as he normally shows up but he also has
like ticks me stuff than he normally
doesn't have he's clearly under a lot of
stress and this is where the money
coaching thing like you can't coach
authentically when you're getting money
off of it but how do you make it a
full-time job if you're not getting
money out of it like when you then have
to choose between your profits and your
purpose and you choose profit ever
you've ruined your whole message and you
have to choose profit because if he had
been open about this like by the way I'm
just using my coach in to get to get
some sex and just like and but I also
not
like I need you to be drunk for it
because I know that you're not gonna I
can't get through your defenses if
that's not the case like that against
easy for anyone especially a coach and
the fact that he's now taking down these
um the videos is like copyright
infringement okay then you release
something to the public because this
video he did was only the one and then
he just wants everything to go back to
normal
he had a meditation retreat in a
cylinder or if I'm saying that right um
that was planned for months and people
paid I think at least a thousand dollars
to attend I'm totally me I don't know
how much money but you also pay for
plane tickets right I don't know if
accommodations were included so by the
time you put all the money and it's
definitely a thousand dollars and after
this came to light there were tons of
people who are like I want my money back
I don't want to go to a retreat centered
around you it's like oh we're all just
gonna heal together you that's not
your say you don't get to keep people's
finances and anyway so they could either
not go and lose that money including the
planes I guess they could go and have a
side a slide retreat I I'm just gonna
check quickly to see because there's
actually a zoom conversation later today
that is delayed know is dealing with
this stuff I had a 6:00 a.m. call that
nobody showed up to today so because
because I did this Kylie go response
video and people had really resonated
with people where I was like basically
Kylie going is his term for like
visioning and future in the present so
like I remember a year ago when this
truth came out about Kyle sees even
though a few weeks ago and the community
came together and created a community
that wasn't centered around Kyle's I
mean we were there as peers and we and I
used a lot of his language language and
it really resonated with people so
although I do not have the I'm saving
the entire world I do not have the
capacity of this kind of sees
but I was like I can do this I can show
up at 6:00 a.m. have a zoom conversation
I forgot that it was daylight savings
time so it was really like 5:00 a.m. and
my body felt like it was 5:00 a.m. no
one showed up for it wasn't supposed to
happen someone on Facebook message
you saying like we're gonna kind of
consolidate all of these like side
things that are going on
it's like yep I'm down with that I would
love to be able to show up for something
or if you pay 30 bucks a month for it
and get peer support I don't I'm not
looking for hire a hard to go coach
I don't think and this is what I've
gotten out of this whole thing is
although I had left the Kyle seas
community for my own because I had
outgrown just his teachings I'm still
would watch the odd video of his and I
am I was still holding him on a pedestal
like I was still like oh this man
meditates for two hours day he's got
 together I'm like no he doesn't
he's not even allowed to heal is if he
heals there's nothing left to evolve and
then how does he evolve you're not
allowed in front of us all how how can
you you do it when that's when that's
the case like it's just how do you how
can you be honest and integrity whether
you're in an open relationship or
whether you're sleeping with as many of
your clients being honest about either
of those things you're gonna choose to
not be honest so that you can make money
and now he just keeps doing it it's like
well I'm not gonna he's not releasing a
video to the public he's not every time
anyone publishes the video that he did
release internally he does a copyright
infringement on it he's not looking to
be honest he's like I just want to heal
these women I just want to like be
authentic and like move forward and
don't worry I learnt my lesson I will
never sleep with any clients again it's
like funny how this wasn't you weren't
concerned about this when your brother
and Matt talk to you about it months ago
but now that these women have come
forward now all of a sudden you're
really concerned about helping women and
that like all this because it's not even
just the women he sleeps with or tries
to now he's like oh no the other two I
didn't sleep but they tried to sleep
with me and now and and I didn't I
whatever turned down their passes that
cuz there's like this right so now
you're putting it on them it's like oh
they like which might be true but like
you plied them with alcohol you just
gross
and so because it's not just the women
you sleep with it's also all the other
women who probably have a crush on him
who were like why I love
I'm just moving spots because my kid
wants to nap in my bed and hearse is
messed up so give me one second
you
that's like a step you bought with me is
it the other way I need to go yes all
right there we go Oh change of location
I don't even know if I have anything
left to say now that you find out for a
while put the guys comments I've been
off on the screen but I don't know what
that is actually what is going on this
is on both periscope and YouTube but I
don't see any the hardest or anything
else that's going on but if you comment
I believe I see it from both places it's
all Kyle sees thing like what i if he
was truly living in his brand he was
being authentic and like I keep watching
old videos of his from like 2014 2018
and I'm like to 2020 Kyle really needs
to listen to 2014 and 2018 Kyle like all
of this it's okay if your money falls
apart that's just the universe's Way of
telling you that like you have something
better to give something new something
it's okay if things fall apart it's like
let it fall apart it's supposed to you
are supposed to fall apart take some
time say I'm leaving for four months and
yes the issue is his money comes from
here so how can he show up authentically
and this is my issue with the entire
like coaching system in general is that
if you're getting money for it you have
to make decisions that are more an
alignment with your finances than with
your mission and your vision and if
you're not making money for it then you
have to spend your time and energy doing
something else outside of that to make
money and so I mean that's basically the
problem with all capitalism and what I'm
trying to dismantle it because if people
and then constantly in the same space
because the Coyotes community the teal
swamp who needs full of people who want
to do coaching and both they're looked
at as their look down on if they don't
want to get money for their coaching and
so like I feel weird any money I just
want to do this thing it's like oh
you're broken around money you need to
do some heat leader out money like or
society needs to do some you either owe
money we need to figure out how to live
our purpose live our genius without the
need for money and that's what I'm here
to do on this planet is create a world
works for everyone create a world that
we don't have to work
full-time for anyone because even if
you're not in the public eye you're not
a coach
you still have to make decisions against
your integrity for finance like you have
to put your time energy health on the
line in order to go to work and that's
even if you're working in an office job
let alone if you're working in a coal
mine or something where you're there's a
lot more helpers involved at creating a
world where our needs are met so that we
can focus on our work our actual work
our purpose our genius what we do that
time passes by um you don't even know it
and are in flow the thing that you don't
need to get paid for because you would
do it for free in fact you would pay to
do it that is what we should all be
living in and money only hurts because
if you're making money from it
you're either feeling bad because
they're making enough money and
therefore you feel like here to like not
showing up in the world in the same way
or you are making money on it it's
hurting your very purpose for being
there especially in this coaching
business but in all industries it's like
if you're a restaurant worker and you
own a restaurant and you're showing up
and you're cooking for people and you're
there not to feed people that's amazing
but then all of a sudden the food's a
little bit off and you're like oh I
can't afford to throw this out so I'm
gonna like cook it and make it I hope
it's okay you're like you have to
balance risk you can't go to your
restaurant cheese and be like by the way
the Salmons a little off but I'm gonna
cook it I think it's okay and I'll give
you a 30% discount right which you're
still not making profit off of anyway
it's like you and then you're sick you
have a cough well I can't afford to stay
home so I have to go to work and you
spread the virus
Ronen virus to play that's what's gonna
happen especially in America we don't
have health care and people don't have
sick time and so in every industry it's
like a doctor show up for work and
they're like well what should I give
them the the generic brands or the one
that they're gonna they're gonna pay for
my cruise this summer they're gonna pay
for a good dinner well of course I'm
gonna give the one that's even more
expensive even if it's just subconscious
even if they're not consciously aware of
that thing that costs them money and so
I got into my thing from Kyle's thesis
thing like we are able to come together
and create for ourselves a system that
provides our food and we figured out how
to do that together so we know how much
time and energy we're putting into the
system to get our food out we know how
much money we're putting the system to
get our food out we know how to solve
our our shelter crisis our how to get
clothing and connection and education
and energy and just everything that we
need to live our lives right now the
current system is the best hope we have
for that in the mainstream is ubi our
government's passing universal basic
income
none of them are suggesting they give us
anything beyond a very subsistence
living wage and then people can choose
to work on top of that or not that's
highly really expensive for the
government people don't have a high
enough wage to actually thrive under
people who are disabled people who can't
work get actually hurt more because now
they're in the same like they're getting
the same amount of money as everyone
else who can also work on top of that so
supply and demand needs everything it's
gonna cost us more and it's just not a
solution because it's gonna cost
hundreds of millions if not billions of
dollars to implement something like that
even though I would absolutely vote for
that if I got to vote for it on a ballot
because it's the the other option in the
current society is like what
everything's automated everyone's
unemployed and we all just start right
but the solution that has come to me and
I'm in the process of putting out the
world is we need to solve these problems
ourselves together instead of leaving it
up to the government who's never gonna
solve it in a way that it makes our
lives better we're never gonna solve in
a way that makes everybody happy we can
come together and create a system that
does helps us feed ourselves right helps
us get access to shelter that's this um
we're safe and beautiful and we can
solve all of our problems together
we just can't solve them by ourselves
like right now the options are pulling
yourself up by our bootstraps do it all
yourself which is what the coaching
community
is also very much because that's what
our Western society is very fixated on
is like it's the individuals problem the
individual needs to get a job pay for
their stuff you figure out how to get
your your genius and then if you're
meant to the money will flow in and if
it's not you're the broken one or the
big thing we have to leave it up to the
government we have to leave it up to the
system the not-for-profits and the
corporations to solve these things
because we're only one individual how
could we solve it and there's a huge
space in between that or we can come
together and solve them for ourselves
10,000 people can come together and
solve food crisis for their for their
community
even if millions of people not by saying
yes we figured out how to feed all of
Vancouver but to say we figure out how
to feed our 10,000 people in Vancouver
and we're inviting everyone else to come
participate in it creating a Kochi
system like that creating a world where
you don't have to pay 30 bucks a month
together to get access to a coach that
is there isn't being authentic because
he's getting $30 a month per access to
him instead it's like well if your needs
are met you have food you have clothing
you have shelter you have connection and
community and education and access to
all the tools you need to have your
hobbies and you enter your purpose and
then you choose to coach you're gonna be
there in a completely different um both
power dynamic and financial incentive
where you can actually be a coach you
can actually help people thrive in that
world if you are choosing to be a doctor
if you're choosing to or to cook food
for people if you're choosing to do
absolutely anything we can trust you're
there for that mission more than the
money because you're our financial needs
are covered for us and this was not
supposed to be a little fruit for my
project but right now that is like it's
so ironic because living learning from
Kyle skis I was able to bring
authenticity the Apple idea of like just
putting the ideas out there showing up
authentic oh this is the only way I can
show up currently with unedited video
without the light and sound proper and
show up and give the message to the
world and in so doing it has come a far
I'm still I have like 100 YouTube
subscribers and if that was the only
thing we were doing that would feel
pretty dismal but we're having
conversations about solutions for
creating solutions within an hour we've
done two so far one on education and one
on food which were both amazing and both
on the together tech channel on YouTube
which has ten subscribers because it's
brand new together Tech is the Technic
technology cooperative that all of
humanity will own and operate together
and right now we're concentrated on the
meta project of people bringing their
projects generally tech but any project
that you find is has integrity and is
here to help actually improve the world
and how can you help each other's
projects get into the world so that is
what together Tech is currently
concentrating on and we have a game B
projects Facebook page that is an off
wrench of the game B community game B
beam what comes after game a which is
what we're all in the capitalist the
communist the feudalism everything up to
this point is game a and we need a game
B we need something for this to evolve
into that is going to benefit all of us
that's going to be based on anti-bible
risk behavior aware just because you get
a client it doesn't cost in the
appliance right in a world where our
needs you're mad I don't care if I have
a million clients or five clients I care
that I'm helping the people who are in
front of me and so like and subscribe to
our YouTube channel not on periscope
very often I used to be it was like the
place where I came to get more confident
on camera
I'm much better in a conversation and so
that is what I do on on the crowd
democracy channel on YouTube which is
now called Jubilee saves the world by
meandering through life because that is
what I'm doing I know how we can create
a world that works for everyone
and although I'm not capable of writing
it out in a book like Kyle sees I now
know like that's not the purpose of it
because it's evolving it is changing and
it's more about the system we're
creating together how do we create
solutions with thousands or tens of
thousands of people and that is what I
am creating so instead I'm sharing the
journey on my channel the journey toward
saving the world by listening to these
little GPS like the net the idea is and
I got this from Kyle is
that a GPS doesn't give you the entire
route I mean you can look it up but the
idea this like turn left here now make a
right in 500 meters it only ever gives
you the next step and that's what your
subconscious your inner um guide does it
gives you the next thing to do and so
for the last three years I have been
listening to the next step the next step
and in so doing I have I have evolved a
lot I have come to the place I've gotten
rid of most of my social anxiety I like
my body's not any healthier my finances
aren't any better but I am happy I am
living my purpose in my joy and I'm
going to be sharing that journey for
free from not looking for clients I'm
not looking for I'm looking for other
people who want to co-create a world
that works for everyone I want people
who want to fund and and not me I don't
want you to fund my life although at
some point probably gonna have to take a
salary and the other people who are
devoting their time to this but right
now I my needs are covered by my
disability from the government and so
what I'm looking to do is create a world
that works for everyone create a system
that we can come together and create
solutions together and right now that
looks like the solution Raisins we do on
together tech every other Saturday and
having the conversations I will keep
having new ideas and moving forward with
those apples and GPS coordinates of like
hey how do we get a hundred people on
soon I don't know if I had a hundred
people who wanted to hang out on zoom'
every Saturday morning we have fixed the
world my house because we would have
grown and figured out more from that but
I don't know how to get other people
there but they're coming right now
together text just like the four of us
who meet on on together Tech and then
the people in game bu have their
projects you don't know even though
they're part of it together talking
about project because they're not
participating in the same way and
working through all of my inner inner
stuff and I'll be continuing to use the
work that I got from coyotes because it
works
Coleco he's fun and I need there's this
other thing he does for like at the end
of saying something that's kind of a
complaint she say and I
love that and that what that would
always didn't really resonate with me
because I don't like what I call
spiritual by Cassie I don't like fake
positivity but it does actually work in
your body to see a like and I love that
so that you're coming from a place of
love you're totally right it's like I'm
in pain and I love that it's not my
body's like BS you do that's not a truth
and but I am truly happy
I do love my life I do love nearly
everybody which exists on the planet
right now including policies actually
have no I'm eager for his current
actions that he keeps like doing the
totally legal game a like take
that down it's my copyright
oh yeah no I'll just keep this really
secret internally and then like Oh move
on together right how do people come to
my retreat I can't afford to to refund
them all so therefore it's on down to to
take that financial risk I'm just gonna
say you you like hold you hostage and
you have to come and and grow with me
and so I'm really not happy with him but
but what I am happy with is my growth
through this that the people who are
holding strongly and going through like
the anger towards the women who came
forward and the anger towards this
coming to light and it rocking the world
and like how dare you they have their
own learning to live those of us who are
like oh you aren't a guru like you don't
actually have any answers you were
telling you the truth you kind of said
that all along but you have no answers
I've evolved beyond you the students
have surpassed the master in every way
we're more authentic we're living our
life more because we don't have to
choose this um business over our
authenticity we don't have to choose
like he's got employees he's got a kid
he's got a fiance he has to support and
although I also have a kid I have to
support it's not dependent on my YouTube
channel right it's not dependent on my
public persona I have friends and family
that love me that I love and I know
they're gonna there's nothing that can
come to light that is going to cost me
that because there's nothing that become
light I live my life out in the open and
I don't necessarily think everyone
should do that I do it way more than you
probably should but I don't have the
spoons to figure out what should be
shared and what shouldn't be shared
especially with my autism I'm like wait
is this socially appropriate yeah I'm
just gonna share it I'm just gonna share
it and whatever it happens happens and
then I'll I learn as I go like oh I see
I see the problem there yes but that is
I have the freedom to do that because I
am already living in game B I'm already
living a world that I don't I look for
ways to help individuals and the world
without needing to get paid for it and I
look for ways to get me help
individually and for my project that
aren't paid for because I want to live
in that world where we're gifting each
other and that this understanding that's
the vision of what the world we're going
to create together because there's we
live in a monetary society together
texts gonna need money to create really
amazing technology it can help us
financially help us exercise it eat well
within our capacity help us understand
the complex information that's out there
on science and economics and politics
and help us get all of the tools we need
to live our best life the beauty with
technology is you actually can once it's
made its really cheap to give it out and
so if as a community and I really hope
we vote for it if it's we're able to
make it for free but for people who
can't afford it we should and so that
was what the video is gonna talk about
today with somebody else's
world-changing project that I don't
think it's world change you notice the
many that I've encountered but I don't
know if all this doesn't say to that
video lender I also is my next and only
Kyle sees video was just gonna be like a
like a thank-you letter and goodbye like
here's everything I got from you and now
I don't need you anymore like thank you
and goodbye and now it's like Fu su for
how you're showing up in this ie not
showing
like I posted the thing that I have this
morning at 6:00 a.m. which was like hey
let's get together on a soon call and
talk about how we have a coaching
community without a coach no that's kind
of like a personal development community
we support each other and there is no
like central authority or higher
authority and nobody showed up
but what's that point about oh and I
posted on my Facebook page both that and
Michael ego one of my friends who was a
world changer she has this amazing
project which are not getting our name
heard from the Facebook but I've named
it before for sure she was like I was
like you clearly didn't watch the video
and or no what the is going on
because nobody does unless they're in
the community like because all of his
facebook pages are moderated so there's
one called grim stall which is his word
for dating or something confusing we're
on one of them it used that word so you
can hashtag it on social media so you
can find other Kyle sees fans and date
them and starts a Facebook group called
Grimstad himself I found out about the
nitu story all the other ones you can
comment on someone who's gotten a post
okayed and comment things but probably
not even allowing any posts to be posted
right now like the last time looked like
there's these these post trickly and if
people like Kyle's saved my life and
Kyle really did this and it's like
nobody knows this is happening because
he's trying to keep hidden and at the
same time that's making it explode like
I wasn't gonna do this video until he
took down pot Awful's podcast yesterday
and then I had you know then I watched
it just like keeps this thing going the
more you try to keep something hidden
the more you're perpetuating the energy
that makes it get bigger and those of us
who are ready to evolve beyond this this
teacher are doing that and showing up
and stepping into our power like we
never could with him probably because we
were trying to follow him and he wasn't
doing it himself and so I'm both really
grateful for this happening right now my
heart goes out to the women who've
actually been directly affected and all
of the ones that I know are like
secondary affected who were like in the
community paid thousands of dollars to
be on these calls especially the 50 who
are paying a lot of money to be on these
calls where I'm finding out that he's
gossiping about them behind their
on texts with this woman while they're
meditating and like that's just gross
behavior obviously was what I'm not
that's gross behavior but all these
things coming too late until it's like
well all this the rumor mill well if
you're not going to address it it's
gonna be the rumor mill and like you
addressed it one time like yeah these
other women they don't count the ice
burn them this one yes I dated her but I
thought it was consensual completely
okay relationship and done checkbox move
on never talk about it again that's not
how this works
like that's not even how but like when
you were five years old and got hurt
your soul got hurt and you still need to
heal from that works it's just gonna
keep coming up until it's healed on its
own time in its own way so how do you
think that this is just like checkbox'
move on I was off that tick we didn't
like I don't even know if he's had one
or two Wednesday calls since his video
was posted and I'm not in them so I
don't know did he turned back on the
comments where people asked me questions
for people a Bodeen hey why are you
sleeping with clients you need to
address this he's clearly stressed out
and he needs to take his own advice and
so someone needs to sit him down let him
listen to Kyle sees from 2014-2018 talk
about this stuff and like yeah your
money's gonna fall apart your life's
gonna fall apart it'll be something
better on the other ends that only if
you let it fall apart surrender
surrender to the fact that you've made
these choices and now there's
consequences and the more you try to
like mix Twp communities because he's
not gay he gays and gay be he's
completely different but like I am the
intermixing of those communities like
the spiritual self-help that I draw on
to be Who I am in the world Sam gave me
the people I can talk about world-saving
life-changing ideas with it's like yes I
don't it so now I'm like okay how do I
help the Kyle sees community like no I'm
not really part of it be on the zoom
call later and like all I'm doing all I
do in the world is basically post videos
and have conversations and I am saving
the world that way that does not sound
like something you can do and here I say
about a year ago I have
what you because it's like I keep trying
to be something society wants me to be
right like oh you have to learn to edit
oh you have to learn to finish a
sentence before you start the next one
that'd be nice
that um the more I try to force it the
less it happens the more I surrender to
it the easier it is but it's hard to
surrender to something that you're like
I know it is save the world it's really
stressful and I have a medical condition
that can't handle stress the irony of
that is like just constantly it makes me
laugh constantly what was that point of
bringing any of that up I don't I don't
know who lose my train of thought it's
all that oh what I was thinking a year
ago is that what I can do is show up and
have a conversation anyone who wants to
talk world-saving tech tip I can sit
down and have a conversation with and I
can answer 95% of the questions and 5%
of them are like we will answer them
together and even the 95% that I love
answering most of it is also this is my
best guess this is my best idea I'm one
person I'll be sitting at the table with
hundreds or thousands and so this is the
kernel that we can grow into a beautiful
forest together
the kernels ROI divorce it's probably
but or he can't words words that someone
else's idea might be the thing that
grows right like this is just one
person's idea the whole point is more
people coming together less central
leadership the better the more like when
this thing Falls when Kyle sees
community falls apart because Kyle falls
from grace
it shows the fragility of having
communities that are centered around one
leader
one group of ideas and that's not what
we're doing there is no Jubilee falls
from grace so together Tech falls apart
I mean right now there would be but once
the ball starts rolling gathering all
the snow once it is right and this is I
don't get to dictate to anyone what they
do nobody does nobody gets them you
don't 20 people getting together doesn't
going to create a new world that they
can roll out to the rest of the world 20
people can create a solution for 20
people or create a solution for a
hundred people and go out and find a
hundred people and a hundred people can
create a solution for a thousand people
and go out and find a thousand people
and if that wasn't they would create a
solution for 10,000 people and go out
and find that
but the more it's one person coming up
with an idea then they have to sell it
to the hundred who sell it to the
thousand it doesn't work that's an MLA
no bad but it's like we truly do embody
the solution because we were part coming
up with it we have the energy to be the
messengers to be like yes I hope to
create this app that helps us all eat
much more efficiently and ethically and
it's ten dollars a year someone coming
to you and saying that who you know and
trust you're gonna be much more likely
to pay that ten dollars a year and be
part of that especially when all the
other apps out there for food or ten
dollars a month or something right like
when we've sold when we create enticing
solutions together and then invite the
world we can't create a world that works
for everyone
so rapidly everyone except my heads
because I'm like in ten years we can be
completely never won't be like no you
can't like how they can be easy and fun
no yes okay I'm just gonna live a life
that is easy and fun well me entering
through legs and you will see as this
thing coalesce is a comes together and
that is what I'm doing you want to
follow me in that journey please like
and subscribe if you're watching this on
YouTube and if you're watching us on
periscope and want to watch me on
YouTube where I post much more content
take general I post a video a day but
isn't a live video then it is on at
jubilee Brisco no not you believers so
that is my last name but she believes
saves the world by me and raise your
life thank you I almost left the studio
that would just leave you with blank
screen