hello welcome back thanks for tuning in
in a moment I'll set some context for my
awesome conversation with Tim first some
housekeeping so as I've mentioned before
because the coronavirus my company the
circle Institute is doing all of their
having all their offerings online now so
link is below the website and the
Facebook page and you can find all the
events there if you are interested in
working with me one on one
go ahead and email me emails below also
I'll be trying to include the link in
this as well but the stoah who's had for
baekje and Jordan Hall on and a bunch of
other different people is I'm gonna be
hosting a two-hour circling event on the
seventh I believe it's at like four four
to six West Coast time and seven oh is
that right seven to ten East Coast time
so it's free so go ahead and sign up for
that I'll put the links for that below
as well alright so this was just a
wonderful awesome conversation with Tim
it was I would say
I would say was it it's kind of the
place where like the universal and the
and the personal leave together and we
went back and forth with those and and I
found him to be incredibly self
revealing and very vulnerable and yet at
the same time constantly feeling into a
deeper pulse of things and as I listened
to him I noticed I noticed myself
joining him in that and then trying to
describe what that was like so we
covered a bunch of things we covered
everything from the coronavirus to the
meaning crisis to the meadow crisis and
how it all weaves together and some of
the struggles that Tim's having in in in
doing what he does for a living which is
basically this and we talked a lot about
that and his relationship his new
relationship and how that's impacted his
life and and in what we're doing in
these conversations what the meaning of
and the importance of these
conversations and
went pretty deep with each other I
really really enjoyed this conversation
I look forward to more with him
all right so enjoy it's a it's it's kind
of long so we we weave in and out a lot
up a lot of topics but I would
definitely recommend definitely
listening to the end all the way through
the end because we go into some deep
dives and I think it'd be really
interested in listening in - all right
have a good night
Jerry there you go this is your question
yeah good to see it's good to see it so
here's a question for you okay yeah
how how do you manage the recording non
recording thing because we've just I've
just shared with you some things that
are very personal and informative of the
moment we have here together how how how
do you how do you internally sort of
navigate the shift is it kind of like a
reset or how do you how do you do it in
all these conversations you're having
here well I can tell you about some of
the conflict that comes up around it
which is really interesting I think is
yeah I notice I'm hyper aware of I don't
want people to think that there's a
means to an end going on here there's
something about like wanting to record
something that like seems to put a
future and an outcome to the
conversation that I'm embarrassed about
being seen as someone who has that
something about like just did he it is
just an internal sensitivity to to
making something because you know what
we're doing here is very it's it's so
not marketing you know it's so not like
it's not what that world is yet there's
something about the record button and
you're gonna you know it's gonna be seen
which brings up all of those all of
those meaning horizons up and I just I
think I have to sometimes tend with my
own self-consciousness
yeah yeah yeah I definitely get that
there's also the invisible to myself
layers of persona we were just talking
and I've just put on like several
invisible masks here like several
presumably and it in because the soap
because the environment changes and and
I you know I had just um you saw asked
you or posed the question you know what
is mine to do and before then we were
resonating around this feeling of what
is it to be seen yeah and that speaks
those themes in combination with this
context we now find ourselves in go
together very much for me
fundamentally in my life at the moment
and and perhaps yours as well and I know
I've always been actually deeply
uncomfortable with recording a podcast
and I've got one you know like deeply
uncomfortable with making it public and
the question is well then why are you
doing it and and the question is am I am
i chasing a sense of reality am i
chasing a contribution to reality that
through through a portal that can only
ever come up against a translucent film
and it's like oh I'm in the plastic
tunnel next to it motherfucker you know
instead of being in that one yeah so I
want I want these things to come
together and I feel like I feel like in
some sense they are but at the same time
as long as there's this there we have it
with these additional layers of fear
that show up or not fear but
self-consciousness and who's seeing this
and the whole it opens up the world of
hierarchy and prestige economy and all
of those things that we might not
our souls to be so in trammeled with but
somehow we live in this functional world
where it brings back in the whole social
world again and yeah man that is that is
an interesting thing yeah it's like
almost well it's for me I would say my
experience so far has been like I
haven't with with my stuff I haven't
really I just uploaded my YouTube
channel and maybe post it on Facebook or
something like that so I haven't really
like made that it being visible part put
much effort into that um
maybe that'll change I'm not sure but
the the I noticed that itself the
self-consciousness about being seen in a
particular way um one is that just feel
superhuman to me right because I don't I
don't know any other I don't know any I
don't know any other
organism that can trip over being itself
[Laughter]
human beings right like man it's it's
it's a being conscious of ourselves and
being conscious about being conscious
it's this loop that a teacher of my nice
to say is like you can always hear the
sound of the food bird and he says what
the food bird is is when a bird flies in
concentric circles and tighter and
tighter circles it's like the moment the
foop is the sound the moment the bird
flies up its own ass yes so we want to
go the opposite direction from that that
sounds like that sounds like the most
comical version of reciprocal closing in
that's really what he should say what
somebody knows what that is
everyone knows exactly what you're
talking about oh you're the food bird
yeah yeah there's something about that
that just so it's so funny
and it's it's so relieving to talk about
it right yeah in so many ways but I
found so far actually it's just the self
conscious comes up is this moment of
wind to press the record button because
usually most of the time we dive right
into it just like you and I did and we
just went right there and then there's
this interruption that you have to like
do it's like well wait a minute should I
be recording this I want to record that
but that was really personal like
there's a whole the whole thing that
comes up and then you're like what it
means to press the record button well
you will you think that I wasn't just
there with you and yeah yeah yeah it's
it's very interesting and well you know
and you're in an intense you know you to
kind of backtrack a little bit about
what we were talking about I think I
just really appreciate what you said you
know about having you know a what sounds
like a very a deep deeply deeply stable
presence
in your life right a relationship in
your life that's really really stable in
a deep way right in a way that I think
you said you didn't you never quite
really had it like this and such they
going to bed and waking up are less
complicated and that changes everything
and in her and also we're also in the
presence of that relationship like she
went to go like to a farm to a farm like
10 hours away or something right
mmm and you guys had just moved in
together just about a month ago two
months ago right yeah yeah well at the
time of this crisis yeah time of this
crisis and that the most secure
relationship on a deep level that you've
ever had it's had this big change during
this crisis like what's that like for
you as I said well as I as I said to you
there was so-so
okay so so I said to you that I've been
able to go to bed and wake up better so
so I her off and then I came home I went
on my bed I didn't brush my teeth you
know how you know how you like when
you're not doing too well it's like just
getting up to go brush your teeth and
just do the ritual before actually going
to bed properly it becomes like just a
crushing weight of how can I possibly
live to this thing and it's gonna delete
defeated my will you know it defeated my
will and here I want to go and be of
some service to the world I was defeated
by the tooth brush you know over there
the way so I so I slept you know and I
knew it would give me a bad night's
sleep woke up at 3:30 you know risk
getting mouth ulcers which almost always
happens to me if I don't brush my teeth
after a night I didn't fortunately which
is good and and there you go so that
broke down the ritual of that broke down
but you know I spoke to her the next day
and then navigating how I felt given
that I was deeply involved in a plan for
her to go so the feelings of abandonment
as being different
from you have abandoned me but having to
having to make sure they're on board
with where we're coming from there so
we're not just back and forth what what
you mean I abandoned you this was your
how could you make me feel that way
you know bad that you I'm not a bad but
it but it's not what I'm trying to say
but so it's from present seeing the
feelings without falling into the
blaming so maintaining the we through
that of me finding it you know and
that's a valuable thing right yeah
that's just I just get I mean it for me
you know one of the things that's
happened in the in this quarantine that
I met I'm in California so we've been
basically quarantine for like two weeks
or so and actually not a whole lot has
changed from what I do during the day
because off like I see clients during
the day usually I'm zoom and the other
change is we in my business in the where
I teach courses and stuff like that I've
always been in person so but we've moved
all those online but usually I'll teach
on weekends and in a few evenings a week
so it actually for me personally hasn't
been much of a change however my wife
has been working at home and what's so
interesting about that was like that's
gone really well like in in some way
it's been ecstatic because she she's she
gets like she gets to cook and she's
like you know asking me if I need
anything and she's just blossoming and
this wife miss right and it's ecstatic
right so in some ways that like locally
for me the whole crisis has been almost
the opposite of a crisis it's been more
in some sense more of what's good just
got better right or had me realize like
the the things most close in um it's
like Ruby it's just got closer and more
meaningful for me so if I think about
that okay so if I think about that and
instead my wife had to go across the
world
when my reality be like right like I
just it's funny I feel I feel a little
bit like yeah just kind of like
some-some layer of skin got ripped off
mm-hmm
yeah well what that brings to mind is
that this is a time of retreating quite
literally to the home but the degree to
which that's a retreat to somewhere you
want to be versus a you know a
quarantine it's it's you know the
quarantine is the language of the
opposite of retreat really isn't it and
yeah yeah and in this time of realizing
what it is we do care about nearly I
think if if there is that retreat there
and you find exactly what you've said
then that is a beautiful life-affirming
sign and I imagine there are many people
who enrich reaching home find a whole
load of demons and yeah yes is
interesting domestic violence is just
gone through the roof and you can kind
of see that coming
right yeah I mean that I think what this
gonna in in many ways I in many ways I
think that what the coronavirus is doing
right if we back up a little bit I think
it's it's it's not the crisis it's
revealing the crisis yeah right and I
think that the the and now again if I
again it's like a whole bunch of
different circumstances I'm sure I'd
feel really different like we're talking
about and as time goes on I may actually
have to start dealing with cuz I haven't
I have been no one that I know has
gotten gotten the virus like I lost
anybody right there hasn't been any big
fine it hasn't been financials so I
haven't I haven't been hit by it
personally mmm however there is there is
a sense right of
waking up to the multiple layers of
unstable structures that have first that
have been very very weak however had
worked in such a way that they don't
reveal their weakness so we build
another layer on I mean the financial
system is seems to be you know the most
exemplary of this and so everybody
generations you know at this point right
have been walking around on top of
seeming stability that that have or will
be perhaps reveal its profound
untrustworthiness I think the conv that
that's happened is speaks to something
that's been going on for a long time
right and such that you have a virus
that comes in that knocks our ability to
do and to manage those symptoms of
systems or what it takes and shuts down
and then those those systems fall apart
especially having those systems not
anticipating or rationing right prepared
even though we knew this was on so many
levels we knew this was gonna happen
right yeah I'm what to me what's
happening is it's like it's revealing a
situation that we were already in but
you're making it much more foreground
yeah yeah absolutely I feel exactly the
same way I wonder if we could sort of
explore this is like a just a purely
speculative kind of psychological
analogy and I don't mean it to be hey
this is my theory you know of the thing
that's going on right now but you know
how in a relationship one that has had a
wound there and it's a deep one it needs
to be it needs to come to the surface
but but but neither party is either
aware of it enough or perhaps possesses
the courage or capacity to navigate it
in it with its current it stings too
much
and so you know it might go on for some
time and people take little jabs at each
other and that energy that could be put
to that adaptive you use is now just
being kind of it's just further wounding
it and eventually we're gonna kind of
stumble our way into cracking into each
other and then we're going to be left on
the pieces in the floor and okay we've
got to build up from here but if we
don't have the skills or if we didn't
build that resilience in us or if the
problem is too deep well we can't rescue
it and that's what we were scared of to
begin with that I couldn't go on the
same but let's just imagine it kind of
is you know what I call that what do you
call child childhood yeah yeah oh well
it's yeah but what that brings to mind
to me is the challenge again of growing
up and being seen properly for who you
are growing really into who you are
without the without the restrictions on
that which you know people might think
are part of what's necessary for
educational and maybe in some cases yes
maybe in some cases no not an easy thing
to become who you are in this world
because if the world is a Titanic on a
high rope to nowhere well you've got to
just stay exactly where you are a high
road man yeah
and so it's like there's this to pick
back up on the metaphor it's like
there's this some almost like the
collective psyche has is revealing as
you as you put it is revealing through
in that haphazard way of just well they
actually the only way we can wake up and
see this is by collapsing and let's just
hope let's just hope that that there can
be emergence through that and I feel
there can be and but then it's so hard
guy because he always things come back
to me it's all how much do we want to
care about things you know how much
should we be caring about things and
then it opens up all the world of
potential suffering that you can
envisage which are your attachments of
what that is you know your fixations of
what that is you know millions of people
who potentially might whether it's
displaced and and and
died before their time through climate
change or some other crisis or a solar
flare we lose the grid or wall or geo
pull this potential things as all these
ways things can get so much worse and
it's like well is is the movement now to
do something about that like what are we
what is are we not accepting the
dissolution of the Phoenix into
something else like what where am I to
find myself and all of that and and how
can I be on the side of letting go
appropriately so that I can truly
reattach to what is vital right it can't
be solved in an abstract of course but
that's the difficulty of the abstract
terrain in presence ears things yeah
totally
it's also the difficulty in
relationships like as you as you started
talking about this which I really
appreciate it is like is this is this
like a dysfunctional family where
there's all this unspoken stuff that
like so everybody takes roles to manage
the anxiety and one's the scapegoat no
and it's a collective unconsciousness
that does games energy and starts
beating itself upright and comes to its
demise and then tragically you look back
and go oh that was xavius the whole time
right are we inside of that mmm great
question yeah I mean and you look at I
feel strange even for reference Donald
Trump because it's almost become such a
cliche thing to even say but the guy is
a reality TV star and all he is and he's
he's playing his robe like you couldn't
have written a script like this to cast
a character like that no one ever
watched that you'd have to have the best
skit actor in the world who could just
hold the roast ridiculous like like
ironic intensity just to have people
buying in just every time the ridiculous
things that are said you're like no he
can't hold that space can he and he does
you'd have to have that in a show to
make it work and there's no one who's
ever acted as well as that yes yes yes
any select as good as Donald Trump can
live himself totally sit there is it is
it is if Brett Weinstein can talk about
like politics is basically
national wrestling everyone knows it's
that real they're not really fighting
right yet there's something there's
something there's that the clown shows
going on and everyone agrees to give up
knowledge that is they could even know
it right but they're it's a strange time
I think it's really revealing of a very
strange time I can imagine as well that
it's like so I've never been to I used
to watch WWE when I was I think it still
living in England so maybe seven eight
years old I'd wake up and I'd see the
rock and I'd love it you know I'd love
it and so I have like an energetic
relation to that stuff never watched it
after that but the thing is what about
those people in the crowd hey because
they do get into it they really do care
and even they know it's not real but
they really do care and if you were to
turn to your family member and say all
of a sudden what you doing man were you
taking this seriously it'd be like what
the fuck you know this is some come on
man and and so you could have a real
argument about not playing into that
flow truth yeah and that seems to have
been magnified and magnified and so
finding the soul through that finding
connecting back to this space that's
Beyond and deeper than all of that it's
like where man all those layers of kind
of a sickly layer cake to just feel once
way through back down all that stuff to
be burned off is so poor since Sun on
one level that it even occurs to us to
get on zoom and have a conversation
about this right mm-hmm
on some level there's a there's a way
and I think you could probably
appreciate this but I kind of feel like
I'm like an ant on top of an elephant or
something right
that that something happens and I
realize it wasn't even an elephant right
that I didn't know I was on right it's
this level of just being so so finite
right that the inside
think that's one thing I can say for
sure is I really don't have any
certainty about anything about what I'm
looking at hey yeah however there's
something about you can as you often say
it's like well we can all we can only
start from where we are right and there
is something about I think genuine
philosophical dialogue right genuine
philosophy Oz genuine inquiry right
everything that all the things that when
we think we think about are the deep
things the paradoxical things seem to
start from there right seem to start
from there and so I'm not sure but from
this and on top of the elephant that it
didn't know that it it isn't done there
is this sense of where I think about
just watching the Renaissance the
intellectual Renaissance it's happening
right now like where you're watching
we're watching on some level philosophy
and deep thought and these kinds of
things could not just be in academia and
so some would argue that it's actually
moving out of academia and it's moving
more into the public's space and there's
we're finding out there's lots of people
that actually our are up for these kinds
of conversations are up for genuine
dialogue or up for the mystery or have
been thinking about it and internet
social media is it just seems to one
open up a bunch of different horizons
that make it possible for that to be
revealed on some level so there's so the
part part of the strangest thing about
it why it's kind of like hard to press
the record button is because I actually
don't know what my role in this is like
there's a way where I'm right and some
level I'm writing a book but I don't
know who I am in a relationship to that
I like I'm gonna find that out yeah and
so there's there's this weird there is
this dichotomy that what is worthy of
thinking about what is worthy of
contemplating it seems to be very tied
to the
sense of really being able to turn
towards and be vulnerable or transparent
to the mystery yes right yes so
beautifully said yeah yeah me through it
all a place of retreat I can find and
have found irrespective of anyone in my
life is a retreat to in my case it's a
the page with writing and all that is in
some sense is the last bastion of a
place of where it's okay to be
vulnerable and to to both be maximally
vulnerable which by the way still as I'm
sure you've realized it's still
extremely difficult to be even in the
privacy of your own journal it's still
extremely difficult to be and often I
often I think about my own expression as
I think the degree to which I don't feel
safe enough to express Who I am is the
degree to which I add about 1000 words
on to every sentence yeah yeah and I can
add 1000 words on to every sentence I
should I don't have to stop with that so
yeah and that puts an interesting spin
on philosophy because I feel very much
the inadequacy of the philosophical
institutions of our time I have and here
we will like this comes up against
wounds that are for me is still very
much active because there was a place
where I had for a moment the thought
that perhaps this could be somewhere for
me and that's many years ago now maybe
probably eight years ago where I I would
have had their their aspiration of that
and then it was sort of I always
gradually revealed to me in stark ways
and I almost failed my masters I failed
essays because every time I wrote in a
way that was growth fall for me
expansive of my own mind and novel and
creative and beautiful every time I
wrote something beautiful it was it was
criticized and and the so so so it's
there's like so that's an interesting
link the relationship between history
puzzler got the thing that you said so
it's like whenever I think what I heard
you say is like basically when I move
towards self revelatory world revelatory
movements of beauty that opened into new
territory expanded reveals and was
revealed to and by and I turned the
outcome of that into the institution's
right is it kind of like what I hear is
on one level I hear like a personal like
ouch
like like visit is that part but I also
is it is it kind of like that is it is
it something like the institution's it's
also there's a tragedy on the side of
the institutions that they weren't able
to actually read that that was happening
and value it mmm
then it came out instead his criticism
that wasn't that missed it that missed
what was actually beautiful and personal
about it is then yeah I think that's I
think that's a very fair way of putting
it and I mean what I did do was catalyze
me to build a place where I could talk
where I could communicate in that deep
way and express some of my ideas very
tentatively and I've slowly begun to
introduced a few things here and there
in conversations but it's interesting
because I'm doing it from a place where
well my writing and my thoughts you know
there are in there in books that aren't
even digitally written because I mean I
have written some stuff up digitally but
you know but because that was and that
is the place where I am at that that's
that's the best of me but also the most
like they're not written to be seen I
don't really like anyone even looking in
there I occasionally show my you know
girlfriend one or two things but it's
it's my own personal commune with the
here and now for the purpose of absolute
baseline building of coherence and and
effective and loving relationship with
with life which I call loving
transformation but where to show that
where to be with that you know it's it's
because the second we put the record
button on this the second we present
that in any way right what is it to
market that what is it to box that up
what is it appeal to people with that I
truly I have I truly I don't know and I
am still in the dark about what and
where and how for that to be seen if it
should be seen and this is perhaps you
know fundamental to what we're all
experiencing maybe yeah totally so I
just really felt a lot when he said
actually it's just I wrote that without
not not not with I wrote it not for
somebody to read and occasionally and
then he said occasionally I'll like read
like a little bit of it to my girlfriend
right
we're somebody important to me but even
that's a lot right so there's like a
nakedness it comes there's a nakedness
there that there's something about
tolerating the nakedness of the response
that could come right that seems like it
would just go there's a there's a
there's I think what I'm feeling into is
just this kind of sense of this
difference between there's something
about like when you rode you were being
profoundly vulnerable mmm-hmm when you
move through it being read you feel
exposed potentially potentially it's I I
think I am so it's tip towards that way
of exposure that makes sense how would
you put well well I wonder about the
very like the felonious the sincere
felonious of expression itself you know
that even here and now if we were to
mistake my expression in some sort of
isolated box from wherever the
contextual relationship of this and
everything else was which no one has
access to all of that perspective right
so my expression is made true is true in
relationship to that which in fact no
one can can be all with we can be kind
of with a relationship with each other
but there's a full onus in that my
expression becomes it's like it's like
it's a fading note you know and it was
part of something but it's a fading note
and there's what we really are I think
what we feel we really are is actually
the thing which notes right the thing
which plays and so there's the
inadequacy but the beautiful tragic
inadequacy
but then also because there's that says
there's a tragedy in affirming that
artistic impulse affirming expression
itself is so beautiful and so and that's
why we we we value you know we value it
so much and we respect it so much and we
you know it touches us so much but in
all of that artistic expression it is
forlorn ultimately because we cannot
ever capture we cannot ever capture but
for playing a small part in the
revelation of this flowing artistic
co-creation that we're all inexorably a
part of mmm-hmm right so there's this
other part of it like what I think I
heard you say that reminds me actually
of cuz I went to I moved up I moved to
San Francisco originally to go to the
San Francisco Art Institute which I just
actually got notice that it's closing
right after 150 years of existence
just a couple days ago which I'm still
kind of groggy and I paint and sculpt
and and I've been doing that ultimate
like my whole life and and it's really
interesting because I remember my first
showing and I had my first showing at
the cafe that I got coffee at every
morning because I was like friends with
the owners and stuff like that no like
hey you want to show your stuff and I
had these Eve I was pretty ambitious I
had these like I was known for like
sculpting things that it were too big to
get out of the building so I would have
to pick them up I still have I still
have cultures oh what a beautiful what a
beautiful metaphor that is oh my words
because I was applying that to much
sculptures like like laying around and
people's for my friend's backyard
somewhere but the but I remember this I
got a lot about what it is to be an
artist right and the relationship to the
the work of art and the artist because I
go and get my coffee and you know they
were these huge painting so they were
like it was clearly art was on the walls
right and so I I'd be sitting and I like
I'd be in line and then I'd hear people
getting a conversation about it and they
start talking about what this like you
know they were these figurative kind of
michelangelesque kind surrealistic huge
things and and so I would hear them
interpret the meaning of it and it
wasn't what I meant and it would just
drive me crazy
right like I'm like that's not what I
meant like that's not what I meant
and I I after wrestling with that for
about two weeks I started to have this
sense of like this question started to
be introduced in my mind of well whose
is it
like like really like is it is it just
my expression and therefore i am i have
sole proprietorship over its meaning or
is it an event between the viewer and
the work itself that's that that is no
longer it's no longer guy saying stocks
work and I got to witness that over and
over and I also got to witness my
attachment to what it to what it meant
but but kind of realizing is that there
is something about the artistic being an
artist is to put yourself in a position
where you are constantly burr living
giving birth to and being birthed by
something that you don't that is in many
ways beyond you yeah and you gotta let
go of yeah it's so goddamn personal yeah
because you just put everything into
that painting right like just the idea
that they can like misinterpret it and
that but here's the thing is it like
oftentimes you know
if you read say like Heidegger reads
Coldren hölderlin and Heidegger is
basically hearing what Holdren is doing
about revealing these deep truths about
the shift in the metaphysics of the
history of being right
and I guarantee you Holdren didn't have
any fucking idea that that's what he was
doing
right I would imagine at best if he read
Heidegger's work like what Heidegger
like fully thought out what he was
saying okay I bet I bet Holdren would be
like he could feel like the echo of like
oh yeah that did there was a obviously
there's this edge of his intelligibility
like oh yeah I'm glad someone said it
right yeah but I but I'm sure most of
the time he'd be like me in the cafe so
is it there's this interesting thing
where and and I know that Heidegger
would say said this about when he's like
look all you need to know is he was born
he wrote and he died that's about all
you need to know that there's something
there's something else happening that
goes beyond our own personal biography
even what the creator write intended to
say what ends up being said right when
it's art it can be it can speak to the
the whisper of the senseability moving
through the culture that no one can hear
until a hundred years later yet there's
this dichotomy of like as the artists
you got to just you got to just paint
with your own blood practically for it
yeah but you don't even necessarily know
what you're saying
lots of seems like ontological breaths
and convulsions and things happening
over there hearing all that well that I
think you I think you just said
something that is more or less complete
you know you just said something that
you said something that's the kind of
thing that were looking at and I would I
would like to say some things about it
but the pause is worth taking because
I'll be only dressing things up in
another in other words and when the push
comes to shove what I think is most
valuable about what you just said is
like deity so that was like a that was I
could crumb of truth and in response to
that drum of truth I don't think the
right responses is to is to be like let
me see if I can play that drama of truth
in in a different way but have it be the
same drum of like it's like what does
that make me do it's it's like it it
moves to action it moves to action you
know so like how can I embody that in my
life and it is it's - it's to accept it
fundamentally it's to accept it and
there's it's the same
of acceptance that that your expression
there allowed me to tune into that is
the acceptance I mention to you before
we started recording recording about
sort of just lying in bed with my
girlfriend or someone who you know
accepts your expression into the world
for what it is because there's because
it's beneath because it's beneath the
requirement for the expression to amount
to anything that you can point at and
say that's the thing yeah there's a -
there's a in your response like I think
is one of the ways I find you to be
really artful right because there's an
awareness of the context
not only what I just said but there was
you were you presents something was just
said and then you what I really
appreciate it is you articulated the
context around that and like held it up
and now the the relationship you're
tending to the relationship between us
right so there's this kind of intimacy
it's not just it's not just personal
self disclosure but you're tending to I
just said something
the first thing that you responded to
was how one that it was said and how
what is the way to best respond to this
and he talked about the drum how do i
how do I beat that drum or how do I
something about the drum there's there's
attending there's attending to something
there that is I think is really quite I
just appreciate that about you hmm
yeah yeah well thank you god I could get
egg whatever it is I can whatever it is
you're attending again you feel myself
sink into it
hmm and it does seem like it does seem
like when your your something's taught
to bring you to language and you attempt
to do it and it's difficult to do it it
seems to me that it's because
you're listening to something you're
looking at something in your your your
hearing at first year you're seeing at
first and then and then struggling to
say it there's an intimacy within the
expression and just seems very artful to
me hmm
yeah thank you and why that would be is
we can reference what you what you just
said moments before because this is this
is the dynamic it is the it is the
vulnerable but aspirational I would say
inadequacy but it depends on what your
goal is inadequate if you're trying to
get the thing if you're trying to
capture the thing you know but but the
aspiration in in treating the treating
the the pulse of the insight the the the
rhythm it's like it's it's because what
what can we do really what what can we
do in this time this time is about the
bush fires were metaphorically about a
lot of stuff was going on but it's like
what is the lesson burn off what is not
serving you before nature burns all of
it off including you
you know and and now it's like well what
is it we should be caring about and for
me that process is metaphorically
referenced by what are those what are
the what are the deep drums like how can
we how can we tune into those deep drums
and we hear that pulse and when we know
it's a pulse of those deep drums to act
in accord with it not to be stuck there
but to go again right to to be to be on
the poster it's a collective thing so so
and look okay so this is
this is you quite care so you care you
care about that
I care about that yeah yeah I care about
that yeah that's why I'm here
really yeah yeah the reason why I do the
podcast at all is because I I think in
being so detached from participation in
those in that process somehow that
there's such a absence of of tuning into
that you know in at least what I was
seeing and there was it's doing it's
doing that thing I just I we we have to
be more in touch we have to be more in
touch and I've never been able to accept
when someone tells me the way it is and
I don't feel it's that way
I've never excited never been able to
accept it and and I think people know
that about me I think it's made a lot of
things for me less easy because it's
much easier sometimes when someone is
just willing to go along with something
but to the extent I'm willing to go
along with something I don't feel it is
right the level of the level of godit's
it's like it's like it's like you it's
like I feel like a I turn off like 99%
of my capacity and I don't even have the
words to speak sentences I say I'm a
million times and because you're trying
to navigate through a tiny little box up
here it's like oh wait what are all the
lies that in our being we're telling
each other right now in order for me to
convince you that I'm someone who can do
this job for you in business right now
and that's what I really want to do and
what I'm passionate about I am NOT
passionate about that thing at all at
all at all we're in big trouble
existentially deep trouble civilly no
it's really it's really it's a real
problem and and I can see it in your
eyes and I can see it in your eyes that
you're not happy to be here and I could
be the person to talk to you right now
we could do that
maybe I could be some way you know I
could say
something and maybe you tell me to fuck
off and with your eyes but there would
be something they would it be like there
was it that little at play
someone's played the drum you know and
it spurred you into being from somewhere
that's now slightly more in tune and and
that's that is what we need and that is
that is a risky and vulnerable thing
that pulse when he said that pulse
that's a psyche I just kept feeling like
just being right on that pulse hmm right
and in some level some level I'm feeling
into that pulse and and therefore when
some but something the world shows up is
not that pulse
there's dissonance right that's what I'm
kind of hearing you say but in some way
the suffering about it like the
suffering around or the dissonance
around or the struggle around all
presupposes the pulse hmm and this when
he said pulse I just I just like
listening to you just cohered through
through your cells to my to my hearing
and I've just been listening kind of
like oh yeah it is so that is what
you're feeling into it's think it's like
a pulse mm-hmm and it's there's
something so so what is it to realize he
so I use the word transcendent the pulse
deeper than a particular post the
transcendent pulse the deep drums what
is it to realize the deep drums that can
Co hear the music of dissonant yeah
pulses or drums up here that is that is
what we need we need like and we have
that we have that onboarding us in that
we have the machinery we have the
processes they're very processes which
make life possible are what we can
realize and cultivate in each other in
authentic expression as you do as
you do that enable us to be with a pulse
deeper than what was isolating us
previously and that is the core of the
the the sacred making capacity we have
and that statement has to apply to it
applies but applying that to the full
stack it's like yes that religion that
religion that religion you actually have
to be able to worship the same be in
with the same sense of sacredness and
that's what we need and if we don't find
that if we don't make that happen and
that's what I'm attached to that's if I
give up on the attachment of that
happening one day then I've actually
given up on this the possibility of this
iteration of the pulse continuing hmm
yeah I love this I really loved how it
just kind of came together and cohered
do you in that moment just loved him
yeah it's really great for me well thank
you thank you for the opportunity guy
yeah
I wanted to say that when you told the
story of your own journey with sculpting
creating a work of art mm-hmm realizing
that the creation of that thing became
an event a love entity and of an event
an occasion to be participated in with
others that actually was the more vital
thing than what you thought about this
thing even though you're birthing of
that was very much also that yeah yeah
what that brought up for me
pragmatically was that in the project of
what I'm in the project of what I'm
doing with voice club as it became void
his craft I've been aware of for a long
time that my own following my own
authenticity in the moment is inadequate
to the the aim of what it needs to be
and I i've released things on it before
where I'm not involved and that is the
aim but being but releasing control of
that has not been something I've been
able to do and that's partly because of
basic Maslow's security reasons is that
I've poured my life into it and I've you
know I've been eating off credit cards
for years and and it's made no money
it's only cost me money of course you
know the patreon has very little on it
but there's a sense in which well if if
it grows I need the money so I can live
and how but but even that has been an
issue and so what it needs to happen is
that it needs to be opened up and become
a true collective and that's what I want
and in a small way if if you would and
you know as you know I've said to you
before and I've said in an introduction
to a podcast as well there's there's
mastery in what you do and and if if you
would like to publish some of the
conversations you're having where you
just do it to youtube if you want to
publish them audio wise on the podcast
then I would I would love for that to
happen and well I also um you know and I
did this I need to open it up so that we
can all participate in in it
and if that doesn't work then then I'm
going through this thing of thinking
what should I be doing you know maybe my
energy needs to go somewhere else but
I'm not quite at that point yet
mm-hmm so yeah relinquishing you know
yeah and even though I know it's true
like I'd been there before
do you know what I mean I but there's a
sense in which that took me right to
that place again
and it wouldn't mean I wouldn't say a
lie but maybe towards that way if I
didn't express this to you right now so
yeah anyway that's that I want to make
sure that I got the thing that you
expressed sure I'm not sure if I did did
I think what you expressed is so this
has been an art for me and I've poured
myself and my money into it right and
then there was something else you said
that was that I want to feel I want to
feel the relationship between the two
and then they said and it's coming to a
point where I really I wanted to be
collective mm-hmm I need to open it up
right and then there's a the other part
which is like well I also needed to make
money because I'm I would imagine
because I'm running out of it right
like
you
in there it then there was an invitation
to become part of the collective right
yeah which of those was the thing that
you wanted to what was the thing that
you wanted to admit wouldn't it suck to
like have like like have confessed right
then the the father heard the wrong
thing so it didn't count ya know you
will leave out all the pieces yeah you
laid out all the pieces the the thing
that has to be admitted an omitted is my
the sensibility I have toward the
ownership of it and I haven't been
trying to own it you know it hasn't been
that way but I I just haven't understood
how to actually do it
how do you actually well have people you
know like I haven't understood it
logistically and I'm not that great at
logistical stuff like that you know I'm
just not and it takes a lot of my energy
I don't have it you know I'm I'm I'm
with you on that one yeah yeah and so I
mean I can participate in the high-level
strategic discussion about it and then
I'm like okay where do I do with my hand
button do i press like yeah yeah what do
I pay attention to yeah so it's the part
to do with that and because the thing
is that you you already are a part of it
do you know what I mean that's the thing
about it you actually already are a part
of it the most I can aspire to do is
gesture at the thing we are already
doing to the extent we are realizing
ourselves together with each other it's
simply to gesture and invite people to
be here now
with each other in a mutual learning
environment Norah Bateson's excellent
erm samatha see a mutual learning
environment they I think like a mutual
growth environment informed by the
authentic dialogue you know dialogue Oz
however we want to talk about that where
we can develop our own capacity to
listen to express you know to to join in
a shared voice of understanding
informative of how to be in the world
and making sense of what to care about
caring in that process I've just written
a million things trying to express the
same idea over these years and and
[Music]
anyway so you already are a part of it
but if you would like to as I said
something practical is that if you would
like to release some of the
conversations you know you're having
through that I would I'd love to do that
and beyond that I am inviting people
into group conversations and it would be
lovely to have you along too one way
when you have the time or or more and
just beyond that I I want to open this
to people listening as well this is
something we actually need to all be
involved with together and so yes got it
yeah having just said all that what's
what's there for you
me yeah what's there for me is the
satisfaction with saying the
appreciation that you heard it the the
satisfaction that you didn't just say no
that yeah I think there's various the
possibility that's like a meaningful
course we could take together just some
to some end and obviously communicate
that about that completely but but yeah
you know on an ongoing basis but also
that I know that there's a certain
discontinuity coming when we hang up
from this call and there is a sense in
which I'm going to be here again back
with back with the feeling that I'm
having to push my way still towards the
mountain rather than be pulled towards
it and sometimes I'm pulled and most of
the time I've been pushing pretty hard
like I feel very strongly that mask
masculine principle having to push
things ain't no one ain't no one coming
to rescue me man it's never been that
way you know and and it's for some
people that's their appropriate way of
being and we always do both you know
it's always both it's always a dance but
man I just never felt that like that
thing to be rescued yeah and so yeah and
there's a tiredness I have with with
that but also you know and it but I know
I won't give up on it you know so it's a
matter of keeping on really yeah totally
I think it's like a couple of things
like what is
I think part of well so what I'm hearing
and I would appreciate cuz I could feel
it when he says like yeah I'm kind of
like part of his tires like it's a lot
you got a schedule people you got to
figure out when you put stuff on like I
would imagine making the picture that
you put on this thing I would I would
imagine probably I think that way too
much time doing that stuff my leg you
got it where you found it way better
where to put your attention on what's
the most important thing these are like
there's so many logistical things that
go on with this and on top of it a
tremendous standard that you have to
stay on the pulse of it and the pulse
itself doesn't doesn't seem to give you
any directions on the strategic the
strategy of how to make it work right
but there's a there's a necessity to
make it work which is probably the push
part and then there's the the calling
that even has you bother to have it
worth it right which is the pulse that
you have a standard to be true to mmm
but the the doing of it and the pulsing
of it are not they don't necessarily
account for one another mm-hmm and so I
just I think I'm as I'm bringing words
that I'm just bringing words to I think
all everything that I heard I'm just
appreciating that mm-hmm
yeah there's something about
I have and I don't know how helpful this
frame is psychologically I think it's
probably not very helpful
psychologically but evolutionarily
there's this well we know that more
women have reproduced than men and I
think for every two female ancestors in
our genetic line there's one male so
some men had many kids some didn't and
there's a sense that the that kind of
masculine pushing you know is something
that fails and can fail all about trying
not to fail yeah yeah yeah and so
there's I've never been without the like
part of that acceptance going back to
lying on that bed and being like
accepting what is it's about accepting
that these these efforts actually well
it quite quite literally like that is
the side of it it may not work out
according to what you hope and and in an
in an ultimate way yeah yeah even still
it's worth it and and accepting that and
really feeling that you know and yet yes
so that's the refuge you know it's and
that's the refuge we need I hope more of
us we must it's the only recourse the
acceptance of death in that sense you
know we have to accept our death for the
whole we have to accept our death for
the collective pulse to continue and
yeah and right now we're going through
this thing where we're stimulating our
economies and for those who are hoping
for things to go back to normal you know
to what degree are we not accepting a
death that is going to only come back
around
but we see em so inadequately placed at
the moment to accept these things on a
large scale and of course this speaks to
the whole meaning crisis and everything
and there's so much depth to go into
there and so if there's one idea - -
presence here that's I think quite a
radical idea when I think this yeah well
I think it's in touch with what we've
discussed as well and something has been
on my mind an image the image of it in
my mind used to play out for me as okay
so I'm on a stage now maybe it's where
the mainstream outlet right in a
beautiful theatre and this is a place
where people paid quite a lot of money
for their ticket and they're all quite
well connected and they're all the
people of society the ones who might be
oriented orienting to something
meaningful and important but they are
the it's like it is the stage so to
speak which is I mean that almost
ironically because of course the stage
as well is you with the pen yeah but but
on that stage all of a sudden in that
frequency where everyone's kind of
nodding along like that was just the
amount of radicalness we were here to
see right we feel kind of titillated and
thrilled and we're all quite pleased
about that
yeah and then all of a sudden it's like
oh actually we detect a turn left - turn
left on that and whether it's - you feel
like a prime minister just quite
literally taking off the clothes and
saying we are all going to die yeah the
notion of of dropping of cracking of
piercing back into the deeper layer
layer of collective awareness into that
space that's already there but has been
covered by the veil right and then we've
forgotten about it as you put it such a
beautiful expression
and a beat but having care yet for that
process having care yet for that process
and that's why in many ways I've been my
experience in having these conversations
not today not with you but so often I
feel I'm showing up as 10% of what I am
and I say as I said a thousand words to
say a sentence because maybe I'm not
ready to go that's fucking ridiculous or
something like that or be the more
aggressive side of myself or be more
fully who I write and it's it's partly
because there's a vulnerability in that
but it's partly as well because I have a
care for being gentle and being caring
with the co-movement of moving towards
that place of dropping things but when
does it become appropriate to impress
upon people that no this is a time now
of significance really this is this is
of an important time and to do that with
the fullest kind of intensity that
really is is can only come and comes
from an encounter with with with the
death and all of its torturous
relationship to us that the level of the
the void of non-being the abyss of that
right the pain of of that the fear of
that but to a per to do that in a way
that affirms it rights away they're
gradually with each other I don't like I
don't really like upsetting people if if
you can't if you can't extend if you're
not there with them if you can't care
for it yeah so it's tending to that
thing and I'm not sure how much I'm not
sure mm-hmm I'm not sure this is the
first time expressing that sort of
publicly and there's you know it's just
about how much you want how much we want
to amp the art of that how much we want
to amp the art of that yeah and all
participate in the amp and like in the
art of that but have the the have the
grounding have the have the resilience
to be with that and have that be
something positive this is yeah totally
totally so there's there's a sense in
which here's what you're saying is
yeah I'm concerned about like is my is
my desire to be kind right and to be
relational and considerate is it wise is
it is it is it wise right like is it am
I am i worshipping the right god right
what I'm doing that and there's I so
what I hear you say is like I sometimes
have this sense that like I feel a burn
or a fire or a convulsion come through
like a rage almost of uh of something
like wake the fuck up and you know what
if I should be saying that and I'm not
yeah who should I say it to and like yet
these are really these are really really
really really really important questions
that I think are I think they're really
important and it's not obvious what what
the whys what the wise thing is to do
right yeah yeah it's not it's not yep I
had a conversation last night with a
good friend of mine about initiation and
as part of a series I'd like to do on it
and invite people into multi person
conversations to feel into and discuss
this notion and there was the sense that
through it it got to a point where it
was like is it appropriate to share this
how open-sourced should even the genuine
inquiry into understanding what
initiation is be or lineage making be
how open-source should that process be
because it's this it's this mixture of
the radical vulnerability but if the
ground cannot hold that if it cannot if
it's not present in a way where exactly
as you say there can be the growth
enabled from it yeah it's this with such
a weird balance and um I honestly I
don't quite know what to do about it you
know
[Music]
but I've gone I've gone a I've gone a
bit further than previously today gone a
bit further than previously today yes at
the end of the video you know only
people who are really resonating are
going to get that far
and so that's the interesting thing
right like bottling yourself up into a
three-minute video for the intent to
grab attention right then that's where
marketing kind of comes in right it's
hacking it's hacking immediately like
the attentional disposition getting
someone effectively feeling like all
this matters to my dreams and fantasies
and nightmares right now and I can I can
by buying this product I can I can move
myself somewhere toward that or away
from that which is which is really we're
working with that fundamental and
fundamental framing yeah so at once
being gentle with that but still urgent
that is and all the traps and all the
traps of taking on too much of the
persona that comes with that kind of
thing right that the on the spiritual
kind of thing the danger of the type of
the way of the Guru the danger of
mistaking the Messianic impulse to being
that which is only in you and and people
do that but of course it's always about
pointing it back it's we we all need if
we truly if we don't all go no one goes
that's the thing we actually requires
all of us and it's moving that way and
Daniel smacking Berger makes this point
so well in reference to you know
exponential tech plus rivalry is self
terminating I mean it's just one way of
putting what is the the the trajectory
of things and it's kind of in some way a
kind of an abstract point in reference
to this kind of thing and it's it's the
body Sadler you know understanding but
it really it really is that way and yet
and yet there are these steps we take up
where the rifts we throw out into the
universe some of which
of which do not contribute resonance but
in fact fall off as dissonance the
attempt in doing that is necessary to
move perhaps when one lands it moves the
collective in a direction and that is
that is a powerful idea yeah yeah I ever
feel you know it's something I feel I've
been thinking about this last like 20
minutes ago it keeps breaking into my
attention a that this amazing our
teacher when I was in art school and he
really stood out because it's because
where I was where I went to school was
like that's like the most avant-garde
place in the world and it was really
strange he was a strange experience
because I thought I was gonna i I came
from a little town in in northern
Arizona and moved out to San Francisco
to go to art school and I thought I
would be having conversations like this
like but actually actually I was kind of
seen as the weirdo because I was like
healthy right I still smoked cigarettes
a time but I was like healthy I was like
you know like I was making my living as
a trainer and a stripper and like what
stuff and I wanted to talk to people but
people like the artists were slowly very
introverted and kind of angsty and kind
of very often it was completely
different than I was imagining it you
know so I was quite shocked with that um
and there was one art teacher though
that was just really special like he was
really he's kind of classically trained
artist he had that sensibility to him he
wasn't totally in the whole postmodern
kind of thing right and he really stood
out to me and he had this this British
accent this really kind of cool British
accent he'd give these amazing critiques
that were like they were like uh
spiritual revelations they were always
so inspiring right and one of the things
he said just kind of in passing that
that changed my life actually and I
think I'm still if I think about it I
think I still am operating that way
as he said look and some level it's
obvious but when he said when he dropped
it it just it hit me I wasn't expecting
you to hit me in just the right place he
says being an artist isn't a business
decision it's a lifestyle decision yeah
it's a lifestyle decision and and all of
a sudden I just I felt this huge relief
right um
that I didn't I didn't even know I was
already tense about right cuz at some
level there's this thing in the back
your mind you're going to do a lot of
debt for school like a painting how's
this gonna happen you know there's all
these uncertainties so there's this kind
of pressure the background that was the
only of that to be thinking about but
when he said that I realized like I got
relieved of a pre-sub position I was
living inside of which was the measure
like Miss placing the measure of my of
my success and what kind of choice I
actually made and it was interesting
because if what you're choosing is a
lifestyle a mode of life right then
you're and you don't have to try to make
your art to your business it's not a B
you're not doing it so so as to make
money or whatever whatever you do
businesses for then you really then you
were free right to be flexibly basically
have a style of life that allows you to
get closer and closer and closer and
closer into the work and that that is
the success is being able to likely be
able to let go into the process that
most grips you right your your interest
in your attention and I I I would say
this I still I think operate that way
I still operate that way and I just so
so there's there's a part of me that's
kind of you know hearing some of the
things that you're struggling with and
I'm like to me like he you you're
clearly like a poet like you're you
your art your art your artistic right
you're like you just want to like you
just want to merge whatever the pulse of
the cosmic question and just fucking
have no difference between you and it
anything other than that is just
suffering right yeah right right it's
the students you don't have any say-so
over that so so to get that to go like
this yeah Hertz might hurts me
it's tough big like it's tough being guy
and like feeling a feeling that
expectation right yeah yeah so I just
want to like say it's like I think I
think what you're what we may be you
know again like like an ant on top of
the elephant
I don't even didn't even know wasn't an
elephant right like on top of that seems
to me that what we're exemplifying is a
process not an outcome right that for
example like people I think will
probably listen to this and what they're
what they'll be left with I think if
we're successful the success will be
they'll be left with having just engaged
in a mode of being and a process right
that they'll try to articulate with
things we said or ideas about this but
really I think what we're presenting or
inviting people into is a by definition
is a process right and so I just think
that that is that I think is what I see
you doing - right yeah with your work
yes right it's like you're you're you're
you're you're trying to exemplify or
display and become increasingly more
masterful
and opening up a place in the universe
where something like that happens right
and that and that you aren't you it's
that is the product if you will if you
want to put it in that language right
the the product isn't a set of
propositions right but it's to to that
mysterious sense of whatever it is it
has when open up to follow the movement
of showing right so yeah yeah yeah the
involvement with like your involvement
with what is shown it's the it's the
collapse between audience and stage yeah
yeah in some important sense in by
definition it's kind like I think is one
of the things I'm getting from from
reading with Chris the dialogues we're
just like you know maybe a little over
halfway through the first one it's
already blowing my mind you just get
this sense of there is this sense in
which dialo goes like and one level what
you're literally you're reading words
you're reading a conversation right you
can't not read it by being in the
conversations so so interesting to read
it because you start to feel like alka
by DS right being you become ELCA by DS
listen to socrates and you're watching
yourself kind of fall in love with
Socrates of being made a fool of and
there's these repeated questions and
your there's these tensions that start
to be enacted right and they're through
the whole thing it's really starts to be
revealed like that the whole thing so
far is like you just start to circle
around this what a hollow right like the
thing that starts to get built up is the
thing that you can't say
right it's like this this walks here
around you Deacon symbols your identity
like you know he's like asking question
after question and somehow there's you
get closer and closer into this thing
that is more and more unknown but more
and more present and there's this kind
of tricky part where you kind of don't
I'm well on one level there's some point
where even Socrates isn't Socrates
Socrates is something else that's kind
of walking around in this in this way of
that which is most as point important is
the thing that can't be said but like
we're gonna get as close as possible to
it and become someone who can aspire to
that which you can't even articulate
right and so there's a way in which
dialogue is really important and is one
of the things I've I've come to really I
it seems like it seems like discover
with John right for baekje of that the
dialogue right in in dialogue owes right
is in terms of in his language the
ecologies of practices right one of the
things he says any points that I agree
with him is that you know in a lot of
like the authentic practices and the you
know the yoga practices the embodiment
practices and all the things that are
their response to the meeting crisis
right that he's partaking of like he
he's totally a student of them and he
says they give one of the big things
that's missing for him is his dialogue
OSes philosophy yeah right no not Act
not the academic form of philosophy
right it's more the engagement of
philosophical aporia right of insight
right of stepping back or stepping into
and back and discovering what's here and
the thing I think I've I've appreciated
not and I if something's clicked in for
me here is is that it in like philosophy
a may not it
it's not that it's just something that's
missing that could be there and it'd be
nice if it was there and it improved
things that it was there but it may be
the thing that if it's not there it's
not a full response right that it's like
that that deep philosophical
conversations that can alter your
identity may actually be it may be
necessary like it's not a conversation
that you could have or not have or take
relieve that is at the fundament of
being human and that and that that it
being bound in the enacted in just
academia in the particular way that it
is that it coming into into the public
sphere or if you want to call it that
and having it becomes something that's
beautiful and attractive to engage it is
not just nice it's like actually it's
the difference between a full response
to being alive or not you know what I'm
saying
and that's it's for me that is uh that's
been some of the results of just
engaging in the process of finding that
out because I've always been drawn to
that stuff but I've never quite really
had anybody to talk to about it at that
level right sure um so having people to
talk at that level and then just kind of
realizing that oh my god this is what I
okay this is why I've been so burning
about this and I just didn't quite have
the people to do it with that then could
step back and then talk about it and
engage in it there's it's so it's
crucial it's not just mmm it's not just
something that would make something
better it's it's in the very necessary
of of life and if it's missing it's a
profound missing yeah yeah
yeah that's so beautifully articulated I
thoroughly agree yeah hmm and insane
yeah keep going all right I was just
gonna say it's the UM if if I was to
prohibit myself from or someone wants to
take away from me the the very essence
of inquiry with the world the essence of
relating to the world yeah it's it's
it's the it's the art form of the
relating principle it's that it's the
art form of relating relation to each
other and the world so it's like what
what are we there is no there there's
only there's only an absurd tragedy in
the opposite direction of that right
right right right oh and we look around
and we see a lot of absurdity and no
shortage of tragedy with no with no
reverence of the tragedy right like you
know I'm saying it's like there's just a
trend there's a tragic dimension to
existence in fact it's like this is one
of the things about being human in being
right sighs it's kind of like but that
our very eyes is what Heidegger and so
many other people have talked about with
death in our finitude it's we bring
something really special to the world
right but it's also we bring what is
most finite we bring our finitude into
all of it and it gathers into a sunset
right
in it and we know we're gonna die and
that's like tragic like every single
isn't like an ontological existential
pressure like nothing would all the
anything would be intelligible at all
without that horizon yeah and and
there's something about and this is the
tricky part and this is kind of the
tricky part is what I'm kind of making
sense of it is is that there's something
about the that something has really only
happened in the last
literally in the last 15 years it's been
happening for a while but they ate this
shift to the age of technology right
which is where it's actually it's a it's
a shift from where even the subject has
been taken up as a resource to be
positioned enough to optimized right and
technology removes you know
technological objects if you look at it
like point to the being of technology
and our understanding of being as as as
what makes them tell everything
intelligible the way that it does to us
has to do with when we look at something
is is we value it to the degree that we
can remove the friction between us and
it you can collapse the distances but
what's interesting is that when you do
that right when you do that right you
you you remove everything what it takes
to have character
it's like precisely it's the distance
and the struggles and the aspirations
and the virtues and the failings of
having gone through something with
somebody that one becomes who one is in
the way that they are they realized time
right it articulates their face in some
some way and this is what's so
interesting and what this is kind of
like and one I'm wondering about is is
this the coronavirus is through it's a
pressure that can't quite be optimized
but reveals that that like we've had no
friction in fact I get up I don't even
notice the first thing I do is look at
my phone and that phone defines and
fashions the way I think in times in
terms of right and then it's totally
disappears and all the metal levels of
thinking about that and what that's
built on is is turning out to be so
fragile yet is revealed
once it shakes and it collapses I
realize that I have not even been awake
to write what's really been going on
right and I don't even have the the
sense of moving towards it being
something that would be worthy of
character-defining
right I think we're in a very very very
it hasn't happened I think it's a very
different time and I think this is what
this this could possibly reveal right
and so one of the things I take like
salicin is that I just really you know I
was on I went to rebel with I went to
first time I went to it the one of the
rebel wisdom sense-making meetings and I
was so cool there was like you know 25
30 people that were just online and then
Jordan Hall comes on and just you know
he just lays it down like people asking
questions and were everyone's engaged in
this kind of making sense of what's
happening and his view on it and this
inquiry that I realized like oh my god
there's a hole and all this in framing
is a little rip and all that that just
kind of pours out and it's something
very different and I I think on some
level where you and I are a part of that
right we're an articulation of it we're
living it out right and the struggles
that were that we're going through and
what we think about it on some level may
or may not be true but there's something
else is I'm banking anyways on that
there's a whisper that we're hearing
that actually is the thing that's most
determining is like and we're listening
to it and responding to it yeah yeah
well in being with the process there is
no
no need to to bank on it in a sense my
adaptive my body is in some sense right
but in another sense it is it is just
what there is and the whisper is there
and I feel very strongly that if I don't
listen to the whisper then it becomes a
scream yeah so yeah yeah this has been a
really remarkable conversation I was
really looking forward to it I'm so I'm
so glad we've we've had it and I'm
giving me two deeply appreciative of you
man thank you so much him yeah thank you
i I'm enjoying feeling closer to you and
getting to know you more yeah it's not
just the beginning yes yes I always jump
to quickly you know wit where Winston
Churchill had it an excellent speech way
you know it was after the Battle of
Britain I'm pretty sure and he said this
is not the end it's not even the
beginning of the end right it is in fact
the end of the beginning and I've just
been waiting for a time of my life to
say that I don't know maybe we're still
at the beginning of the beginning but
let me know so that I can let me know so
I could say it yeah hmm yeah I I would
man beginnings and endings yeah and also
just congratulations to about like have
several
ship in your life that you just guys are
living together and kids like you like
you like each other like it's deeply Co
hearing and so for link it and you feel
loved and you love and I mean and some
level we're talking about like pretty
meta things but I thought by virtue I
could only talk about it right in the
way that I am because I have on a very
very very deep basic level like I'm
loved and I deeply love and I'm loved by
the people most local to me yeah yeah
that's such a beautiful insight it's in
my personal myth a story I tell about
myself to myself though the reason I am
maybe the most important reason I am
like I am is because I was loved so well
when I was a child and then it was such
a broken home after about the age of
nine and in a in a in a way that really
was quite quite quite a chaotic rift and
breaking and there were many
consequences but there's something in me
that has that that recess that embodied
sense to drop into and that is always
why I've said to my mum a whole family
but I've said it to my mum more than
anyone else that I'm so grateful for
yeah and I and it and of course that the
point about the here and now is is the
same oh yeah
wow I'm gonna enjoy I'm going to enjoy
listening to this again because there
were moments there in your expression
that that really touched a a kind of
completeness that is
guys I think can keep on giving so I I'm
feeling I need to I need to do some
stretching take a break and and close
from this in a way that is in continuity
with this so nice if you don't mind I'll
stop the recording but we'll stay
talking to each other you got it
yes thank you thank you for being here
with me guy yeah I think