[Music]
we're putting out a whole series of
films around psychedelics and you've
written quite a lot of addict ecstatic
experience just be good to just get a
sort of potted history of your writing
and interests sure so the first book I
wrote was called philosophy for life and
other dangerous situations that was
about how people use ancient Greek
philosophy today after writing that book
and after it came out in 2012 I started
to look at ecstatic experiences which I
define I define ecstasy as moments where
you go beyond your ordinary sense of
self and ordinary sense of reality and
feel connected to something greater than
you which can be wonderful
euphoric and healing but it can also be
terrifying and sometimes damaging and I
wanted to look at how people find those
experiences today in Western culture how
can we find in ways that are good for us
as opposed to bad for us
so I found I think Aldous Huxley's the
greatest writer on this topic and he
talks about upwards and downwards
transcendence downwards transcendence is
when you basically just you want to get
out of your normal yo but you do it in
an unhealthy instructive way you get
annihilated on vodka for example every
kind of Avenue to transcendence can
potentially be unhealthy toxic and
downward so I wanted to try and help
myself and others find ecstasy in a way
that's good for them and healthy for
their society so I spent five years
researching that and
you know try to put together my thoughts
in my in my book the art of losing
control which came out last year I was
interested in the history of ecstatic
experiences and I feel like Western
culture rather marginalized and
pathologized ecstasy starting from
around the Reformation as in by
pathologized I mean it got redefined as
a mental illness so in the 17th and 18th
centuries rationalist materialist
thinkers like Thomas Hobbes would say
ecstasy is enthusiasm as delusion you're
just letting yourself be carried away
with your imagination in the 19th
century psychiatrists like jean-martin
charcot said ecstasy is just hysteria a
symptom of a brain disorder all the
ecstatics of yesteryear he said from
Joan of Arc to Socrates to Mohammed are
actually suffering from brain disorders
20th century psychiatry said something
similar you know if you say I'm spirits
are talking to me I'm connected to the
universe that's actually just psychosis
so that's the main story I think and as
a result of that there's a taboo around
ecstasy this is something that Stan Grof
talks really well about yeah Stan Stan
Grof is very important in this kind of
thing so psychiatry pathologized
ecstasy so we still have these
experiences because they're naturally
occurring but we don't talk about them
because we don't look ridiculous or
stupid or mad or the sense of
synchronicities or yeah something that a
lot of people when you kind of when they
feel safe enough to talk about will say
yes I've had that experience where it
just felt like there was something more
- there was some pattern sudden senses
of deep connection to other people say
or to everything or to nature very
common happen to agnostics atheists
believers they interpret them in
different ways they're very common
Bertrand Russell's walking down the
street suddenly feels completely filled
with love for the strangers around him
for five minutes
and it changes him for it you know he
goes it doesn't be doesn't if I'm a
Christian but it becomes a pacifist for
his whole life so the main story is that
pathologize ation and marginalization of
Ecstasy but there of course being
counter currents ever since the
Enlightenment bits of Western culture
that say no we ecstasy is important this
is a this is a valuable good experience
a good aspect of human nature we need to
keep it alive but these have been
subcultures kind of going against the
grain from the romantics romantics
absolutely Methodist Church 19th century
kind of spiritualism and occultism and
then there's a mass explosion of it in
the 60s with things like Eastern
religions things like meditation Hari
Krishna or show Tantra psychedelics
whether that's from indigenous cultures
or or LSD rock roll experimental movie
suddenly what had previously been quite
minority in bohemian suddenly becomes in
a mainstream there's that there's an
explosion of inter mass culture of this
of different ecstatic extract their
practices and of a hunger for intense
experiences including psychedelics one
of the big problems as well as either we
have this mainstream culture which still
to some extent is frightened of ecstasy
because we're frightened of losing
control because our whole culture is
about being this well controlled ego so
the idea of really letting go of control
is frightening to us because we don't
want to kind of end up in section then
we have these subcultures which you and
I have walked in and and you know
working to some extent where ecstasy is
more accepted New Age culture personal
development culture psychedelic culture
and so on and we were queer subcultures
I would say we're not mainstream culture
we couldn't talk about some of this
stuff on the BBC for example it's
it's a it's it's still a bit to be
probably getting less so yeah before I
hope say slowly I work in academia it's
still a bit to be maybe getting less say
the problem in this whole culture is
slightly different it's not one of
pathologize ation fetishization exactly
it's the opposite if the mainstream
culture is aversion and fear you get the
opposite in in a subculture of over
attachment the desire for a spirituality
entirely made up of highs yeah seeking
it too much and then you say I don't
know about you but I noticed it in my
spiritual life sometimes I'll go to a
retreat or a workshop or a psychedelic
ceremony and I'll feel really high and
flooded with meaning for about a month
or two then a bit less height then I'll
feel a bit bored and depressed and empty
and they'll go what's the next adventure
and it's like it's like a kind of you
know it's like a kind of slightly full
team rocket pack you know you go you go
up into the air for a bit leaflet down
stuff so that's a risk is it's addiction
really ecstasy addiction I think I first
became aware of your writing on
psychedelics and an article you wrote
for the idler and what I was struck by
was that you were not afraid to go into
the more metaphysical spiritual depths
of what the experience meant and there's
a lot of people writing about
psychedelics but very few people with
your background in academia talking
about well what is the nature of the
entities that we might meet when we go
into these experiences and this is
something that I'm also concerned about
with with some of the studies that are
being done at the moment like how how
difficult to fit is this experience for
the medical model this is something that
a lot of people in the psychedelic world
I think a very have a very concerned
about there's a kind of push-pull
because for the first time they're
getting the mainstream acceptance of
scientific studies and medical usage but
also this brings in a very different
conception
framework it brings in a materialist
framework it brings in the world of like
double-blind trials it brings in
corporate influence there's something
and I have this sort of sense that
there's something about the psychedelic
experience that is a very difficult fit
for for this paradigm right we want
reinterment but we want it in a very
rational predictable and measured way
and I think that's what people are
trying to do with psychedelic science
and with contemplative science look
we're getting transcendence look we're
losing control but we know exactly what
we're doing and here's a brain scan and
so on and that can work two ways you can
either end up with a form of
spirituality which is actually totally
disenchanted because it's been it's
become so rational and instrumentalized
and actually you're not get you're not
going anywhere you know you're just in
the same control freak capitalist
culture the other way is that is that
the science gets spooky actually the
real challenge and the you know you end
up Michael Pollan talks about you know
shaman's in white coats the scientists
become kind of guru figures all just
weird stuff kind of comes through and
and and and and challenges the model
that you're bringing well this is like
entities this happened with the guy who
did the DMT research Strassmann yeah
Stratton basically gave it up because he
went into the DMT research as a
materialist scientist and was so freaked
out by not just the things that people
were saying but the commonalities
between what people were saying that it
really challenged it really disturbed it
really challenged his worldview and he
also felt I'm not sure that I should be
doing this right
so I mean Strassmann he he wasn't
exactly materialist he was a Buddhist he
thought when people will take
psychedelics they will have an
experience of pure light consciousness
and that's the kind of idea that goes
all the way back to Aldous Huxley who
came to psychedelics having very much in
a research mist
I was very into zen and vedanta and so
on and he thought the highest truth was
kind of pure light consciousness and
that psychedelics would bring us to that
highest trees but what Strassmann found
instead was people didn't have this kind
of clear light experience they had
entity encounters lizards elfs all kinds
of things but you know some of you know
aliens and some of whom weren't
necessarily benevolent I think there was
one one person in one of the
participants you know
meets this alien and their participants
really scared each case all his love all
his love and the entity says something
like even here or so till I heard of IDO
is quite quite no quite they weren't
necessarily loving often they're just
kind of detached and like want to
operate on you whatever so it's
interesting when when psychedelic
researchers think about these kinds of
things that you might meet on a trip
they will often try to bring a Buddhist
perspective like Aldous Huxley these are
just emanations of your mind so like
just as the Tibetan Book of the Dead
Book of the Dead says after you die you
might meet scary monsters recognize them
as just emanations of the own of the
clear light of your consciousness that
will transform it so likewise at the
Johns Hopkins Laboratory there you get
given trip guides the drug this is the
laboratory has been very key to the
psychedelic Renaissance and these guides
say anything scary that you meet these
are just emanations of your own
consciousness recognize it go towards it
accept it and surrender to it and become
one with it but what if what if that's
not the case that's just one theological
perspective another theological
perspective like say a kind of
you know shamanic perspective or
traditional Christian perspective might
be that these these aren't just
emanations your consciousness these are
actual separate independent entities
which could be malevolent it could be
harmful to you and so you shouldn't go
towards them accept them and surrender
them when it's the job of the Shaymin to
defend you from them so I don't know
these are interesting I guess the point
of this is is that you can't just you
know this isn't just science this is
also theology and metaphysics and it's
also just totally beyond our pay grade
who the hell knows right I didn't know
what a medicine Medical School has been
yeah all that stuff taught you know the
nature of the spirit world and this is
why you know Ernst younger the writer
said to Albert Hofmann you know you're
you might be messing with stuff just
that you shouldn't mess with you often
being a guy who invented LSD yeah you
might potentially be opening portals
that you shouldn't in the eye of global
ayahuasca survey 1/5 of respondents said
they'd felt under energetic attack
during or after an ayahuasca ceremony
it's 20% that's a huge amount so you
look at indigenous cultures and the you
know the emphasis they put on the need
for protection the need for spiritual
prophylactics when you're when you're in
in you know opening yourself up I don't
know should we know about that should we
think about that and I said this to
Roland Griffiths you know the Leeds
scientist I said what's your position on
on entities do you believe in bad
spirits do you think we need protection
from bad spirits and he was like well I
would just probably see them as I would
not see that as a belief I would not
encourage that belief
you said but it's interesting weather I
suppose let's say in the future we all
have lots of different psychedelic
centers that we can go to that's already
happening right and each of those
psychedelic centers will basically have
a different model of the universe so
you're not just gonna pick your drug
you're not gonna just gonna pick your
Center you're going to pick your
universe do you go to a universe that's
totally atheist where everything is just
aspects of your imagination
do you go to universe where there are
good and bad spirits and that Center
will help kind of protect you from the
bad spirits do you go to a universe
which is Buddhist where all things are
just emanations of pure consciousness so
you know the old days we just had to
pick our therapist but you know in 20
years we'll be picking our universe
picking our metaphysics yeah exactly
so this is and that's interesting and
it's I think it I suspect it'll go the
way of you know the William James
thought you know he was a pluralist that
perhaps reality isn't one in he came up
with the word multiverse
we're gonna you know we're gonna have
these multiple universes that we can we
can visit in through different
substances and through different rituals
you know the cultural containers which
send us off to these different places I
have sort of similar experiences the
psychedelics that started a bit later
than you yeah but I also found some of
those experiences quite difficult to
integrate and I think one of the will
probably come back to this but one of
the dangers is the sort of limited
personality the ego attaching to the
spiritual experience and making it all
about me that that that was a real one
danger but the other thing that that I
really noticed especially in the
psychedelic community was it's a
community of people that are connected
around the experience and my my personal
view is that we have to learn to
integrate the insights in a much more
meaningful way and what often I found
people doing was fetishizing the
experience fetishizing the state but not
really doing any of the work to bring
that into their
lives and that's one of the risks of
doing this outside of established
spiritual traditions because when they
work those traditions they provide lots
of warning signs and the kind of
cultural container and an ethical
container for these experiences and one
of the things they warn about over and
over is the risk of pride and self
cherishing when you have an ecstatic
experience because you know some Paul
writes the letters to this community do
you remember which book the call
knowledge isn't great but it's the
anyway it's a famous passage as always
gets read out in weddings it's something
like if I speak with the tongues of
angels but I have not loved then I am
about become a clashing cymbal or a
clanging gong or something like that but
basically it's writing to this community
which is getting really into the
ecstatic gifts they're speaking in
tongues prophesying you know all these
powers and these anything that's that's
not the point if you're not doing
anything to help people and serve people
then you're just making a racket so that
it sits and it's very easy if you you
know have some slightly special
experience to think I'm special and
therefore to get attached to it at every
time or you can get held onto it and as
soon as we do feel special often I think
fear and anxiety can come in as well you
know because the ego gets inflated
massively identifies and holds onto the
experience so you have this experience
of the divine you think I am divine I
you know I'm special I'm really special
and that can immediately I don't know if
you notice kind of flip into kind of the
opposite of that which is paranoia and
just fear
so on this ayahuasca retreat I went on
last year I had this moment where I
suddenly thought I'm psychic
I I have I'm special I've got special
psychic gifts this was in the middle of
a ceremony and almost immediately that
flipped in that feeling of I'm space
so flipped into fear I thought what if I
go crazy what if I can't handle that so
I thought and I came across this phrase
the trap of specialness so when we think
I I'm uniquely special in this gift that
is a kind of trap
which can very quickly lead to feelings
of fear and ungrounded miss so the an
state that is humility like laughing
yourself I'm not psychic I mean if I am
I'm so minor you're gonna say I've seen
my Lily psychic I mean like maybe
everyone's got you know some good but
yeah I'm you know it's just like the
antidote for that is I'm not that
special just laugh at yourself love your
egos kind of games and humility you know
comes from the word whom us for that's
grounding like yes you're the divine
someone's that says everyone else you're
not you know more divine than anyone
else which is something to be said for
Christianity you know Christianity at
the heart of Christianity that kind of
even the symbolism of Jesus is don't get
to above yourself yeah and there's
there's also something that I've
increasingly come to appreciate about
the sense of dying to oneself
sacrificing who one is and in some sense
sacrificing the ego to become who one
really is I think is part of the deeper
symbolism of Christianity yeah I mean I
like the idea of the more you can get
yourself out the way the moon the more
amazing things you can do or your ego
out of the way if you know that we have
the Tao or the divine in us and that can
do incredible things more than we can
imagine if we can get our shadow out of
the way our smaller self it's it's kind
of it's actually limiting us in terms of
what we can do our desire to get the
credit for it and the glory for it what
do you make of Stan Grof because he he's
been one of the big forces of this he
talked back in the the 60s about the
need for a psychology of the future that
incorporated ecstatic experience and the
net and the possibility of healing
through ecstatic
experience and I guess his framing of
exotic experience is that it's these
these experiences can help us heal or
can bring us to more complete what's
takes a more complete wholeness I think
he's a he's a master
I wish transpersonal psychology he must
be probably one of the top three top
five thinkers in transpersonal
psychology and I think that field
deserves to be far more mainstream and I
think it is becoming more mainstream at
the moment I I mean I think his ideas
his and his wife's ideas about spiritual
emergencies key and I think his 1980
anthology that he edited with his wife
called spiritual emergency is a classic
work I've never tried holotropic
breathwork but I want to I think that's
fascinating that you can get into kind
of psychedelic states through through
breathing techniques and I'm I'm told it
can be a way to access like that
experience but it's a bit less risky
than drinking a lot of ayahuasca so much
I know you can come down when you stop
basically because that's right that's
yeah my therapist after this Rakhi
ayahuasca experience I had last year she
kind of said to me next you're next it's
like no experience should be through
holotropic breathwork just so you can
ease into it so you know i i've heard
some of the interviews he's given I
heard his interview he did with I saw
your excellent interview with him and I
saw I heard his interview with Tim
Ferriss and the one thing that struck me
is when I listened to him and like when
I listen to Rick Doblin of maps and
various other people in the psychedelic
Renaissance
I think they they're real optimists in
kind of utopians
about how
if we have a society where you know the
psychedelic non-dual experience is at
the center we will then overcome all
kinds of problems like the demonization
of the other polarization fundamentalism
and so on that it'll be a magic
transformation because we will all have
these non jet experiences therefore
there will no longer be me and you
they'll no longer be us and them and you
know so that's really there's a whole
political aspiration a whole political
plan with with with them and in a lot of
people in this like the Renaissance and
my I just don't think as clear-cut as
that my one-word response to that or one
sentence response would be like what
about the Aztecs that that is the
culture we know because we don't have
many precedents of cultures where there
was a psychedelic ritual at the heart of
it
so the Aztecs had a psychedelic ritual
you know they they we know they all did
magic mushrooms and yeah this these were
not wonderful tolerant liberals they
were completely warlike tribe they the
reason the Spanish conquered them so
easily with just a thousand soldiers is
because all their neighbors hated them
because they would constantly raid their
neighbors who they thought were kind of
socially and ethnically inferior to them
grab them take them up to their tower
and and pull out their hearts and then
you know take off their skins and wear
their skins so the hippies would look
kind of tolerant liberals so I just you
know what sort of Charles Manson and
John Lennon let's put it that way yeah
yeah so the idea that you know there's a
magic pill that's going to get rid of
that's going to completely cleanse the
human heart of all its problems
and well this is just this is the
president we have so you know in the
very small database of psychedelic
societies one of them was this was this
awful I mean I'm not to say was all
awful but it certainly wasn't you know
completely pacifist so that's that's
that's one issue I have with with
snapple that's also the lesson I think
both of us where it's certainly in the
middle of a psychedelic Renaissance
Michael Pollan's book was a real
game-changer and there's a restarting of
psychedelic research it's definitely
underway and I think both of us have
this sense of let's look at what went
wrong in the 60s let's look at what
happened when he had this huge
exuberance that ignored the shadow yeah
and I think this is this is something
that we really struggle with as a
culture to hold the complexity of yes
this is a really can be a really
positive thing but there's also a dark
side to it yeah so the the dual nature
of the experience
yeah because it seems I mean I may be
said it's likely flippantly but that's
why Charles Manson was such a
significant moment in the 60s was this
was basically an LSD cult that then
decided that the thing that they needed
to do to cleanse the world of of evil
was to launch a war starting with
Hollywood stars and this this happens
time and time again when the ecstatic
experience is made the centerpiece of of
any culture yeah and I'm sure you know
many more examples of that as well
yeah I think it is possible to have an a
cultural container for psychedelics that
doesn't involve human sacrifice we've
got a hope it is and and growth and
Hoffman and others got very into the
Eleusinian mysteries and they called for
a new alesis the Eleusinian mysteries
were this ancient Greek ritual which
existed for thousands of years I believe
yeah I mean I think it was a real center
point of Greece that along with in
Christianity's last
I think it lasted for like over two
millennia and people would go there from
all over Greece and they would drink a
potion and then have this experience of
death and rebirth and if you compare the
accounts of participants in the
Eleusinian mysteries like they didn't
talk about it much because it was secret
but Plutarch who was a priest there
wrote about it bit and it's very similar
to accounts of people on psychedelics
they talk about this first stage of
shivering and shaking and disorientation
and fear and darkness and then an
emergence into light and euphoria and it
was very central to their politics and
it helped to give them a sense of
togetherness all these different Greek
tribes who might be at war with each
other but for that period they would
they would kind of declare peace and go
and celebrate their togetherness
together
I think psychedelics do have a role to
play at the moment in helping us I think
it probably will be a bit messy but the
issue is that we've become so conscious
so self conscious so conceptual so kind
of closed to what's below the surface in
us that we kind of need dynamite as
Westerners to to get beyond that that
kind of you know that modern ego and to
get beyond our materialism we've got
very stuck in this in this materialist
worldview of the sense of the stolidity
of ourselves and of everything around us
and this is me and I'm this you know
this is the table and it's all very kind
of separate that's so very reminiscent
to the McGilchrist talking about the
left brain and the right brain yeah the
left brain is sort of this atomistic
reductionistic tool and the right brain
is is what we've steadily kind of
shunted out of Western culture that has
an appreciation of the holistic
can the inter-relational and yeah the
the mystery now I don't know if he's
right that this is you know connected to
physical changes in our brain I don't
know I totally agree with him on the
experience level and I just don't know
if I if he's right or not on the
physical level but so and and I think
we're we're disconnected from my own
emotions as well from our own are from
our feelings will become hyper
conceptual I think McGilchrist says this
kind of thing I see it particularly in
academia as well
therefore we you know we do need
sometimes this radical surgery just to
get us out of our heads but I know for
personal experience that you know
psychedelics really is radical surgery I
mean it can be messy as well it's it's
it's a blast but I think it's necessary
because because I think otherwise we are
quite stuck in our egos and in this
sense of the solidity of everyday
reality
[Music]
you
[Music]