no wonder hello I'm live yay look one
goes live no one watches these I have
like five above there zero plays but I
figure out that the rave like these are
live videos which I only do because I
don't want to worry about editing and
scripting in any of that ah yes we are
community - this is so exciting
this live video yukata this is some edge
years eat unless it works better
for community to bring another fee like
there if there are enough seats then we
can offer more rides and someone else
can drive like Heather control my car a
human I know like I can't native people
of mine whose how that be used
against us okay so I'm figuring
everything out figuring out how I can
possibly move this forward with like my
who I am
my limitations and my skills and my
ideas and schedule a stream so anyway so
I'm going to schedule a stream here on
YouTube once a week which is essentially
gonna be like a board meeting or I have
that thought before going live anyway
like what if that did become the board
meeting right now it's me talking into a
camera to people because there is no
board I don't even know what level what
point we get aboard at I mean I do it's
soon I want other people to co-create
with I want to UM and I have I have
those people but not no way that kind of
works for me not in a way that's like
okay I need a schedule time that like
it's like in the morning during a
weekday which is not when people are
available and it sucks that I need that
time like I could carve out morning on a
weekend to do that but then I was like
we're doing anything else on a Saturday
morning so yeah it could be Saturday
mornings my live stream but that I need
like someone to watch my kid for the
time period because I have childcare
during the week and not on the weekends
cold school and my child is elsewhere
during the school day except today like
except Wednesdays cuz I think it doesn't
have to all monsters that's already 200
wretch information maybe attract I'm not
a paranoid person at all this was so not
designed for me and that's awesome
because I don't just stop letting my
brain know if not stop letting my brain
not stop letting it ahead in the let
things happen
let them flow so stop in my brain David
something is this less saying I've
already learned I don't need to relearn
that again at the same time when I allow
it then I can finagle it wiggle it
figure out other ways to create from
where that is and let me just check
good morning on Thursday wait
like it wasn't on length enough I post
the best of the three options yes
Thursday one of the three options at the
bottom which is my anxiety I love those
cool like that's not even me I would not
respond cool to this statement does that
be to respond that way and I don't want
to be cool in any way which is so much
cooler like that Peas
yes so having a weekly live streamed
video going forward I don't get
distracted at all my cell phone still on
cousin scheduled for an hour a week of
leg hears and if it's me rambling for an
hour to myself it's me rambling for it
to an hour to myself it's not like I
don't know how to do that
it's what I do just not on camera that
other people watch yeah it has to be
dragon awake it has to show there we go
morning it could be any day Monday
Tuesday Thursday Friday
I don't care between those four cuz I'm
open to all four but I need to know
anyway Lister just like picking one and
then having people sure I like the idea
of a Monday or a Friday just because
they're more but then everyone schedules
things somebody I'm writing for that
same reason so fossa Tuesday Thursday
maybe there's a lot of people available
and what I want is people who want to
co-create during that time here
right now like this is a horrible than
you to do that in me like with one voice
explained people but right now that's
what it is it is me explain it to people
so having people there being able to ask
questions having people to explain and
then as that forms of like what we're
doing having people who want to do the
physical work of the vision of moving
forward and co-creating that vision and
co-creating how to work together and the
technology and the transparency and
Democratic peace and and all of that
people who want to work on that can then
become part of a board and we can stream
that every week like every week like hey
we are live going this and if that's the
understanding of what's happening and
that could be something that is I know
I'm not comfortable doing that but I
really want to be a part of this how we
honor that as well because it doesn't
mean you have to be someone who's
comfortable to be on camera to be on the
board and have a voice and have like
maybe but maybe it does exception to
beginning well that's what transparency
and dictates if you need to be able to
do this from all over the world so there
will be times when it makes sense to
come together and have physical
community and that was that's gonna
happen even more so probably in the
beginning because like having a weekend
for people or not even a weekend like a
week of people are getting together in a
retreat type setting and working through
the process but crowdfunding before that
like crowdfunding for that process
crowdfunding for creating the technology
that we can co-create with and then
crowdfunding putting a system in place
where we don't need to keep crowdfunding
where it's just like subscription-based
fees the people are contributing so that
they can know my love okay then you're
gonna have to get a one from somewhere
else which is already in here one second
[Music]
don't might get to be on camera so that
little lock in my door she'll run in
here possibly make it so yes
scheduling a lab weekly first live video
and then as that becomes it can become
two hours it can become on a different
time of the week and become multiple
times the week like we can co-create
that together let's make in charge and
you doing I'm really good to keep it my
ego in check not it's like at the moment
but overall I think I'm pretty pretty
good at that and can bring that into
what I create as many people with eCos
can be involved people with egos get out
so he'd be involved but it doesn't mean
that you go gets to run everything
because my egos not running at your you
goes about running it yeah world he goes
don't run run everything that's not
they'll have them we all do it but we
need to nice we don't need to do
anything but wouldn't it be awesome if
we could create a world where everyone
was empowered to be happy and fulfilled
and have their version of what true
abundance is not consumer-driven
amalgamation of things and hierarchy
above everyone else because that's what
we have now and it doesn't work it
doesn't create peace it doesn't create
prosperity for everyone it creates it
elicits its prosperity like obscene
prosperity and waste for a tiny fraction
and a huge amount of poverty and misery
and we can make like even these people
aren't there have abundant material
resources they don't have a bunny
community they don't have fun and they
might but like
they're still lonely they're still
dysfunctional and unhappy in the same
way even more so somewhat than everyone
else who thinks that getting up there is
gonna get them happiness they're already
there they know it doesn't where do you
get happiness from more money more more
like it's not let's take it back from
from the rich and cut all their heads
off and do it like it like eat the rich
it's everyone has a space currently a
specific group of people are winning a
game that's rigged for them instead
let's create a cooperative game that
they can choose to play or not play but
we are gonna win together we're and
they're invited they can be part of it
they can also not be part of it
everyone's invited regardless of all of
the barriers we've had previously you're
invited you can get to bring yourself
with those barriers with you we just
have to mitigate that cost to the rest
of everybody else everybody gets to be
who they are the good the bad the ugly
well we stop the things that are truly
horrendous and horrible society and
realized most of what we think are like
the the day in and day out things that
are horrible this this aren't like
having like the crime out there is
dictated by a lot by poverty and laws
and like just that things are illegal
love they're immoral and like we need to
have all of those conversations in a
little sidetracked so I happened to lead
all these old ones so I was scheduled so
that's what I am currently doing so the
video part is gonna be me live streaming
from my bed in my house like that's not
going to change we're not getting
editing we're not getting and then the
other piece like I'm doing I did the the
website and keeping that up to date for
like here's the vision of what the best
of what I can kind of explain go read
that don't have
but your first like go see that read
that then come ask questions and how to
then take the idea and break it down
into a way to actually move forward and
actually do the step so that me having
to do the work because that's not
happening and then figuring out like who
wants to take on those pieces like if we
have four people on the board of
directors who are doing this for free
we're doing this because this is what
they want to be doing in the beginning
and then you have more people like it's
the it's without the monetary part of it
it's what's happening it's like then you
have people taking on tasks and doing
what they love to do and want to do for
the greater good with the crowd with the
who will become the members and the
board of directors like those too it is
like people who want to who want to be
the decision-makers and want to in a
democratic and transparent way you're
having the people somewhat voice their
opinion but we're still the ones who are
like truly on the board because they're
not paying money we don't know that
they're one-person one-vote we don't
like there's only so much democracy and
transparency that can be allowed within
and that's the other thing is like we're
going live on these calls so it's
definitely not in camera which means
it's on camera like it's that weird same
like in camera sessions are behind
closed doors without a camera presence
in board of directors and such and yeah
we're not having that we're having
literally the on-camera sessions of like
here's what we're doing here's the
transparency of it all and oh how fun
would that be like what if we had like
million viewers like that's so scary to
me and also the same time like wow a
million people watching me for discuss
what that might need to change I might
need to change locations instead but
figuring out yeah people we can do that
the truth is though once you have enough
people watching then you then you what
like enough people following supporting
interacting then you have a threshold
met in order to launch a crowdfunding
campaign without keen sanity and stress
and risk that comes from like launching
it today event hoping to fly by the seat
of my pants and have like honoring both
sides of like yes you need to move
forward there needs to be a plan to move
forward even if you're just a planner
until the end of time
this needs to exist in the world it has
to go go forward that's why we need all
groups of people many people who take
the steps any people who break down the
steps any people who understand each of
the steps and whoever we have is who we
have so if you don't have a brain
surgeon in the apocalypse time then you
know the next best person then a doctor
a nurse a paramedic right like to do the
whatever it is that needs to get done in
that case brain surgery see my brain
once called like you're doing this
horribly no I'm not doing it adequately
not to where I would want to necessarily
have the skill to be able to communicate
the idea but getting there I know I'm
much better at answering questions and
so creating the space to answer those
questions and just going live in pretty
zoom channels somehow does it work so
I'm also gonna be tweeting like little
blurbs as ideas come up like this needs
to happen sneezed often just me being
transparent and authentic and to some
degree not democratic because I'm a
person and there's not a democracy
dictating my life but the thing I'm
creating is democratic once there's
people on board that are have skin in
the game that in this case that the
board of directors or people who are
there understanding and communicating
able to have that
I know how much you need to like a
profile in a membership group and what
that would look like this is what I do
all day it's a parent thing like
Facebook with all of my like high school
because like I don't necessarily want to
have Who I am my salary my health
history like like a profile right like
there's things that I'm comfortable
sharing and not comfortable sharing
there are things but then in my
communities that changes like my kids
school uncomfortable with my profession
or so that people know what my expertise
is or what I don't know
special circumstances might dictate my
life like I'm more comfortable with that
because that explains stuff but I
wouldn't want that necessarily going out
to the people I'm thinking of how to
create like for a board or you have
membership having that transparency so
like the board is like your profile of
like who you are and what you bring to
the team and what you voted on and what
I ate that like as we want to do that
that doesn't necessarily to be visible
to the outside world that's like if
you're in the inner group ie look this
is what will become the membership this
is the world like the people who want to
pay and want to be involved in the
democracy or paint like are involved
which is not it's a very little
threshold it's like $10 a month and an
hour a month of time on this on the site
by coming and showing that you are
keeping up an hour months that can be
like sent out to your email right like
hey come check out this site you haven't
done your hour prove the few people who
that wouldn't be automatic most of us
are gonna want it's supposed to be a
space that you want to spend time in
like Facebook is like it's a space where
you're getting connection and
information if you lay that sense of
contribution yeah that's what
and doesn't exist somebody created a
space where you can actually like dig
into the world's problems and discuss
them and create them gather the
knowledge explain the knowledge use the
knowledge create new technology that
uses that and gathers new information
from like specific users and from the
world and and puts it usable usable
format be awesome to have that like I
don't explain it that well I don't sell
it that well no but again here is that
but you had access to like your
ancestors stories and I mean that means
everyone has access your ancestors watch
stories which needs to be something
that's dealt with on a culture my
culture faces for them to decide whether
they're okay with that but there's a way
possibly to honor both we're like okay
well we'll give people who have proved
it like that's the problem like the
inner group versus the outer group and
does the outer group get to decide who's
part of them and for this organization
I'm saying no in general that like
anyone who wants to be involved should
be allowed to be involved but at the
same time I think how we become
inclusive is allowing exclusivity I
think that saying everyone has to be
comfortable with everyone all of the
time isn't realistic finding spaces
where people don't have to clash with
each other if they're not comfortable
clashing with each other because
clashing brings growth an amazing
opportunity if done hopefully in a
consensual way I was like okay I'm
willing to have conflict with people I'm
willing to undergo that emotional labor
and we just allow people to do what
they're good at without requiring
everyone to be the same like it
requiring no-one to do motional labor
ever and know when to like I don't know
how we're like mutant society like we're
just like I mean like muting color-wise
like making it all like it's like we
need to be able to have humor
even though it's offensive to people we
need to be able to have language and we
can't all cut out our language at the
same time because it's offensive to one
specific like everything is offensive to
somebody and how do we both allow the
person who's being bombarded with
offenses all day every day especially
like microaggressions from not having
that happen at the same time help the
other people to evolve without
villainizing what they who they
currently are like they just don't have
access to the next level yet if there is
a next level like I do think like I
don't think you go from like fully not
raises just like because it's not true
actually I maybe you do but more much
more rarely I think if you were raised
like without race as a concept at all if
you're racing like a multicultural
society not racist and then it would be
really hard to come races but if you
were raised in a very monotonous society
it just wasn't racist because you didn't
deal with it and then encountered people
of various cultures and looking
different that you could actually become
racist I think not just my mind like I
don't want to have one person no matter
how brilliant and how much I like them
to be in charge of the world I don't
know person in charge of my country in
charge of my life like I want to be able
to have a full autonomy in my own life
have everyone have full autonomy in
their own life and be able to work
together to have a seen society a
society that functions well to help me
live my best life and it's like there's
some trade-off there there's like okay
maybe I don't get if the things the
group decides on a democracy level
aren't like I okay I have to wear a
seatbelt if I'm in a car or because I'm
going to kill myself and other people
that I can't drive drunk that like there
are things that are maybe we decide
people can't drive computers are better
at it and the no one's allowed to drive
it all on the road like that would be an
imposition to people but it's like okay
but if you like
drive their me space for that just not
every day in your commute because you're
you're the human mind the human eye is
not adequate enough to drive death
Mobile's everywhere that's how people
die computer we're better not currently
our computers better at it but they will
get better at it and we won't
our dysfunctions our dysfunction like we
can't get it you can augment ours with
technology but like why not just do the
technology to begin with not to begin
with that would make no sense but we're
putting cameras everywhere so we have
visual blind spots and it's starting to
drive the car like that's maybe what we
do and tries it more and more makes it
safer and safer then the people who are
driving old 60 like they don't have that
because it's not yeah
there's nuances does another day this
rap now I said I was gonna do it for 10
minutes going tangents all of my
tangents so I'm gonna schedule a weekly
board meeting and this is I'm gonna
delete all these anyway schedule a
weekly board meeting on YouTube from 10
a.m. until I'm going to start tweeting
which means I probably need crowd
democracy is like what can I rebrand
them can I really look at them can I do
that I feel like it's confusing to have
crowd democracy and together and be the
people I'm just not changing there's
things I don't think about that but a
weekly board meeting or a weekly meeting
of time once when people come on board
and it can be more people that will be
awesome and beginning might be like
someone interviewing me someone doing I
don't know we'll figure out a bunch of
ways of interacting with people that
feel okay to me
and if it's not me involves other people
explain it and other people doing it cuz
I'm not I'm done with that to the brand
great the bending of light rod democracy
no it's like this is the nicest thing
YouTube what should I call it
well I'm creating together attack I
don't think I think I can be cried
democracy uncrating together attack it's
like all right crowd democracies like me
created this thing
and together Tech is what we are
creating through this entity becoming
this entity I think it actually someone
helps that distinction one is able to
communicate that people won't be less
likely to find me but that's ok ok more
committed I may do yeah so weekly board
meetings I have a Twitter account I'm
gonna go say create a Facebook group
that are all this Facebook will have to
be two Facebook groups one which is like
the inner circle and one of which is the
public one and the inner circle can be
We the People together 10 no money your
money do anything but like money
dedicated to the cause of bettering
society for everybody that money and
it's decided and what's done and what's
better for society with democracy and
transparency of knowledge to understand
what needs to get done for society and
what not and then what they're creating
is it's technology and tools to make the
world better like we can create apps
that help us have permaculture
everywhere that make it easy to
coordinate like I need a gardening
system that's like now go water your
plants temperature has risen your soil
is it's down you need to order it better
yet it waters it for you like creating
that system everywhere hey you have in
these insects we're gonna build it we're
gonna release this sense that it reason
these birds and they eat those insects
like whatever it happens to be when
we're creating maybe we don't do that
maybe that's a horrible thing to do but
like when you're creating systems but as
you're creating new things you're also
measuring what that impact is and you
have people seen it it's not done in
order to keep status quo and everything
status quo status quo and don't build
outside the box don't think outside the
box don't the Queeny outside the box
thinking but we also need to be able to
see the risks outside the box thinking
with people who are inside the box
figures right like well no that's too
risky
it's like those are important things to
hear and understand and think through
and at the city there's so much we can
all do together when we honor that we
are unique individuals with our own
to deal with and our own stuff to give
cooler resources which to me is like $10
a month to know that there's better or
possible or we are co-creating together
where we can see what the current state
of the environment is what's getting
done where what's the current political
state of our of our fellow humans all
over the world what are they dealing
with what is the true cost of the
we the the decisions we make on a daily
basis to eat certain things and have
certain things what is the can we have
that without slave labor and without
degradation to our world and environment
if not we need to fix and the I don't
think we fix it for profit we fix it
together fix it together
anyway so I'm totally off topic but on
topic on topic of the world off topic of
the schedule a will be clean board
meeting so yeah this is what I do I just
sit and talk sometimes on cameras or
Reds maybe roundabouts that somewhere
eventually people but that's mine other
people's brains do not work that way but
having a brain that like forgets
it's like I need tools to be able to
access it having unique connection needs
which I'd actually don't that my
connection needs are that unique but I
have felt that they are right like no
one understands me and I don't belong
and I don't like those are still things
that definitely occur underneath and
having access to tools that help bring
that stress and stress down because it
because it helps facilitate that like
you don't need to find for people around
amongst the 7.5 billion they'll find you
but we can make it easier for people we
can be like oh you're an introvert oh
you're a morning person
Oh like honoring that we are all
different we have different needs once
and that's good because
means that we don't all have the same
need at the same times it's much more
functional to have their being varying
things so or meeting weekly or the
weekly timeslot that starts slive
streamed videos and becomes more and
more and more boardy and board meeting
and focusing towards a society we have
the twitter / Facebook media marketing
to get people to the live video as well
as to um yeah so I can just throw my
ideas out into the boy it's my dome not
sitting in my basement
having no yeah no contact with the
outside world I brilliant yeah my
brilliance there you go Brad schedule
straight with media drugs mediated
tweets
yeah I'm just keep moving forward those
don't seem that harsh to me like being I
can show up for an hour a week in a good
week in a bad week I can do that and
then creating something rather sorry I
get sidetracked by I'm going Kevin this
is happening I gotta do all these things
and all these things let's just see one
more time weekly meeting then that
social media which hopefully someone
else takes over somewhere in time where
the moral and the website the websites
gonna be the the thing the websites the
big picture like here's what trying to
create me explain it's the best of my
ability maybe with some videos on it and
then the weekly live call that'll be
here like you can go back and look at
all of them which is not what I want
people to be able to have to do the
point is is that the website is the get
up to date up to speed and I'm gonna
help crowdsource that like how what
would make that better cuz having a Wix
website is probably
I cut it but like who can keep that up
to date right who can be on that project
who can that the social media bit is
like just interacting with people and
getting the media department the media
departments the social the socialist
social media which is the tweets and
Facebook and being able to engage with
people and creating that community but
also just eyes eyes on the idea and
spreading that then the live video is
the actual project moving forward which
is how do we move it forward how do we
do that
all the time like that that's what's
gonna happen and that's not brilliant
and I love it like why didn't I come up
with that two years ago that's not that
difficult but it is because when it's
ready like you're trying to try it I try
to the board meeting I tried to do this
but on a small scale in a small Facebook
group and because of Facebook's I'll
grow them because people are busy
because the world doesn't work the way I
think it does all the time it just
doesn't work it's not the it's not well
can't engage in a way I need them I need
like because I'm I can't do the physical
work required that most entrepreneurs do
in order to get a business off the
ground I need to inspire other people to
do that I have to be able to share the
vision of the world that we can create
together so that they're like yeah that
sounds awesome and I want to build the
website for that I want to be part of
the media campaign I want to create that
technology I want to live in that
collective house and create with a bunch
of other diverse group of people
technology for Humanity that sounds
 amazing that's who I want to
reach that's who people who are like
co-operators I'm a collaborator I want
to give $10 a month towards when this is
launched like yes I'm in those are the
people I want to reach and so I'm
willing to put myself out there is my
introverted like to create and small
group person out to the world so that we
can all create this system and all have
access to what I can talk to people
and explained for them what this world
is like oh you like spore it's great
like you can play sports all day every
day watch other people's play sports
discuss sports come up with new sports
and play those like whatever your desire
is you can spend your time doing and the
only way that like there are a few
places that might not work for starving
we need people creating food but that
just means we're part of the food system
unless for a small fraction of people
that can opt out of that meaning that
either were really truly not capable of
contributing but we still have food
needs we need to take care of those
people and people who maybe their time
is more important to be spent elsewhere
than even doing that maybe we can feed
our brain surgeons
maybe we can feed our if like they don't
want to because truthfully they might
still want to participate no I don't
want to clean my toilets
I want to be cutting into someone's
brain and saving their life we let them
to come into someone's brain and save
their life and we take care of their
other needs but most of us in our own
toilet so that someone's inspired to
create a robot to clean everyone's
toilet we all create our own food
systems until robots are able to do that
and then still we still are gonna want
to be involved there's new retro
movements like I want hands on food from
seed to table like there's something
about human interaction a not having it
made through technology and there's
gonna be that like the slow food
movement all the way I can talk about
this forever I love talking about this
reverence all I want to do but it has to
be in a way that moves it forward
because the license me talking to myself
and the point is is to create a world
together just functional I make sense
that we can cooperate in so how are we
doing weekly live videos and I just got
that out I was funny before I started
this I was like I was just doing the the
live video in the me alone Facebook
group which I love doing it's just for
me to do and to so that if I forget
something I can look back and I've never
never rewatched one of them one day
and the other point I was on that one
and then I went to go to do that again I
was like you should go on your life
Facebook's I'm really inspired by people
who do that it's more like the self-help
people when you stop I'm like on your
regular Facebook page you're just like
go live for really okay cool cool that's
great I'm not anyway so I had the urge
to like that little tangle of an urge
and I was like not ready for that I was
like oh but I can do a face of the
YouTube YouTube life side and but yeah
but now I just got I'm like okay yeah no
I'm okay posting that I will be doing my
videos on Facebook my regular Facebook
page that people who want to come and be
part of it Ken I'll be like this is the
10 a.m. call every week of like here's
what we're doing here's what's happening
and here's what's going on who can do
this and how do we coordinate daddy
button cuz I can't even do that like
there will be a spreadsheet
sign up next to what you want to do but
you what you were taking on doing and
then as that gets ridiculous and we have
too many people and people are trolling
and changing things we have like
administrators who do that right like
someone's like okay I will take on this
right like we need someone to create a
logo well it's ten people want to do it
do 10 do it why not do it if you're
gonna do it for free you're gonna do it
because you want to do it and do it and
then how people vote on it and we pick
the best one the other ones still got to
create it if you enjoy the creation
process that's we want creating anyway
so those are the people who create
we just like have we draw in the
co-operators the drama co-operators we
draw in a diverse group of people who
operators are the competitors our
diverse group of people co-operators
she's our diverse group of people and we
tap into that it's all golden and I
would say I explained that like you I
should be doing nothing but like sitting
in my bed watching TV all day every day
like that's what kind of I'm capable of
until I stopped dictating letting
society dictate what I'm capable of and
what I'm so quite immunogenic look stop
like okay I can't work a 9 to 5 job
Monday to Friday and then like I can't
function I'm not I can't pay bills I
can't do you alright if I need to take a
nap for this amount of time everyday I
need I can my brain only functions in
the morning adequately for this period
of time and less so later in the day and
there's things I could mitigate that
like I like it's like I have to figure
out my life and I realize everyone can
figure out their life and tap into
unseen potential that's like okay if you
figure out if you're a morning and
evening person you figure out what
stresses you and de-stress that when
it's useless stress it's not then you
have the energy and the ability to like
truly dig into what matters like who do
you love and how do you connect to them
the most and what are you grateful for
what do you like that's where I have to
spend my energy because there's more
energy there like it's like that brings
more not less like if I sit there and
dictate of life alright and this is
horrible and I'm horrible and I can't do
anything and I can't it's like that just
makes me go further and further if I'm
like okay what possibility is there not
so I can keep with everyone else so that
I feel like I'm contributing what can I
do from where I am which is physically
in my bed what can I do from that space
and from that space this has come and
it's a me like it's personally amazing
like I am happier than I've ever been
outside world it doesn't look like okay
so you're single on disability you don't
really have a social life it's like yeah
is my life this is what I'm doing is
creating a world where one eye can have
a social life in my house like I want
people I want friends to come physically
to my space I think I need to be able to
coordinate that I want to be able to
have a community like living cohousing
so that community is right outside my
door and I don't have to travel far I
want to be able to have transportation
that brings me from one location to
another so like as I destress my life I
distress it for everyone and so and
everyone's going to do that cuz there's
things that don't stress me all this
stress other people out that I can help
I can help create solutions to and stuff
that other like that people drive my car
it's like great they get a car to drive
and I get tripping and I don't have to
drive that's awesome like it's like we
can create solutions like that all the
time for everyone not just for me now
just so I profit but like everyone can
have those solutions and it's part of
its owning who you are and how the job
is for 40 minutes by myself I love it I
can talk to myself all day long I'm
awesome okay I will go down schedule a
time to the Twitter thing and do the
website I'm liking that