hello and welcome to the Uncharted life
podcast I am Jacob your host Before we
jump into today's episode I wanted to
remind you that if you would like to
support this podcast you can subscribe
to us on the Apple podcast store you can
also leave us a nice review if you like
it today's conversation is with guys
saying stock guy is the inventor of a
methodology called circling which is a
means of having mindful and intentional
conversations he also runs the circling
Institute where he teaches the practice
in Berkeley California and that is a
place where I am a student now guy went
to art school and has an art degree as
his formal education but I really feel
like conversation has become his art
form and in fact I've never really met
anyone that has the capability of
listening quite like guy listening is
his superpower and the way that guy
approaches conversation emphasizes how
much between two people is unknown and
there's a way that he approaches
conversation with curiosity in
wonderment that is at the core of his
teaching he basically tries to teach
people how to go into relationship
bringing attention to just how much you
don't already know and the result can be
conversations of discovery where new
things happen not just the things that
we expect and it's exciting and dynamic
and complex and I really love circling
and so I was excited to have guy on this
podcast and in our conversation I feel
like we capture some of that sense of
wonderment and we discover new ground I
I have I had some thoughts that I had
never thought before I really enjoyed it
and I hope you will too
so without
any further commentary here's my
conversation with guy singh stock it's
such an interesting
I mean podcasting is such an interesting
thing in in and of itself I don't even
think we really quite know what having a
podcast and having these longer
conversations that you can sit in on
week by week you know almost you know
every day you can listen to podcasts all
day long and it's I've been really
paying attention to what what that means
like because I'm watching the news media
that regular news media being completely
threatened and doing getting less
ratings and clicks than these these
dudes kind of like doing stuff in their
bedroom and doing these conversations
and I don't know what exactly that means
but I've been thinking lately about it
about this in in it and it actually came
from listening to Steven Pinker who just
wrote a new book and what a lot of what
his book is about my understanding is is
really showing that's societally
culturally environmentally we are
kicking ass like like crime rates are
down starvation is almost eliminated all
kinds of crazy that looked
impossible even just ten years ago are
happening but he said that like if you
listen in to the airwaves we because
there's so much communication that what
gets talked about are the negative
things so people have an image of the
world that's really quite terrible in
comparison to what's actually happening
and that that really got me to thinking
about you know what is the internet and
what is what is like what is the impact
of of having all of this communication
going on all the time and I started
thinking about it like well I guess one
way you can conceptualize it would be
this is a you could say that the
humanity's brain essentially right
you can kind of look at it like that and
you know what of course it's gonna be a
brain that like mirrors ours on some
level and like if you think about what
what you do and most everyone that I
know does when they think like you think
so that you can rehearse things in your
mind without having to act them out so
like you can like basically you think
and notice about problems you because
you're practicing solving problems in
various ways so the consequence of
having that right on loudspeaker all the
time I just actually don't even know
what that means but it's just
interesting to kind of think about yeah
it seems like like there's a potential
for just a really negative kind of
feedback if like I'm hearing if each of
us has a brain that's like tuned to
picking up problems and trying to solve
them and then in obsessing over them and
then we have you're tapping into
everybody else doing that yeah seems to
create a global brain that might be
insane totally but what what's what is
interesting is if you look at what's
actually catching on and the kinds of
people that are becoming incredibly
famous that wouldn't have any way of
doing that otherwise like like um you
know the what they're calling the dark
web it's such a great name peterson and
sam harris and and all these guys have
this huge following and these guys would
never have any kind of audience at best
they'd have a book that would you know
sell that most people wouldn't read but
now you get to like listen into these
like free almost freeform conversations
with people that you never had access to
before and watching them develop their
thinking off of each other it's but the
Petersons is a really good example of
this where kind of what and it's really
I really like what's happening because
how all
you you know he's he's grumpy and
temperamental and you know he's clearly
like if you catch them in a bad mood
it's like he's somebody who's cool
 bite your head off or something
right
so like he'll have an interview of some
kind of like interviewer that has it out
for him
and and he'll get confronted on all
these things and it's usually he's not
it's not a real conversation you know
it's like the the liberal media is
trying to peg him and he'll get
aggravated and then then I'll watch
whatever issue and in an example of that
is when he talked about here our peace
any guy I can like blame for a lot of
stuff about here are keys and his
reaction was kind of like a little brute
and irritated and well done given
everything but then I watched him and
repeated interviews after that and talks
and things that he did and then watched
him start to really like then take that
conversation about here are keys and
then in each talk that he gave you could
watch him start to work it out right in
such a way that was like actually a lot
more integrative and a lot more calm and
a lot more thoughtful and a lot less
kind of Lamy or irritated and I'm like
that it's really interesting to kind of
look at that is like a healthy mind
right of where you know cuz what that's
what that's what life is like you know
you you prepare for everything and then
like some kind of crazy thing comes
along and like you know violates and you
do the best you can and you probably
don't do as good as you want and then
and then but if you're if you deal with
that like head-on and you look at it and
you do what you do when chaos comes in
your life and you talk about it and
conceptualize it at some point it kind
of you can update like the your
presuppositions in the ground that you
stand on and and stuff like that and
when you don't do that like when you
don't do that you know you get in
trouble it seems like he's like he
especially someone that seems to be
thinking things through as he goes like
yes
through these conversations and even
even in his his biblical lectures are
just a very interesting piece of art for
me because it seems like in his biblical
lectures he's working things out as he
lectures by himself like through a
conversation with his own mind like he's
kind of thinking while he's lecturing to
a couple hundred people and and there's
a way like that and that that's kind of
unique to me mm-hmm and this brings me
to a topic that I think I definitely
want to talk to you about is like
conversation what is conversation what
is it good for because you are something
of saying it an expert conversationalist
hmm that's cool or it's the medium that
you've chosen conversations to produce
like you are art in your life's work
totally yeah so what is a conversation
what's it good for
well it's funny that you'd like brought
that up because I was just thinking
about you know there's this other thing
that's going on is you get to witness
conversations and I've like I am I am
utterly fascinated by conversations I
know that for me I've had conversations
with people that have actually radically
changed my life right like single
conversations like I've had
conversations that radically changed my
life for the bottle for the positive and
I've also had conversations and
interactions with people that flick like
drop have been traumatizing and and and
like me up for a long time so
there's like whatever conversations are
they have the kind of power to get deep
inside of me and it seems like other
people in such a way that like if we
have a conversation that challenges a
presupposition that you stand on top of
either in a positive way or a negative
way that adjustment will you know it's
our presuppositions that have this know
what to pay attention to and what to see
and so if you and I have a conversation
and we talk about something
that actually gets down below the level
of your of what you think with or your
axioms and and there's an adjustment
there it changes it's gonna change the
way that you here it's gonna change the
way that you pay attention and if you
think about that you could say that like
wherever our attention is at in the
world is everything organizes around our
attention right like I'm watching you
and you know in your life
adjust your attention like in at
different levels and then I'm watching
every conversation that I have with you
you know because it goes for a little
period of time before you see you again
so I'm able to kind of like one of the
things I noticed myself kind of tracking
with you is like oh like you're going
through a process and what you show up
and what a cursory you to talk about
with me and like what catches your
attention and doesn't catch your
attention and how you talk about the
relationship you were in and what that
was to you a few months ago versus how
you're talking about it now even the way
that we talked about you know the
conversation we had about your dad I
just have this feeling that if I would
have asked you that three months ago
like you may have said something really
really different I'm not sure yeah
there's a lot to talk about there like a
lot of what I'm doing is changing
through conversation and I think this is
just one reason why I relate to you so
strongly and I don't think this is true
for everybody but I've sort of very
explicitly made meaningful conversation
like my goal and the means through which
I am enacting my yeah my life path right
like I sort I have a list of
conversations I need to have with people
roughly on my wall the wall of my
bedroom and I'm walking through them and
and they're powerful conversations
they're they shake me to my core and and
they're sort of like pushing me in a way
that I used to think I was like
invincible because nothing really
reached me like oh yeah I could say
anything to anyone because nothing's
really reaching me and after I have some
of these conversations I actually feel
like a little
like like after like a difficult bouts
of exercise like I actually will want to
take a break and and it's good yeah like
I've never felt I feel like I'm using
myself to the purpose I was meant to be
used for right right
I have what well its edge of a question
yeah so like you've made it a purpose
like like one of your purposes and focus
is to have meaningful conversations what
do you know about conversations that had
it make sense to make that choice like
what do you already understand about
meaningful conversations that would have
it show up for you in such a way that
you would actually make it a goal and an
orientation to like move towards those
and have more of them and even track
them yeah you know it's it's it's
interesting because it's kind of a new
vein of ore for me to be mining yeah
when I was younger I thought the only
way for me to make meaning was to be
like master technical topics the extent
I could be like an Einstein or a Newton
or Steve Jobs or something in
engineering or science like that was the
way you make the world a better place
yeah and what I'm finding is I sort of
been diving into some sort of new
philosophy which is like I experimented
with took a counselling course and some
authentic relating courses and I and I
found that through these courses I was
changing I was being impacted by people
and I was having an impact and it was
very exciting it was very engaging I
didn't have to work to make myself do it
I just wanted to do it and so and in
some of those skills especially in the
counseling realm I took outside of that
course and very occasionally I was able
to help a friend through a very
difficult time and sort of like bring a
family together that had never talked
about an issue that was driving them
apart because I knew how to provide the
the ground of positive regard for us
those conversations are and and I did
that and this was a family that wasn't
talking about a particular thing and the
person I knew in the family she was she
she had said she didn't want me to have
this coverage she was kind of on the
fence about me even pursuing this
because she was afraid it would make
things worse and and I found out that
when I confronted that it made things
like so radically better it was right
you you it was like having a million
dollar show up in your bank account when
you write it when you're like struggling
paycheck to paycheck or something like
this the kind of windfall that that it's
it's hard emotional windfall it's like
hard to find in life yeah and I became
BM thinking like well what if I could
have that more frequently like what if I
could make that a career yeah where I am
having that kind of impact on people and
being impacted myself too yeah and so
it's it's kind of come through just
empirically having these experiences
that show me how valuable right
conversation can be right and then I
want more of them and so I'm moving
towards that right totally
and I'm still I'm still can all have an
answer for this I'm gonna have like it's
kind of at the edge of what I'm thinking
about where my attention is on what is
what is that that you're moving towards
with those right uh-huh
like I still don't exactly know what
that is but I know that it seems it's
meaningful enough for me to just
basically have it be the central focus
of almost everything when I do in my
life uh-huh but it's funny I still don't
exactly know what is pulling me forward
that's kind of the nature of it like
there's something that feels meaningful
and like that meaningfulness kind of
draws me towards it and I'm constantly
asking what are we doing here in this
conversation like how did you know to
like have more of those to move toward
that thing that's meaningful well I mean
it feels good to me yeah and so it seems
like the world is getting better see
I'm imagining it's it's it feels good to
you you're not talking about like what
you've described there you didn't look
like you described it very comfortable
no right now it's more like jumping out
of a plane yeah or something well that's
what's interesting is that like if you
think about like if you think about
dislike what a conversation is on one
level here's you know here's to Apes
like doing this bizarre social practice
called talking right and we're sitting
across from each other and we're doing
these very complicated like movements
with our bodies right that we that
somehow have some kind of background
rule right such that if we went too far
over we'd be like we'd freak out and
think you know I think something was
wrong with us so we're inside of
something like a dance that we know on
some level how to do without thinking
about it and and I if we tried to
explain it we wouldn't be able to
explain it but somehow we we enact it
and then we point our faces at each
other and we make these sounds
these rhythmic sounds and out of that
right out of that dance and out of those
sounds like literally you could say
something to me that alters the way that
I see myself right the way I see the
world that that alters the way I make
choices that I can what like I can walk
out of here and out of our conversations
be so opened up to a possibility of some
kind that that will lead to me seeing
something in my life that I hadn't seen
before and that could lead to me
changing the world
right who knows but like I can't think
of anything that has more meaningful
potential than that like that every
conversation if we we have the
possibility of moving towards something
that's like uncomfortable but on purpose
right and that's what's kind of cool
about conversation is that like anybody
that you stand in front of they're like
I don't Lee
know what I'm gonna say that's what's
odd about it right let alone knowing
what you're gonna say so there's this
kind of world in which the unknown is
immediately accessible right and so like
in that case you had a sense of like
there's there was conflict in a family
right and we all know man like there is
an unwritten rule about like the one
thing that seems off-limits is that you
don't voluntarily bring up see people's
relationships when they're in front of
them all right if you talk about their
relationship like not in front of them
you kind of like do it secretly and you
don't let them know it's almost like
there's this taboo you add that on that
a family yet other people's
relationships seem to like don't be a
very frequent topic of conversation in
the world like maybe something like 20%
of conversations are about he's probably
even more yeah totally but there was
something about like how did you know
like that's an uncle you like you you
voluntarily move towards that what did
what made it worth the discomfort that
you went through to put yourself in that
situation where so much of our nervous
system would probably feel threatened to
do that like what did you see possible
well I was um I was fairly close to the
situation so yeah like there is some way
that ignoring it was affected starting
to affect me I was not as close as an
actual member of the family would be but
it was enough that like I would be
taking it by not addressing it I'd be
taking on a burden of having like this
dysfunctional corner being part of my
life and I didn't want another one of
those yeah like I have enough places in
my life where there are dysfunctional
corners that I mean sort of like this
path of having these conversations let
it listed down that I need
need to have is something about like
this is dysfunctional there's some
conflict here that I've been papering
over and I'm I'm sort of in this process
of like unkink Amol in like I kind of
think of like like the if my soul is a
piece of string that's me then like
there's all these like knots in it right
and there's it may be therapy or or or
various kinds of mental health like just
gives me more space in that knot so like
some of that sometimes I can
occasionally I'm not a piece of it and
you know and the way that I'm going
about it and maybe maybe like as you get
less and less knotted you attain some
sort of inner peace this is sort of on
the edge of my understanding right now
this analogies not worked out that well
and like my way of attaining inner peace
like my path to enlightenment or my
current best guess that like what works
for me like looks nothing like what most
paths or the laymen look like it it
looks like directly going to like one of
those knots and directly have any
conversation with the person that's
causing that knot yeah and it seems to
be the most efficient way for me to Ray
I'm not things and like as I do that
like I feel good about that interaction
I feel good about that place in my life
that it seems like I just have like I
like myself better right and I like
people better totally and like my inner
peace increases now I haven't seen what
happens if I'm unable to uh not one of
those places and I get backlash from
that person and they really do and I
really do make things worse that's the
risk though right that is the wrist it's
better risk has been present for every
one of these conversations that I've had
right I haven't seen what happens yet
when that happens and there's some
really tough ones coming up where I'm
afraid that's gonna be what happens
right but in this particular situation
it was a new knot and I was just kind of
angry at it I'm like no I'm not gonna
let that happen
yeah not gonna I've been working on like
unknotting my soul like I'm not gonna
let you put a new one in
[Music]
yeah I felt capable oh right it didn't
feel too far beyond right when I thought
I could do right I mean I totally did it
the question of a question let's just
say that you didn't do that like if you
think about like all the conversations
that you've had like that right and I
can feel I can feel the sensibility of
or the impact of that in the way that
you're talking about it right I would
imagine there is probably like other
conversations before the one that we
were just mentioning like that were
maybe not as big they can be even small
Thanks okay this is actually a practice
yeah like it can be as small as like the
the waiter giving you something other
than what you ordered yeah and maybe the
the way most people might deal with that
or a lot of people would deal with it
was just ignoring it yeah even the thing
they don't want yeah and then anything
going about like being slightly
resentful of it and going about in the
world and but every time you do
something like that it makes you smaller
yeah and every time you you speak a
difficult truth into the world every
time I've done that it has made me more
powerful so I am more powerful now than
I used to be told I know it like and so
what I'm hearing you say if we were to
break that down it sounds like you know
that you've learned through those
experiences that you can volunteer right
to move towards things that are scary on
purpose for the sake of something
greater and probably through those
conversations everyone was probably a
little bit transformative because it's
not like you get less afraid but I think
that you I think it's more like you just
you start to respect yourself because
what could be more respectable than that
somebody who looks out on the landscape
feel something off right and then like
gets the risks and voluntarily move
toward it like and just speaking the
truth and being true to yourself
opening up total ambiguity like in doing
that on purpose that like that
the essence of what moves us that's the
essence of like anything respectable I
think when we watch people it's like
it's like funny it's I've been thinking
about that too but why is it like I'm
always thinking about like what what is
it what is it that I'm doing encircling
like what is circling and what is it
what is it about it that's so moving and
I think it's just simply I I think this
is just it's pretty much comes down to
this it's like oftentimes when people
circle of course if we're gonna get
present to what is we're gonna get
present to like the edge like we're
gonna get president of what they want
right either implicitly or explicitly
and then the moment we get present to
that whatever in them right is is
inconsistent with their goal will show
up right and then like just the act of
the circling and the conversation in the
context of it it shows up with everyone
really supporting you to be you which to
be you means you have a goal or you have
something that you care about and so
through looking through it it X courage
and so this it's impossible to not be
moved deeply moved and captivated by
watching somebody be truly human like
that like to exercise courage and go to
the places that are most scary
voluntarily like I think that's why a
lot of a lot of the reasons why people
keep coming back and circling one of the
things that's most I think heartwarming
about circling is like seeing the seeing
the virtue and others like seeing them
be courageous seeing them boldly
confront their contradictions yeah and
be willing to be seen in their
contradictions and attempting to see
others as truthfully as they can like it
sort of upgrades my sort of opinion of
the average human
yeah there we go this is a person I
didn't know a stranger that looks like
something someone that I might never
talk to if I saw them on the street yeah
and then I find something of value about
how they're going about being them and
it just yeah raises my my opinion of the
average person the higher my opinion of
the average person gets just the better
the world feels because it's like full
of people out there and when I hate
people it's like kind of right it's like
not so good that it's full of people and
when I like a more like more I like them
the better it is right to me what you're
talking about actually is is one of the
things that I think I've come to
understand what the capacity that doing
things like circling deepens and what I
heard you say is you're listening for
human beings have changed like who you
consider human beings to be is deeper
right like you're watching you get to it
because it's not just about like
watching a movie right just passively
watching a movie no like you're actually
engaged right in fact you're committed
to be fully engaged and so when somebody
goes through that you are a part of that
like you watch them you feel it you're
but you're on their side some part of
you is like the part of you that like
cares about like whatever it is that
you're moving towards you're watching
this person moving towards them on some
level you're watching them like act out
your life right in a different way and
that that is I think listening I've come
to understand interestingly enough is to
be like the biggest and the most
important thing to develop in your life
like because you know it's funny because
mostly when people think about
communication and you look at you know
the bookshelf which is tons of out
there about communication and no wonder
because it's like you think about think
about how many like conversations it
took to build this this thing that we're
sitting on I think
so for people that can't see we're
sitting on a couch or I'm sitting on a
couch yeah I mean I would guess
uncountable it's at least thousands
totally embedded in those thousands are
the conversations that happen that even
came to the notion of something like a
chair you know hundreds of thousands of
years ago right all of those millions
yeah
it's like so we're literally sitting on
top of like centuries and centuries of
conversations right so like on some
level we're made of conversations and
but usually when people think about
conversations they think about speaking
right like most books are really about
like teaching you like what to say and
how to say it and how to be magnanimous
and all those kinds of things but the
silent the silent power in conversations
in what make the difference in
conversations is actually the listening
and Heidegger talked about this a lot a
lot of it like a lot of existential
phenomenologist really kind of got like
deeply into this because if you think
about it you could say ontological e
speaking like it is it is the listening
that calls forth speech right there is
no speech without a listening that calls
it forth right so I would imagine like
in some way you're listening like in in
the in when if I were to go on and
listen to all your podcasts what I'd
actually hear right is all of the people
that you've podcast how they show up in
the presence of you're listening right
and what would make it alive I would
imagine is is to the degree that like
when they showed up you allowed yourself
to be impacted in such a way that it
deep into your own listening and how we
would know that it was you would then
you
would come through and how you talked
about it right so it's like it's like
most of the time I think people actually
don't listen but they don't listen to
that they're not listening they think
that they're listening right and there's
nothing wrong with that that's what it
is to be human is to not notice our
assumptions right that's what makes some
assumptions is we don't notice them it
feels a lot more comfortable for other
people who listen to me than formulas
and other people mm-hmm and to the
extent that I've got better at listening
I think a lot of it is when other people
give me the gift of listening to me like
there's some way that I feel valued
enough that then I can calm down and
return the favor
right but there's some something in me
that's that's like walks into any sort
of interaction like anxiously like am I
going to be seen and am I gonna am I
going to be able to say like what I want
right and it's sort of like in the last
circling weekend I went to but you
invited people to like just mention
anything that was like on their mind was
keeping them from being present or some
sort of problems like that at the
beginning and I spoke my mind and then I
was able to like drop in I like it's
important for me that everybody knows
everybody listens to me and now I can
listen to you
yeah and there appears to be some other
personalities like you seem to have less
of a need yeah to be heard right away
yeah like when I talk with you a lot of
times you start asking me like what's up
with me and I'm just really happy to
share so and I feel really good yeah
so I'm kind of wondering how you how do
you have developed like this capacity to
to listen to people mm-hmm how do you
reduce that anxiety that like you won't
be heard if you don't blurt something
out I think there's a lot of different
things that like attributed to that I
want to say that like first of all like
it hasn't always been that way for me
and on another level on a deeper level
it has always been that way for me on a
very deep level but I I think back about
I think back to 20 years ago like when
we first started doing circling and
stuff like so much
my attention was on how I was being paid
attention to right like like a lot of
what I said was on some level trying to
make like trying to make sure that I had
in some way control over how you saw me
like that I was impressive or that you
liked me and those kinds of things right
because it's it's really vulnerable to
be in a conversation right in fact in
fact that's why I think that we text so
much versus getting in a conversation
because conversations are inherently
uncomfortable right there's it it
reveals our vulnerability our sense of
obligation to the other that like lemon
Oz would say is you can't get under
right I am a responsiveness an ability
to respond to the other my whole nervous
system is already designed for that so
there's this kind of quality of that
even in the most ordinary simple as you
were talking about before right the most
ordinary simple conversations right have
this complex layers of a sense of
obligation to the other and how I under
hop like how I form an identity is
really given by how those conversations
were and the attention that was paid to
me throughout my whole entire life
that's how I've I've been shaped
literally like by other people's
attention and in interacting with that
as I've gotten older I think this has
been a combination of like probably some
of it has to do through like like really
through virtue and like my own like self
understanding and self inquiry and my
desire to like all my meditation that
I've done all the circling that I've
done all this desire to grow as a person
what's interesting about that like is is
what that has meant for me is as I've
grown as an in
visual I've become less and less of an
object to myself it's really interesting
like when I if I go back in time and I
look at areas in my life where I was
like a lot more insecure who I wasn't an
individual's more of an object of my own
thinking ray of my own thought because I
was constantly managing the sense of
vulnerability so when you say that was
more of an object to myself is it like
more of your attention was on yourself
and how you're showing up yeah totally
and I've just noticed like and I also
think that it's like not all of that
just virtue all of that just also feels
like just age like at a certain point
it's like there's a few years ago I
realized that I had lived my whole life
not really present to the finish line
like if you would ask me back then like
of course I knew I was gonna die but a
few years ago I started to like as I
started to age right
like I like what Joseph Campbell says is
like when age is like getting older
simply the mass to energy ratio changes
right and I've had injuries that don't
heal as much and and I watched my cheek
my face change and like I can't remember
like remember things as good as I used
to and there is this sense of like I am
very aware of the finish line and it's
so interesting because something about
that just has like the image of myself
and the importance of myself feel
inherently not nearly as important as it
used to be I still don't quite
understand all of that like well it
seems to make it makes some sense to me
that when you have a lot more potential
going for it just in terms of time that
what happens seems to carry more
steakley you you are more maybe you are
more who are you are going to be than
twenty years ago there is a wider
of who you could be yeah so so actually
like there there's more at stake in day
to day activity which a little later
than when you're older
totally and there's also a sense of like
I really do feel and maybe this is just
maybe this is just actually from life
experience but the notion of being a
self and what that is you used to feel a
lot more solid to me and actually having
having a kid going through a divorce
like kind of having my life all fall
apart and rebuilding it and you know
having all kinds of all kinds of stuff
that's happening going through all of
that stuff I just noticed I don't have
just my sense of what it is what itself
is the background sense of it or the
assumptions of it there's something
about it that just feels a lot more
finite and ephemeral that it's ever been
but what's interesting is that like what
actually has brightened a lot more is
the world like the projects that I'm
doing and the people that I'm talking to
and the things that are important to me
it's more like I just find myself a lot
more my attention being a lot more
invested in like meaningfulness of my
engagement at what's really salient for
me in the world and what you used to be
sailing it a lot more was the image of
myself and I have to say that that like
that just eliminate so much
energy because on some level I guess
that's kind of what it is to be yourself
I mean age almost kind of talks about
this about like the inherent narcissism
of being a self-conscious individual and
he talks about it the narcissism of
everyday life he doesn't just talk about
it in the pathological form but what he
says is like what it is to be have a
self representation is is the knowing of
myself through inference you know
because there's like the narcissist myth
which he doesn't he's not present to
that the beauty right
is in The Observer he's looking at his
own image and he falls in love with the
image but what he's blind to is that
actually the beauties that which is see
right and so he's tortured that to me
that is such the human predicament right
of like it's it seems like just a moment
I think there's something really there's
definitely something very elemental
about this yeah and there's something
you said earlier that was calling it up
in me to like this like this interplay
between the the perceiver and the
perceived yeah and sort of our desire to
be both in some way or our need to be
both yeah we need to be seen yeah it's
it's it's like it's very it feels very
fundamental and it feels like this might
be at the root of certain kinds of
dysfunction of psychological dysfunction
and it's a it's unclear to me and I'm
getting some some sense here it reminds
me earlier when I was talking about how
I need to be listened to and and that
enables me to then listen to others in
some way if I I'm just listening to
others that I feel resentful of them
okay I'm way like recognize my beauty
yeah and there's a way I can only
recognize my own beauty when other
people perceive it totally so what's it
like just to say like so weird you say
is like I only can wreck there's some
way in which I can only recognize my own
beauty if other people recognize it and
such that if they are talking about
their own beauty right for too long
you'll get cranky yeah in a resentful
yeah well you make that I don't know
because I want them to be beautiful too
I want to be surrounded by beautiful
people and that can only happen if I'm
record if I'm recognizing and
appreciating it yeah I've gotten a ton
of value out of being the perceiver and
letting other people being the perceived
yeah
Oh feel this feels like a pretty
complicated knot guy I don't really know
what to make of it I would say that like
to me I'm not sure it feels like the
anti narcissist to like if I'm
recognizing that I need other people to
see my beauty to feel beautiful then
there's some way that I'm identifying
with the group and and I'm and like I
need the group to be functional for me
to be functional yeah in a way that I
think some amount of that's actually
good like this idea that's this idea
that we can they're sort of like an idea
in and kind of hippie new-agey circles
if I'm going to like just put a big old
label on things that like you should
strive for being enough in yourself yeah
like your perception of yourself as good
should be all that you need and that's
what like enlightenment is and you don't
need anybody else right and that to me
does sound like the narcissistic fantasy
of aiming for what's the name of there's
like a philosophical term for being the
only thing that exists oh yeah idealism
like radical idealism or something it's
like when I believe that I'm the only
conscious being in the world because I'm
I wasn't that guy Singh stack but
there's a little term for this day if I
can figure it out in five seconds than a
solipsism yeah yes it seems to me that
like the the concept of enlightenment
that some people have is like to aim for
solicitous ISM as like a goal yeah and
there's something that I feel okay about
like needing other people to to be
valued because like I'm I'm a social
being I'm a social ape yeah and then but
then I think the way that I can be
assured of my own value is by working
towards the health of the group yeah and
keeping in identifying and having some
sort of
tightly connected smaller group in my
life that feels like family like through
which I can actually enact goodness
because if I'm identifying with a group
of a group that's too large like I can't
actually do that I'm not that powerful
not yet
yeah so yeah you're working you're
working this is where I am you're
working like I appreciate what you're on
the edge of ordering chaos
totally or we're just over the the realm
we're over until the Romilly unknown we
just stepped totally slightly over that
boundary yeah I thought like I
appreciate what you're saying it's like
you know there is this degree in which
there's like there's a kind of like like
neuroticism like or or there's a way in
which I can relate to really what we're
talking about narcissism is being an
other for others right so like it's
interesting because like I'll in
implicitly in the conversation there's a
guy in your head that I have a some
imagined sense of that is so much of
what I'm listening to in in innately and
how to talk with you like so for example
if you're perceiving what you imagine my
perception of you to be and you're
reacting to that yep totally and I would
say that like you know you're Scott it
like when you're a teenager like
hormonal II like neural neurologically
like you have so much energy around like
you pretty much are your social status
right like he just he is watching
teenagers like walk down the street and
I remember being that teenager and I
remember constantly being terrified
right but like putting there's this
distance between my insecurities and the
image that I put in the world and I was
constantly managing my perceptions with
no guidance like the only ideal
that I had was like this vague sense of
being cool and
I I had different degrees of being cool
throughout my you know my my teenage
years but when I was I wasn't exactly
sure how I got there
right and I thought all that was private
and if I thought none of that like what
was really important about that for me
is that you couldn't look like you cared
about how you were seen that was the
 trippy part about it so I'm
watching these teenagers walk down the
street and it's so obvious like to me
that they're all like they're
all watching each other they're like
posturing and they're being cool and
they're checking in with each other and
there's like with each other and
like there and then you know like one
person like like one one guy like set a
joke and it didn't go off well and he
saw him getting barest and he was like
like be cool or something like that the
other ones kind of laughed at him and
used him to shore them all their own
selves up and like then he just kind of
drifted in the back and you can feel him
just like like oh oh and then someone
looked behind him and then he'd like
changed right I think that there's
something interesting going on that is
pretty natural right like social status
so yeah I think I do that yeah this
sounds like me supposed to grow out of
that
totally well I think that there's there
Morris Berman wrote a book called coming
to our senses and he talked about he
called it the bait he talked about
something called the basic fault write
in for Berman like the basic fault was
this this dividing line between the self
and the other and he used a term I think
it was a French psychologist that talked
about used to term called self
confiscation and basically what self
confiscation is is when most of what I
consider myself is that image of you and
your it like the image of myself in your
mom
right to the degree that the self is
confiscated as to the degree that I've
identified myself as an other for other
and that everything that I do even when
I'm not in front of people is in
reference to thinking that I am the way
that you think about me
so that look at Facebook so I'm seeing
myself reflected in the eyes of others
and confusing that reflection yet with
myself
yep I'm trying to figure out how to tell
how much of that is going on is it a bad
thing if that's going on it seems to be
like like we're sort of implicitly
saying that's a negative well I think
that there's another there's another
thing that can be also be going on okay
like I've noticed I've noticed this when
I meditate a lot right if I'm like if my
if I'm like I love to meditate we were
just talking about this before I'm so
glad that I actually liked it because
otherwise I wouldn't do it but like if
I'm meditating an hour or two three
hours a day which is sometimes I can get
on that role I notice I notice um what
happens when people ask me how I'm doing
where I look it's really interesting
it's like when I meditate a lot my
practice is really deep when they like
when they ask me how I'm doing there's
this sense of like where I look is a lot
closer in like kind of like what's like
my body's pretty good feeling good
there's a sense of well-being right like
the like the in and out breath just
happening automatically that's pretty
 cool
right and when I'm not meditating as
much or when I'm under a lot of stress
you ask me how I'm doing
I'm like really gonna like load you up
with all the circumstances in which I'm
concerned about right or think about
that and and pretend like I'm not
concerned about them or something like
that where identify where I'm located is
less and less in you could say the
pleasures of being an experiencing body
like that's what we get confiscated from
right is is where I find myself so
there's this feeling that I often get
especially when I'm stressed out
yeah of my identity sort of being spread
over all these concerns and things I'm
trying to do and it's uncomfortable
actually feel stretched it's almost like
it's like a rack yeah you know like a
medieval torture rack in some way or
like a pizza pizza dough that's kind of
like being spread out and it kind of
feels tense it doesn't feel very good
yeah and I suppose if my locus of
identity is closer in then maybe I can
be just a little happy little lump of
dough totally well then well then it's
not like you don't have an identity or
don't care about it but I think you
could actually like it's more like you
can put like you can actually care about
it more in some way right you can
actually voluntarily be obliged and be
great to people but to the degree that
I'm not like Who I am is not really who
you think I am right to the degree that
I'm less identified with that the more
free I'm gonna be yeah right like the
less you'll be a slave to my perception
totally totally which then allows you to
surprise him delight me in probably more
ways totally like there's something
there's something uncomfortable about
interacting with someone that cares too
much about what I think about them like
I actually feel start feeling like
contempt for them and also in annoyance
with them know let's just say for a
second like is it all to explore this
with you what is it about somebody that
has that going on an extreme way where
they're like you can feel that like
they're really after like you're like
you their image of who you are in their
eyes and you have this interesting thing
that goes on it's like you start to hate
them mm-hm
what why what do you think what do you
think of it I think part of it is
I don't like that in myself yeah I think
if I'm around someone and I care a lot
about what they think about me and I'm
managing myself arey
yeah very tightly and this happens long
first dates then then like afterwards
I'm like I don't enjoy the time when I'm
with them and then afterwards I also
feel bad yeah and so like seeing that
seeing someone else get stuck in the
same trap I get stuck in it's like why
can't you just be better but I can't we
be better what like you're bringing up
my my self-loathing I think that's part
of it and then there's part of it like
it doesn't feel good to be in a position
of too much power over someone because
it starts like the responsibility for
making things happen relies too much on
me and so the interaction just has a lot
less fruitfulness and a lot less
surprises and a lot less mm-hmm it's
just a lot less delightful yeah totally
let's just say let's you look like a
thought experiment say that like what if
what if we found that that that was you
right it means like in this extreme way
right let's just say like that that like
you found out and not only you found it
out but like you found out that actually
everybody knew that about you
right and that you're just finding it
out in a way that you didn't realize
before but you're that person that's
just absolutely he's just craving
people's yeah validation yeah time what
would that be like I feel like I I would
be very tense and anxious and like every
interaction I had with someone I would
drain a lot of energy out of me because
there's always be so much at stake
whenever anybody saw me that I might
actually like retreat into my shell a
little bit around and become more
disconnected because I couldn't handle
social interactions
do you think you'd kind of like if like
say that like the jig was up and
everyone that we're at a party and
everyone just like the jig was up and
you got the news they all saw your need
for their attention right on your
identification with with how they
thought like would it be like
humiliating like what what wants to hide
I think that they would not want to
interact with me what would you of
course they wouldn't right it's like
just kind of like you
you'll discussed about that like just
imagine like you found out that they've
been feeling discussed the whole time
right yeah like you'd want to like some
part of you I heard you say like would
want to go into its shell yeah
and hide right yeah it would be very
vulnerable exactly and I think that
that's the thing about this that I I
feel like the only appropriate response
to that basic fault or that self
confiscation is is the only appropriate
response to it is compassion because
what it what it is is it's a
misconception or a mistaken you've
mistaken where you are right like what
could be more intense than for somebody
to be themselves lose contact with it
and then look for themselves where
they're not like that's the essence of
human suffering right if it's like that
does not boil down to like like
the thing underneath underneath
underneath of most of our suffering it's
 that but what's interesting is
that I think you highlighted this when
you think of really narcissistic people
right like say really narcissistic
people like the like the pathological
one it's like the ones that are just
showboats and they like you get
embarrassed just being around them
because they don't notice like how they
need everyone's attention right it's
funny
it's almost like everybody gets a free
pass from just hating them you
couldn't even imagine like Mother Teresa
like like even her you could be like oh
ha like Eve even she gets to be
disgusted by him and like then everyone
will talk about them and it's it's weird
like with that kind of pathology it's
interesting how it's almost impossible
not to hate them and I think
what that is is I think that they
display like in an exaggerated way like
the truth of art of our own ability
right like when we look at them the
reason why we hate them is because we
hate like like the place that even if
you don't know this conceptually the
innate sense of that I've lost I've lost
contact with my own being right I don't
know who I am
and on some level there's a difference
between what how I emerged spontaneously
as a being in the image I portray we all
have that sense of there being a
difference and if that got exposed that
would be like the worst news in the
world right but actually what that
really is though is is what that exposes
it's like you're a beating that
gives a the cares and and you're a
vulnerable human being that can be
mistaken right can be impacted by their
childhood and like not be seen and be
narcissus will be hurt and deeply
wounded and then try to resolve that
hurt through making sure that you see me
and love me and all those kinds of
things what's really going on underneath
that is that there's this like little
innocent being that didn't get what they
needed and don't know who they are right
like if you really just like it's funny
I'm just like kind of making that up and
just but like and I can feel myself just
being like my voice goes softer and
there's just a sense of tenderness and
like but it's very difficult to be with
that in ourselves
I feel like I'm sort of lost and I think
I need a small break for four for a
small restroom break and we'll cut this
part out let's keep it on there okay so
we can binge see what happens if we
don't manage our herself representation
[Laughter]
there's so many topics of conversation I
want to talk about I was thinking about
a lot of them while I was meditating
can't throw a few at you
we just like to lay out a menu yeah and
see like what resonates I mean this
there's like we can tweak and we can
complete this loop into it a pretty nice
a nice thing you think so yeah yeah all
right how do we complete the loop
well it's looks like there's like just
talking about like how that like what
are the implications of like what when
you know what is it to be itself like
what is it to go like be courageous and
like so like voluntarily sacrifice your
precious self-image for the sake of
something greater and what happens when
you do that over time
like what is it to be like injured that
way especially if you had a like a
raging father who had a lot of power
over you like that in you experience
humiliation and then you couldn't repent
like with that what that turns into and
how like you work through that and but I
think just like what what came up for
you and how alive it is for you like
just I think it's I think that's rich
who I didn't even know if there's this
many options um but what were you
thinking so hold on something about
voluntarily sacrificing self image that
sounds really interesting to me because
that's sort of a path that is part of my
path
it's like let myself be seen in a way
that's less controlled yeah and it's
like there's some way that I'm managing
sort of a higher level self-image
through that like by sacrificing my
self-image and letting people see me
yeah more authentically then I become
known as someone who is more authentic
yeah but it's also like a self image
that I like better so so there's some
way that I'm acting for myself through
that more so because it takes less
energy to manage yourself that is a self
image that is more authentic in the
world and it's more fun to do yeah like
if I'm putting something out that's like
really authentic so people can get to
know me know a part of me that like
ordinarily I might suppress like that's
just just tasty it's fun and and like I
like myself better when I do that so so
so like there is a way that there is a
way that that I'm gaining social status
by doing that and that I know that I'm
doing that but there's also a I'm
gaining status with myself and and I
think it's bringing my self-image closer
in yeah so so it's not it's not
completely devoid of some of these
negative patterns but I think it's
better that seems to be well you like
one of the things I'm appreciating about
like is like you're like I didn't
experience you being at all defensive
about this but you're like you volunteer
like oh I think I do that and like
you're even talking about oh this
is like deeper than I thought and but
there's a way in which it's accessible
to you to be aware of I would imagine
that that wasn't possible at some point
for you it's true someday I grew into
because I found that it was possible to
make life better through truth in which
it was not possible there was a very
severe limits to my ability to make life
better through yeah
like trying directly to improve people's
opinions on with me yeah but and trying
to like directly improve my my image of
myself yeah I hit the gym I can dress
better I can speak better I can sort of
market myself better I can work on my
personal brand yeah that's like it takes
so much energy and it's so limited but
right but confronting myself through
through truth and seeing more of the
truth of what I am it's just it's just
so much easier to make it brings me into
a state of I've heard I've heard some
people using this term critic aleck
criticality which is when a system is
capable of making big changes and small
efforts yeah and so it's so pursuing the
truth of seeing myself including all of
my faults right seems to give me just a
lot more power to change totally hi how
did you know to have the truth be
important like what how did that come
about
when did the like the truth big start
become more important than other things
me it's always been important to me
abstractly I cared about truth as my
highest value from the first time I
thought about such things right maybe
nine ten years old something like that
but this idea that there was a lot going
on in me and that there was a truth to
myself that I wasn't seeing was probably
it was it's a very slow dawning
realization I think Buddhism and
psychology have turned on a lot of these
lights for me totally but there's also
been this I'm actually trying to think I
was precisely one now because I can
remember grad school I didn't have this
in grad school for me was a
Satan did about seven years ago like
maybe I was starting to catch on to
something but he didn't quite have it I
think it took it took like heartbreak
and frustration at I tried to proceed in
the world
without knowledge of self and I got
stopped yeah and had I been more
competent and say computer programming
maybe I would have never looked into
myself I think it was part of a crisis
response yeah the things going poorly
yeah it's like life isn't giving me what
I want
let's figure out let's start moving to
other other areas to mine yeah - mine or
mine - mine goodness and and I think I
really started looking into that you
know what if I had a date it to a
particular date would say maybe my first
Burning Man and which also included my
first strong psychedelic trip I think
that was well shortly thereafter I
started psychedelics will do it right
yeah yeah so if psychedelics certainly
are a confrontation with self I believe
yeah a lot of people use them to get
away from themselves and I have to yeah
but I I believe that to some extent both
the beauty and the terror that people
that I have experienced yeah in that
state has to do with like the beauty and
ugliness that are the beauty and just
terror of being me yeah totally and
having both of those things
amplified totally and and I think that
the the thing that has been a great gift
to me is that I find when I get
depressed
I don't feel either the beauty or the
terror very clearly I feel sort of this
negative but very monotone sort of
variants and then the psychedelics
it feels very cathartic when when I
again recognize even when I feel the
terror like that feels cathartic but
yeah and then when I recognize that
there has been beauty all along right
there is real beauty that I see in me
like that yeah
it's hopeful yeah you meet yourself yeah
and it's not all bad totally and it's
not as bad as I've been fearing you
admit you maybe more than you you maybe
more than you think you are I think
that's the big I think that's the big
thing that I think what word in my
experience is is there's like Who I am
right like there's who I actually um
which is somebody who's up to something
but there's this way in which I can like
kind of point to myself and I can if you
ask me what I'm up to I can like a point
to myself and I go I'll look at myself
and I can tell you about it and tell you
all that but I can also point to the
same place right here in my chest that
might might finger in my chest and I can
I could ask what is it up to and it's
really interesting I have a very
different sense like but a very real
sense in the it to me what is it up to
feels that puts me in this different
like I get the sense of that somehow
when I say what am i up to that is
happening inside of the it and there's a
there's in and I as I've gone through my
life I can't tell you how many times I
have found out why I did what I did I
thought I was doing this in order to did
it up but actually when I actually get
there I realized oh this is what I was
interested in this is what I was up to
this is you know almost everything good
in my life is a function of getting to
where I got and like when I got there I
realized I couldn't have ever
wanted it liked or known about it so
there's this kind of way in which we
kind of like we we have this kind of I
think we have this weird folktale or
superstition about ourselves that
there's this like I am me and I have
access to myself and I know who I am in
that like if you ask me I can tell you
and I am Who I tell you truth of it is
man
like like just like you I will say
things and do things that I didn't know
I was capable of right
I can even want things my whole life and
not even be aware of it right so there's
this kind of level of like I think where
what starts to happen is like what for
example what you're saying is like you
know the insidiousness of the narcissism
all right or the self confiscation is
like I feel the NEEMO inside the
emptiness inside from the vault right
and then I feel that emptiness and
therefore I engages in this incessant
activity that is trying to get you to
like reconnect with the other right in
order to fill the emptiness but of
course it requires by activity in order
for that image to be formed so it it
actually doesn't actually fulfill the
emptiness so like in your like saying
well well like I really appreciated that
you cut you really kind of got that cuz
I can I can appreciate that too of where
well okay now I can think about myself
right now and I like then I can see
myself being a person that doesn't care
about all this that it's like more right
I can just like I want to be a person
that's less narcissistic and more other
oriented or something like that but
what's interesting about that is that if
you actually take that on and let's just
say that you kind of get there when
you're there though this has been my
experience when you're there you realize
that there isn't what you thought and
that in that you couldn't have wanted it
right
Adi Shanti sent this was I
Facebook post on like unlisted what
people were crazy over but Ali Shanti
one time said that like he was talking
about enlightenment and he was saying
you know what I couldn't have wanted
this there was no way I could have
wanted this oh yeah
right I I think I'm getting in some I
think I think I'm getting something from
you yeah if I were to voice it in my own
words it would be something like like my
current path in life of like trying to
straighten out all these knots through
having conversations with people it sort
of comes in response to the period of
like the deepest emotional hell that
I've ever had and and in that suffering
I've learned to be open to the suffering
of others we're actually now when I
listen to someone suffering like before
I had like some idea that I wanted to be
a compassionate person or something so I
would try to listen to people suffering
but I couldn't feel it and now I have
something to compare that to and I do
feel it
like when someone when a friend tells me
how they're suffering like it touches
that piece of me it touches that memory
of suffering that I now have it's like I
didn't know the color red and now I know
it yeah and and so and I will I like it
I love it I am a way more powerful and
whole incapable being of interacting
with the world in a positive way because
I know what suffering is but it wasn't
what I was aiming at and then that
actually happened on accident yeah in
some way yeah well I think the thing of
it is is like if you're paying attention
right and you let yourself like you let
yourself your attention go where it goes
your attention is like your attention is
is going to notice things to attend to
that aren't aligned and actually will
threaten your self-image right like for
example that thing that you're talking
about earlier right
like like you're seeing this you're
seeing this thing going on in a family
and you're like oh there's a dead spot
like an in in to walk into that and risk
like not being liked and being mad at
and all the things that like I would
rather control I have somebody ice
skated in my face than experience but
your attention can notice it and feel
the dissonance and if you're true and
like to your attention because your
attention is a lot more intelligent than
what the contents of my thought or my
thinking right at it like like attention
educates thinking and so if you actually
just start to like confront what bugs
you in your life and handle it it's
usually like if like everyone listening
it's just like if you think about it
it's like if you just kind of look
around and look at all the that
you're ignoring that like speaks to you
and if you just started to have to go
handle it I guarantee you it would put
you in positions that feel embarrassing
that feel like humiliating like that
feel like less than the image of what
you want to do it will be it will
with your dislike like most prized
little self representation they so it's
like if you just start to handle what
captures your attention which I think
has more to do with who you are than my
representation of myself in my head that
I try to get mirrored out here right is
you start to do that like and you start
to show up for that and you start to
like eat what what ends up happening is
if you volunteer for it and you exercise
courage for the sake of something
greater you'll go through a whole
experience where like you'll basically
like die over and over again but like
you'll die in these ways and kind of be
reborn in it with a genuine sense of
meaningfulness and you'll start to have
a lot more of a sense of self-respect
right like not self-esteem not the
gratification of being like
being seen in someone else's eyes
because I think that's more reality yeah
the thing that's cool for me about this
is that I basically trying not to be
bored something like that like I've when
life is inescapably boring I start to
wish I wasn't alive for a long enough
period of time and there's something
about noticing all the places that feel
dissonant that feel threatening or like
where I know something's wrong
and then confronting them that seems
every time I do that it's opening up
some chapter of adventure and it seems
like it sort of has and unlimited I mean
this is me being optimistic and speaking
as a poet but it seems like it hasn't
like an unlimited capacity to bring
adventure into my life there you go
so what you just did in my view is you
just demonstrate the listening did I
yeah to me like well that was just man
he goes back to the deep ravine I was
thinking in response to you talking well
yeah as I was impacted by you totally
like you you you listening if you have a
listening that opened up and actually
like not just like not just connected
the dots for what you already know but
you or some part of you that was
available like to be changed and
influenced by what you heard and like me
like like me watching you kind of take
that and put it into your own words and
like literally I was like oh he's in a
flow state right now right you're like
you're not trying to be cool you're not
thinking about it like you're just
totally just here and like you're I'm
watching you reconstruct like the
structure of your life in some way and
what's fascinating for me is like I'm
like I feel truly hurt right I
feel kind of like you really you really
got what I was saying
not like information that you now have
stored but like the dynamic thing that
is a conversation like there's something
inherently like beautiful about that and
alive can you feel that like right now
yeah well it was so interesting I often
think of listening as being like
something hard and something that takes
my energy and that was something fun
yeah that didn't take my energy it makes
me feel totally enlivened so it's kind
of cool that both of us could feel
enlivened by me listening right and so
like think of think about this is like
when you go outside I bet it's like this
is another thing about like
conversations the ones that have really
impacted me like some of them are really
dramatic right some of them are like
obviously this changed my life but then
there's other conversations where what
they're saying like some part of me kind
of got like it was like oh that's
different or meaningful or like like I
saw things from an angle through
understanding you then I hadn't quite
seen before and it wasn't that dramatic
but then I go away and it's kind of like
there's this open like like there's a
tear in the map right and so where that
tear in the map is is the place where
the like you could say the world itself
gets to shine through right that's where
like there's light and newness that
comes in and so I could imagine like I
bet the next time that I see you which
will be I think on on Friday you'll
probably tell me about some experience
where you're like having something to do
with what we were talking about right
here about like narcissism itself
confiscation or the way that you pay
attention or the way that you listen
that will that have informed your life
and will help you understand your life
better and have more distinctions and
they give you more choices and it'll be
exciting and you'll share about it with
me and I probably do the same thing with
you so in this way it's like like this
is how I think conversations can
actually like we get week
create each other in them it's like like
we express ourselves but we also
construct each other in it and that's
why I think it's really important to
like like I think we form ourselves
through a totally totally so I I I know
this it for me I'll in this kind of get
set to some of the like the thing that
you asked me about like listening having
a deep sense of listening
we're either like really experienced
that a lot is actually through through
reading philosophy I've always like I'm
not a good reader like it took me until
I was like 11 it's like to even begin to
start reading I have all kinds of
learning disabilities and stuff like
that but for whatever reason when right
around when we started circling I
somehow got obsessed with Martin
Heidegger and I don't know why I'm still
finding out why but through reading him
in grappling with with that text it's
really interesting because especially
for Heidegger but really anybody like
anybody that like you have a sense of it
my admiration for and your call like
they're saying something but I can't
quite understand it's a little bit
outside of my comprehension when you go
and like for example with Heidegger and
this can be the case for anybody that
you talk to as well right in order to
understand what he's saying I had to
step so outside of my frame of reference
to then look back on what he was saying
from a different angle - then maybe
understand and comprehend what he was
saying that like doing that over and
over and over and over again I didn't
notice that it transformed my like my
whole way I saw my reality like that I
actually had to like when you were
around people that you admire or when
you read like authors that are like like
smarter than you are or going into an
area that's meaningful for you but
beyond you and you like you struggle
with it and you really like let yourself
want to know it you acts
what's interesting is that you actually
have to become someone that could
actually think the thought that the
author is thinking right that it's a it
transforms your mind and it transforms
your listening and it transforms how you
see so that's why I think it's
brilliant
that you go yeah I wanna like I
want to be around people and have
meaningful conversations I want to be
around people that I respect and I
admire I think the intuition there is
that like if I'm around them and I
actually want to understand them and be
and be in the presence of them what I
admire is that whoever they are is gonna
require me to be able to have the kind
of attention and listening that could
actually grok them that thus and that
relationship is like that right so I
think it's just like I think it's a
really I think it's really wise of you
to have that as a goal right and you're
like resting know that I did I have had
that as a conscious goal about having
conversations with people I admire I do
interact with their thought often
through podcasts or a reading pinko and
I'm certain people I'm drawn to because
like why do I admire someone probably
because there's something about how
they're doing something yeah that I want
to have yeah totally and sometimes I
don't necessarily have confidence that I
can have that capacity but you know I'm
I'm still taking taking in some part of
it yeah
through through this interaction with
them in it I would imagine that whatever
it is that you see first of all I would
bet actually you probably don't even
know what it is that you admire like
that's you could probably think about it
but the truth of it is if you really
admire it right you a lot of it's
unknown and you just have like little
intimations of it but but it's true like
this
get the sense that there's something
meaningful about what the way that they
see life or the way that they're doing
things that is that you don't quite
understand but it speaks to you as an
individual right that becomes worth
being awkward and struggling like like
trying to understand them or like go
through the intimidation that you have
to go through it to like like hum be
around there or whatever this like the
struggle is that you have to deal with
which has to do with you know like you
have to kind of get over your self-image
and your insecurities and or because
there's something meaningful that's
worth it and it is you're willing to
sacrifice on some level some things that
it really would be more comfortable if
you didn't make that sacrifice yeah I'd
like that
I think about this reminds me of my
experience in teaching painting when I
went to an art class and I'm not a very
good painter but I know some people I
went to an art class when I even try
because they were so afraid of being bad
yeah and so my partner and I we made in
art class that was like about just
making a mess and and we we tried to
make it to directly target like like
that impulse like this sort of self
censoring impulse and I noticed that
when I'm around people that I feel like
are above me in some way I do have this
self censoring impulse like I am the guy
that's afraid to paint for fear of being
seen as like bad but of course you're
bad the first time you try something new
like it's part like action builds yeah
us like we need to act in order to build
ourselves yeah and sometimes our actions
are you know they're not cool totally if
you're really living your life like
you're constantly involved in something
in which you suck at
so I'm purpose right yeah we have like
we have five ish minutes left I wanted
to ask you hmm I have this this I mean
Joe I'm enjoying our conversation
I am too I have this this constant
frustration which is having
conversations that don't feel meaningful
to me and I'm feeling trapped in them
yeah and then feeling like the world is
largely composed of them yeah what's do
you have it
have you figured anything out or hum
that well a couple things like well
first of all I think it's like I guess
it's a little bit self-evident but maybe
not like let's assume nothing is right
it's it's like you know it it seems that
people the sweet spot is like you know
what thou is talk about like just on the
edge of quarter and chaos right or
yin-yang and that you want to be right
on the sweet spot and that's the most
optimal place to be if you're around
people that like for example addicts are
like this right like people are really
addicted they're constantly too far over
into chaos
so they're incoherent right in the drama
and all that stuff that like comes of
that and then but if you're people if
you're with people that are like too
much about safety and they're all about
security right and then they're too
rigid and fixed and therefore when
you're around them it's the opposite
it's like you're everything becomes
about ensuring that something doesn't
happen right and so the range of the
conversation that you're that you can
talk in is boring right because it's
repetitive so if you think about it like
but but here's the thing is it there is
always a way that you can enact with the
conversation by paying attention to
what's meaningful to you sometimes what
you find is meaningful to you is you
feel inspired it's like a light and you
want to go towards it the other other
way that meaning shows up is it's like
painful something hurts something isn't
happening right like or it's dissonant
like if you're in a conversation where
it's like something is your sufferings
in some way if you bring your attention
to that and get interested in that right
and connect with them and in
some way start to move towards that
explicitly I guarantee you you won't be
bored right now you got to do it you
have to you know to me I have a high
value on like I don't want to like I
want to I want to be respectful of
people's egos and their structures and
like there's a reason why we have were
socialized like we didn't have like
social rules and like respect like this
kind of given respect for each other and
the culture that has built those social
roles up there's a wreath there's a
reason why we have that it would be in
 total chaos so I'm not a
proponent personally of like like
dropping the the honesty bombs without
deeply considering the impact of that so
I'm more of like I think the artful way
of doing it is like one you care about
things so whatever it is that you care
about when it's not happening in some
degree you feel it when it is happening
in some degree you feel it right either
one of those if you just follow your
impulse they're right unlike you just
start to move towards it politely but
just pushing the edge maybe it's like
maybe you like what I like to do one of
the things I find myself doing is like
when I see somebody's kind of like like
insecure and and like managing
everything or up I love like to
just point that out by like implicitly
making fun of them or hexing them just a
little bit where I'm just really like
I'm seeing who they are but like I'm
like I'm like you know like it maybe
I'll come up to you I'll be like huh
aren't you interesting right like if
you're like say I saw you like really
being concerned about like like whether
or not you're getting enough tension or
you're being seen or something like that
and like I see you self-conscious I
could come up to you it's like be like
are you like aren't you interesting
right
and I'll joke with you about it or
something I'll I'll push that edge or it
may be something like you know
I'm like I'm noticing I I have feel this
pressure to pay attention because I'm
really afraid that if I let you know
that I'm bored that you'll take that
personally but actually I am kind of
bored and I want to like I want to have
more aliveness and so I'm taking this
risk right now with you boom here we are
now we don't have any idea what's gonna
happen next
yeah it seems like there's there's like
some I think it's like it's worthwhile
it seems worthwhile the push let's find
the edge in minutes it's something
painful I think the the failure mode
that most of my friends fall into is
like talking about information that's
like not interesting to me yeah we're
like I want to I want us to feel more
life together
totally so like approaching that edge
but having respecting care for the the
other person's experience as well and
not just not just pushing them without
also establishing some sort of ground of
concern yeah like some sort of grounded
go+
guard yeah look care for them yeah we
respect them as a human being I don't
like it that's your intent I think you
can do everything wrong and I'll still
work out right but if you secretly just
kind of hate them and resentful towards
them and you kind of make them an other
and then you do that like you can even
use all the right language yeah and it
won't totally work out at the end
because it's really our intent yeah I
think I wait too so long for
conversations to go down a path which is
painful to me that when eventually I act
to try to alter things it is it comes
from a place that's like you know just
kind of eyes closed just kind of like
saying no and and like it's just pushing
people and this some way like I think
even if I act earlier I can have more
capacity to tend to them yeah and tend
to our connection it's a it's something
that's sort of an active area of growth
for me standish you stand up and go like
stand up in the middle of things like
take your shirt off and go don't you see
my cosmic specialness you're not seeing
that like I think about it all the time
how come
is there any final we're actually like
basically out of time so it's the only
any final words that you'd like to leave
or our listeners or things for them to
check out only I I think well the thing
I'm just really present to is I feel
awake I feel awake too like that last
thing we just talked about of like in a
conversation if if what matters to you
something that's happening isn't
addressing that or it's you're gonna
feel it and if it is you're gonna feel
it it's inspiration to boredom to
irritate it to upset right all of that
like I just want to kind of talk through
it's like all of that I'm really giving
is it points me to what's meaningful and
like so being authentic is being true to
what I find meaningful and if I pay
attention to what my emotions are as
indications of meaning or revealing the
world as meaningful and like I keep
bringing my attention to that place and
interacting with it spontaneously and
paying attention to the other person and
feeling into myself and addressing that
I have a feeling like man I'm gonna end
up weaving a life that when I look back
the pattern is gonna be really really
rich right the we that I the weave that
I end up weaving will be one that is
probably more true and authentic and
alive and that the self the self that I
so like yearn for other people to see
I'll end up probably being that but be
the one that needs to be seen less for
it or something the other thing I wanted
to talk about to was this is what I've
really gotten was circling and I think
it keys into like what we talked about
with
listening it's hard to describe what the
mirror in like the mirror has been a
cultural historical anomaly for us right
because when I look in the mirror what I
see is not my sense of being someone
right like when I feel myself like like
my sense of being myself and then when I
look in the mirror and I think we all
have this experience when you look in
the mirror and you don't know you're
gonna look at yourself you see yourself
and you have this moment where like
you're an other and then you realize
it's you and then you have this weird
sensation of like what you're seeing is
not yourself right what you're seeing is
is like the the this the self that the
other one sees of you that's what a mere
does and what's interesting is like it's
like at some point when we were kids and
we looked in the mirror like we when we
looked in the mirror we couldn't
recognize that that was me in the mirror
right and then we start then we could
write and then but but it's not stable
like then you kind of fall out of that
when next time A's in the mirror you
don't quite recognize and then you
started and at some point something
becomes stable where you can recognize
yourself as the reflection in the mirror
and then I think the tragedy is at some
point when I look in the mirror and I
have the feeling of myself and I see the
image of myself and it's different I
call the one in the mirror me but I
think the one in it like actually the
one that's the other that's the that's
the stranger that's the one that other
people see but Who I am if I'm really
deeply me what if I were to draw a
self-portrait what I would draw is the
room like I draw my like my knee and my
foot I draw it like a little part of my
nose like who I am to me is I find
myself here already begun with certain
things that are salient like so you're
the perceiver
yeah I'm that like it as as Heidegger
would say like I'm the clearing right in
which the world gathers itself and I
think that like I think this is what
I've started trying to articulate is is
what what I think I call the quality of
my life like when I go like how am i
doing how's my life going it's starting
to feel more like like I feel more
identified with being the witness of it
and what shines forth is the beauty in
the world like and it has me think that
maybe actually enlightenment you know
whatever the that is is like
probably less about being being a being
a hunk of thing that like has some kind
of special consciousness I have a
feeling it's more like it's really more
like what you actually see is there's
more light in the world you're able to
see more of the light within the world
and see more of it and being a reverence
of it like I think that we are actually
more of like this space that gets to
 and give testimony right like
because on some level like there was a
big bang and it grew a nervous system
and it just happened like a fraction of
a second ago when you look at all time
like we are the place where all that is
like opened its eyes for the first time
and took a look at itself and saw itself
as itself right that is on some level
there's who I am in my life and whether
or not I can like I can like be someone
and have a legacy and all the things
that I'm usually concerned about all day
long but there's this other way in which
I'm already more than I can ever
accomplish like I get to be the one who
where the world I get to be the place
and the witness to the world
in all of its life and his death and its
feelings and its tragedy I get to be
that occasion in that sight and I get to
say what I think about it like what the
 what else could you ever want mmm
that might be a good place to stop since
we're the universe perceiving itself
right now what better place could we
possibly get to good talking with you as
always my friend good talking with you
guy your treasure good to see you