welcome everyone to the monthly QA and I
also want to thank my patreon supporters
right from the beginning for all of the
tremendous support they provide that's
much appreciated I want you to
understand that I'm doing my best to put
your support into action both in the
production of videos as many of you know
I'm also been hosting a live meditation
and contemplation and Qigong Sangha a
course class every weekday morning at
9:30 a.m. so I'm currently doing work on
and trying to obtain funding for the
next series after Socrates so there's a
there's a lot that's been done in
publishing some book chapters with
Christopher master Pietro and articles
so I want you to know that I am where
I'm working very diligently and I
believe honestly very responsibly with
the support that you provided me to try
and turn it into I guess products
services that sense of capital is there
any ways things that will benefit people
at large as they attempt to wrestle with
meaning crisis and meta crisis so I
wanted to assure you that I am working
very hard and I have feel I feel that
the last wall has actually been very
very productive in terms of being able
to afford people in transformation and
in deeper discourse and deeper
connection with each other so thank you
once again for enabling me to help so
many other people are very grateful and
appreciate it so what we'll be doing
today is this is a regular general Q&A
and we will be first taking questions
from the patreon supporters we will then
take questions that
text it in and then finally we will take
any questions that are being sent in
right now by the chat so let's get to
the first question and this is from a
very devoted and I mean that in a
positive sense the word participant
within the Sangha is karima I believe
scream is also active on the discord
server well that's another thing that
has been set up by Brett hopefully I'll
get a chance to talk about that for
those of you are unfamiliar with it
there's a discord server around or we
could infinite meeting crisis and voices
with for Vicki and the meditation and
contemplation course so karena is
involved with all of this and she is
she's an important participant as a
creamer asks well first of all she makes
a statement and then she follows it up
with the question she said we will not
survive without adopting soulful living
as the soul of humanity awakens the
unfoldment of higher consciousness will
change civilization to a new era based
on wholeness interrelatedness and
oneness can you not kick-start the
religion that's not a religion on a
simple premise of recognizing with
reverence and awe that we have a soul
thank you so this is a very pertinent
question
Karina's asking because there have been
a series of discussions one with paul
van der clay another one with Andrew
Sweeney and Christopher Metro Pietro and
also overlapping with some discussions
with Jordan Hall where I've been
exploring this topic the topic of soul
so there's a term that I've adopted for
trying to describe this methodology stop
my term it's so Kari has a book on
Augustine's invention of the inner self
but he he says he dislikes the title the
books published in English but dislikes
the title because the English word
invention is not what he wants he
actually wants the Latin term inventio
because the Latin word inventio
actually straddles the distinction
between inventing something and
discovering something
which is actually getting pertinent for
a sort of a Neoplatonic framework which
Augustine belonged to and so I sort of
co-opted this with the term of reinvent
EO and so what I've been exploring in
the dia logos is the notion of the
reinvent EO of soul and the way I've
tried to understand that is instead of
I've tried to sort of put aside the
metaphysical and ontological Heritage
baggage depending on how you want to
view it and try to get a sense of it
again from a phenomenological functional
and the idea that I have been exploring
India logos is that there is a capacity
we have to come into a relationship
between the more nests of reality that
is afforded by the fact that reality is
ultimately combinatorially explosiveness
Spinoza like to say that it has infinite
attributes so between the more nests and
then something that Collingwood made
really clear an apparent in his
philosophy of aesthetics and art and I
think it's deeply convergent with the
Buddhist notion which is this notion of
such miss dat everything even this rock
has a it has a particularity an identity
as the term is a suchness a here nowness
that is non categorical there's a way in
which this is even if it's a stone even
if it's a black rot there's a way in
which it is unlike all the other members
in that category and as those of you who
have followed this series you know that
I'm talking about relating to this not
in the Hamming mode of having it as a
Roth but in the bean mode right relating
to it almost like a dhow I'm not calling
it a person but what I'm trying to get
is its particular suchness Sunnis be
patient with me I'm trying to get
somewhere with this because I'm trying
to get how we can bring back an
important notion
so if you think of the more nests as an
experience of the mystery of
participation the way we are coupled to
a combinatorial explosive reality and
you can think of the suchness as the
mystery of our individuation how our
relevance realization is self evolving
in a way that right never never can be
fully captured I can never fully bring
my process of framing into any frame so
there there's a mystery to my suchness
and how i individuate and of course
young made a great deal of this there's
a mystery to my right there's a mystery
to the morning and how I participate and
there are states of being in which those
are put into light relationship almost
like a stereoscopic vision and Taichi
talks about this right the eye that
looks out and the eye that looks in or a
car talks about this the eye by which I
see a god it's the same by which God
sees me so the idea here is we have a
capacity to bring about this kind of and
I'm using this as a metaphor vision and
it strikes me that that's deeply
resonant with on the work of the
philosopher theologian Paul Tillich who
talked about we're always in a todas a
creative tension opponent processing
between individuation and participation
this is why I prefer Tillich over young
because Tillich I think sees more
correctly the existential relationship
that we're in and so I think of soul as
that about us that lives that tension
that lives that tone us that allows us
to phenomenologically experience the
connectedness the mourners into such
nacinda suchness and awareness and I
think it's important to reeve if I or
reinvent you there
sense of what it is to know not as a
belief but participatory knowing know
that you have a soul as distinct from
the way we have come to think of what
our self what a self is or what a mind
is and so I think that if we come to
understand this week we can come to
understand that in addition to the
ethical and existential commitments I
have to you because you have a mind
deeply aware of these and I committed to
them because I'm a teacher
it takes seriously you know we there was
an expression at one time what we're
talking about the value of education was
growing up that a mind is a terrible
thing to waste that there's reverence
and offer for the human mind and I think
what we're what we're seeing in our
culture right now is we're trying to get
a sense of what is the appropriate
reverence and awe for what what a self
is and we're very unclear about it and
we're wrestling with it but I think what
the religious traditions in their
various ways have also tried to get us
to remember in the sense of snotty it is
to remember right that we should have
reverence and offer this capacity of
soul and what's what's particularly
interesting about that as it seems to be
it seems to be self-reflective what do I
mean by that not only is soul something
for which I should have reverence and
awe soul is exactly the capacity that is
I ought that I am relying on that is a
40 the experience of on the experience
of beauty the experience of wonder it's
particularly the way in which we can get
a sense of how the true the good and the
beautiful actually converge in some way
that we only have an inkling before so
I'm not I'm not sure that I completely
agree with
a crema sense that there's the that
there's a sort of a worldwide awakening
occurring or that this is a sufficient
thing but I do agree with the idea that
trying to reinvent you because all of
these are going through reinvent to
reinvent here what mine means a
cognition means that's for a cognitive
science reinvent eeeh what self means
that's why we're doing that all this
work on modal confusion and the agent
the agent or Mena relationship and now
reinvent here what sorry what self leads
that's the reinvent here of the surface
of all that work on the agent or in a
relationship and then the reinvent EO of
soul as trying to help us to cultivate
the virtue of reverence for the
experience of awe
these experiences of awe and wonder that
are so important to us but we don't know
why it's so important to us because
they're soulful just like other things
are wonderful they're soulful to us
because they disclose to us the deepest
possibilities of what we are and notice
how these three reinvent iou's are so
deeply interconnected together the
reinvent EO of mind and for a cognitive
science that reinvent yourself and the
whole agent arena idea and modal
existence of overcoming moral confusion
and the reinvent heel of soul as this
capacity this fundamental existential
ponents that most develops our humanity
and personhood so I would say that that
interconnected manifold of the
reinventing of mind self in soul is
central to their religion that's not a
religion I know there are there are
people that are important in this
community like Brett who are at times on
unhappy with a religious term that
carries with it all kinds of
metaphysical baggage like souls are sort
of ghosts trapped inside your body or
stuff like that which I'm not in any way
advocating I understand that and I do
appreciate that
the thing is I can't find a good
alternative for that term and I do want
to pick up like I did with the term
religio I do or pick up respectfully
that religious and spiritual heritage
but I want a vector into something as
Karina is foreseeing that could possibly
afford what is needed for the religion
that's not a religion we have to break
up this idea of the monolithic mind that
we got from Descartes that a completely
self-enclosed
computational machine that is just in
the head and doesn't go through any
significant developmental transformation
and that when it reasons it's a
completely monologic thing we have to
break up that whole monolithic monad
idea of who and what we are and so two
degree to which the reinvent EO of these
three and more than these three but
these three especially my self and soul
can be undertaken I think it is none of
its necessary but it seems to me it
seems to be very important perhaps
indispensable for trying to bring about
what we're trying to bring about with
the religion that's not a religion that
was a long answer because it was a very
important question and it's really and
you can you can sense that I'm caught
between something that is very much
drawing me but also hesitancy because
this is something that I'm still in the
process of wrestling with and you know
and I'm really appreciative of the forum
that Andrew Andrew Sweeney is providing
you know that Chris and I and him and he
and I and Zach where we were trying to
do we explore India logos all of this
reinvent here and a deeply integrated
and coordinated fashion so I want to
thank ended publicly right now forth for
doing that and it's a it's a wonderful
thing to do okay so let's try and move
on to the next question
Mackenzie Levitt who's also a patron
it's good to hear from you Mackenzie
what are your thoughts on the book film
Life of Pi and its relationship to the
meeting crisis this is a wonderful
question I highly recommend the film I
found the film just aesthetically to be
one of the most beautiful films I have a
scene in my life
I believe it was Angley the director but
I might be misremembering and if so I
apologize to the person who actually
directed it but I'm not aware of the
cinematographer I don't remember but the
Life of Pi does something really really
beautiful because it brings out a
contrast to my mind in such an
aesthetically powerful aesthetically
attractive manner it brings out a
distinction that is actually central for
the meeting crisis so I don't know how
to do this with spoilers so I'm just
going to apologize
don't listen for the next 10 minutes if
you haven't seen the movie or read the
book and you intend to because there's
no way for me to talk about it this
adapt this point without there being a
bit of a spoiler so let's talk about the
movie because I think this will be more
accessible to more people so the movie
seems to be centering around this
question about how to think about God
well that's you know Wow and you know
there's and the thing is this is like
when you're doing sort of meditative
questioning and you pick questions that
present lots of obvious answers and and
you're not supposed to just sort of
reject those answers but you're not
supposed to accept them either you're
supposed to treat them as portals and
see through them to what they portend
and that's the kind of question that's
the way we should relate to this
question because of course a lot of all
these answers come up their culture is
shouting lots of obvious answers around
this all the time so what the book does
is it instead of sort of confronting all
of that it sort of goes yes but and it
sort of the movie and the book but so
what what it does is it says okay it's
question ìhow to think of a god and then
instead the person tells a story right
tells the story of Pi but whether it's
the adult version of this boy was given
the nickname
and it's right and the adult is telling
the story of this very heroic story in
the Union sense of a hero a boy who's
been in a ship wrecked and is trapped in
a lifeboat with the tiger and some other
animals and especially the relationship
right two tigers and you know if you
could Blake's Tiger Tiger burning bright
so there's all the all those illusions
all this deeply archetypal stuff is
being alluded to you go through this
whole story and you see this and that
and the boy is going through he's an
adolescent he's going through these
fundamental transformations in his
confrontation with these animals these
sort of archetypal animals but most
especially the tiger and with himself
and of course with the sea and then the
world is right it's almost like a union
synchronicity although I have questions
about what that exactly is supposed to
be pointing to but we'll put that aside
like that because he also comes upon
these these venues these places these
locations that are mythic in that
they're beautiful but they're not just
right they they pour ten again they
portend a deeper meaning and a deeper
significance and they have allusions to
mythological experiences like it goes to
this island and it's alluding to you
know when his mother directed a short of
a picture of Krishna as the ultimate and
all this stuff is sort of being
actualized and put into association but
not in a clearly closed final form it's
no it's it's a it's left very the things
are very febrile and moving around and
so all of this is going on and you
getting deeply engrossed with this whole
thing and then you find out but the
story is actually in a deep sense
allegorical that it's not an accurate
depiction of what the boy went through
historically what the boy went through
historically was actually an interaction
with other human beings of
was brutal and aspects of himself his
own tiger nature had come out and you
realize oh and then in the movie one of
the characters suddenly realizes this
structure position and then the question
of course emerges well why did you tell
the story this way to me and and then
there's the there's the the answer is
given well this is this is a much better
story
now there's part of us a Cartesian part
of us that goes well how can it be a
better story it's not historically true
it's less but the point is point is you
actually understand all of this
archetypal mythopoetic processes that
were at work in the adolescent and you
get a deeper participatory sense of the
transformation within himself how he was
connected to himself and how he's
connected to the world and how he's
connected to his religious heritage you
get that much more profoundly than he
would get in a literal propositional
history and then you remember this whole
thing is an allegory you're reading a
story or you're watching a movie and
within the frame you're getting that
this whole telling of his autobiography
is a way of getting us to understand how
we should think about God we should be
thinking about God right in the way in
which the boy told the story not so much
as trying to capture the propositional
literal truths and so this is a
distinction between a Cartesian notion
of truth which is accurate
representations that literally right
correspond to the world and hiding this
sense of truth is Alafaya which is to be
in right relationship coupled to reality
in such a way that there's a reciprocal
opening and reality could pen disclose
itself to us insofar as we are receptive
and we will identify with a
transformation a transformative response
that affords it coming into existence
this is understanding truth as a process
moment of truth and so the whole story
therefore like is a symbol of and it's
it's designed to get you to enact not
just to think about see it it's in its
enactment it's trying to get you out of
the Cartesian frame the whole point of
the story is to get you to enact the the
shift almost a metanoia from
propositional truth to perspectival
participatory transformative truth and
that that is the mode in which you can
most properly ask the question about God
and I think that is a quintessential
theme of the argument I've been making
in awakening for the meaning crisis that
the deep recovery satya of the ability
to shift out of a tyrannical exclusive
mode of truth into this perspective of
participatory transformative one that is
appropriate for talking about what is
ultimately sacred to us that is a
profound claim that i have tried to
support i mean i'm not harder or
anything like that but i've tried to
support with argumentation because i
think the ability to recover that in an
enacted existential modal transformation
is part of what is needed to recover
from the meaning crisis so I highly
recommend Life of Pi for exactly that
reason and I think when you many people
love this book and they find it very
hard and this is not a criticism of them
but they favorite behind it very hard to
articulate why they find it so and the
fact that he's nickname is PI the
mathematical formula and yet that
mathematical Cartesian way of thinking
right is being set right into a more
encompassing framework like this is you
see what I mean it's so rich and it
resonates and reverberates and in a way
in which only art and literature can
look
I I speak write and I generate
propositions and theories and you know
and I'm a scientist and that's good but
there's a sense in which I don't know if
you see that there's that movie you know
contact where they send the scientist
who's an atheist and then and she's a
scientist and then she gets to that
moment where she sees she's exposed and
she says oh they should have sent a poet
that's what I feel right right now right
and so that's what I recommend for a way
of trying to make a connection between
the Life of Pi and Damini crisis I would
also point out that amar is putting
together and we've done some preliminary
work on it and another series that like
potentially we're going to try and bring
to fruition
Kogan willing at some point this year
mining media in which myself and Edison
taught and the affair ro will do this
exactly this kind of thing trying to see
the deep philosophy ah within certain
films and works of art right minding
movies minding media and to try and get
them into dialogue with the meeting
process so I hope that things will fall
into place such that we could do that
because I feel my own lack and I'm not
saying that with false modesty I
genuinely feel my own lack in trying to
bring everything that's necessary to be
said oh my gosh that's even pretentious
to say that but you know what I'm trying
to gesture towards right that that much
more needs to be done by artists and
poets this is why I Andrew Sweeney
getting at a conversation with him has
been so valuable and so I'm hoping that
I can move some way towards being
responsible to that demand that certain
things can only be properly disclosed
artistically poetically Police's it's
also why I write with Chris because man
the guy is just he speaks poetry the way
the rest of us speak prose
and it's a great gift and I'm gifted to
have his profound friendship and
collaboration that was a real that was a
second really important question and I
wanted to address it at length and I
apologize for those of you who are
waiting for your question but both of
these I think are pointing to things
that are right on the cutting edge of
what I'm working on right now and what
I'm undergoing right now so we have
another one from Lucas G who is a patron
hi John deep thanks for your work I
practiced that in Navarre on a
meditation involving visualization
mantra and shine abiding in what is if
that's a term that's been transliterated
and I'm mispronouncing it I apologize
what's your opinion of this type of
practice in terms of its capacity for
developing transparency or opacity
capacity and an ability for agent arena
shifts also what what practice am I
missing in terms of keeping my biases in
check so I think and this is again
something that again it's right on the
edge because I've been privileged to be
involved in being an area committee who
supervising someone doing a PhD thesis
max turn in or he also calls himself
belief and it was on the thesis was on
Barfield sorry Barfield and Steiner
mostly I go to though and Barfield and
about this new way of seeing and what
comes out and good especially in the way
he was responding to caught this caught
put perception and imagination like as
as opposites as distinct from each other
where his perception was purely
receptive and imagination was purely
created like purely projective and
spontaneous and they were therefore
radically opposed to each other and good
to in conjunction by the way with what
forty cognitive sciences
creasing the shorts oh no they're
actually like this they're deeply
interpenetrating that in every act of
imagination you're actually training
perception and in every act of
perception you're actually training
imagination and they are mutually always
self-correcting and so this is a new way
of seeing was to explicitly try and
bring that out I've only had a little
bit of Vajrayana practice and so I do
not want to be presumptuous I've read
about it and I've talked to people about
it
so I have some sense but the degree to
which you are training that inter
training between imagination and
perception I think is very very
important and it's something that I
think should be incorporated into an any
ecology of practice a practice that is
directed explicitly towards the
interpenetration between imagination and
perception I think active imagination
within the Jungian tradition does
something similar I think people who do
work with lucid dreaming I'd estimate
something similar I think people who do
imaginal ritual practices like pledge
each one like I do are doing something
similar because I mean in one sense I'm
imagining fighting it says in the
classics fighting 10,000 opponents what
I'm doing the form right so that when
I'm actually fighting there's no one
there and so the idea is I use
imagination to Train perception and of
course using perception to train
imagination all the time the two hours
that I talked about earlier so I think
that's an integral part of any good
ecology of practices as to its capacity
for developing transparency opacity
shifting of course it's going to help
facilitate that because you're training
your attention to zoom in and out and
you're training it to zoom if you'll
allow me up and down between top-down
processing which is what imagination is
and bottom-up processing which what
perception is so not only be in out
right you're also doing the up down the
digital feature all etc so I think it's
a powerful way of also training
attentional scaling as well as training
sorry all of attentional scaling the up
down and the in end so that's very
powerful I
what am I missing and keeping my biases
in check you need to be doing a
rationality practice and people don't
like people people who that have become
along with everything else just oh no
what happened this was all going so
wonderfully we're talking with
imagination and perception and all now
it brings up rationality well because
what rationality Russia doesn't mean
right it doesn't exclude but it
shouldn't be reduced to you know logical
management of propositional
argumentation rationality is any
systematic and reliable practice for
overcoming self-deception the Vajrayana
practices you mentioned therefore count
as rational but you need to have one
that is specifically focused on this you
need to have practices that are designed
to cultivate what's called active open
mindedness you need to learn about all
the individual cognitive biases you can
buy books on them that will teach you
these are what the cognitive biases are
and then you have to practice everyday
looking for one bias may be the
fundamental attribution error may may be
confirmation bias may be the bandwagon
effect all right looking for those
catching yourself in them and actively
opposing them actively counteracting
them you need to become aware of the
kind of biases that take root within
distributed cognition like diffusion of
responsibility and groupthink etc and
where I try to afford ameliorating them
when you become aware of it and you have
to practice this just like you're
practicing your Vajrayana you have to
practice it every day you have to at the
end of the day write great a journal
what biases did I catch and then on
reflection oh I was probably in that
bias and I didn't catch it at the time
and do it you know in a way in what
you're preventing yourself not
judgmental or harsh but and also not
laksa days ago because one of our most
prevalent biases is that we are above
average in our rationality and we are
way above average in our capacity to
overcome self-deception it's one of our
most pernicious biases so I would
strongly recommend you take up a
practice like that and if you want a
philosophical framework that properly
homes and valorize it I would recommend
stoicism - I would recommend stoicism to
you okay so I have another question from
Ben PR who's a patron thank you for
helping me refine a little better might
make my sense making of the darker and
not to equivocate that with my scars
well he'll be coming at trans Jack
tivity if I have expressed that
correctly it sounds to me generally like
you have I have gone through a tiny
transformation by realization that's
great I'm happy to hear that what is the
correlation between the nervous systems
neurological state and the phenomenology
induced by psychedelics certain states
within second technologies and mental
illness being perceived as religious or
mystical experiences the establishing
these correlations explain the possible
efficacy of psychedelics what
effectively used in the treatment of
mental illness so that's an important
question first of all and thank you for
sharing that you're going through what
you call transformation by realization
which is a very nice turn of phrase I
might put it I feel along that I think
you put it very nicely I mean I hesitate
always to and because you lewd to it
well he more than glued to his data at
the beginning I don't want to present
these states as unequivocally
unquestionably good
I want to prevent present them as
powerful with and I've tried to be
consistent about this throughout
although it different times I give
different things emphasis these states
are powerful and they're powerful in
affording like you said transformation
by realization not just an insight in
consciousness but an insight of
consciousness but they are also powerful
in that they can afford right massive
self-deception massive bullshitting of
ourselves there and also triggered
thereby deeply defensive and reactive
patterns so that's why I repeatedly
argued that the
experiences need to be set within a
sappy ntral ritual context in which
people have an independently running and
and supported Ecology's of practice for
dealing with the many ways in which we
fall prey to self-deception and fall
prey to reciprocal narrowing etc so all
of that always being said please let's
then think about the correlation between
these psychedelic experiences and write
the has been puts with religious or
mystical experiences there's a lot going
on here and for those of you who've
watched the series I have I presented
this conferences also recorded talks
what's higher about higher states of
consciousness also related talk about
gnosis and there's also there's a
argument running through the episodes
around the buddha on higher states of
consciousness and what is it going on in
psychedelic experiences that is
conducive to this and I'm writing
currently writing a book with that read
and his called the cognitive continuum
from in psyche to enlightenment about
trying to show how there's a continuum
between Insight experiences flow
experiences mystical experiences higher
states of consciousness transformative
experiences and what we might stipulate
to call enlightenment which is a
fundamental kind of an experience that
can power a state of seeing and being
that is set into an ecology practices a
wise ecology of practices that really
affords addressing the perennial
patterns and problems the pregnant
prevalence by which we fall into
self-deceptive
self-destructive behavior so there's a
lot of argumentation out there I've
already presented on this and I don't
think it is coincidental that these
experiences often trigger
mystical and religious responses because
I think religio and I tried to argue
this independently assort on just
gesturing at existing arguments religio
when we enhance religio for its own sake
into experiences of beauty and Wonder
and awe and if we push it too far we can
fall into horror alright and we find
them so positively valuable I think
that's the core of spirituality of
religion that's the religio part of
religion at least and we celebrate it
and we do it for its own sake precisely
because what we're doing is engaging in
the development the actualization of the
deepest potential of a relevance
realization machinery on our capacity
for being in right relationship deeply
flourish deeply flourishing couple
coupling to ourselves to each other and
to the world
and so psychedelic experiences when they
are properly home of the capacity to put
us into that state where we are
experiencing something like beauty and
wonder and awe on the continuum of
insight flow a higher state of
consciousness that sense of being called
in a transformative experience etc and
and that's why the empirical research
especially at the Griffis labs and also
some of the work that Newberg is doing
and some of the work that I'm doing with
Jenson Kim and Michelle Ferrari of
Jennifers teller and Bryan hasta caneva
ah all of it is pointing towards the
deep connection but I'm going to return
to this once again I think it is a
mistake to reduce this to just
neurological states that have been
created by the chemical interaction
afforded by the drug I think a much more
a broader developmental dynamic
understanding needs to be brought to
bear to properly understand why you see
this convergence because the convergence
is not I mean there's some convergence
of content but the content but people
the beliefs in content
other than other like the the
metaphysical propositions I'm not
talking about the propositions in which
people are trying to articulate right
when they're trying to articulate how
they are coupled to themselves into each
other trail I'm not talking about that
but I'm talking about like when when
people sort of pronounce oh well the
world has seven layers or ultimately
it's all just change or there is a god
or there isn't a god because all of
these things come out of these these of
these experiences so but the universals
are much more you know they're much more
obvious they're much more not
adversarial much more adverbial
universals like there's oneness and
there's deep Uranus and nowness and
connectedness and beauty in a sense of
whether then and what's most important a
sense of hyper realness and a realness
that demands change from me I think we
need to pay attention to all of that
increasing empirical evidence both the
qualitative reports and the more
experimental work is being done and so
what I think we should be understanding
is that if we do two things if we
understand these states from a4e
cognitive science perspective not just
as neurological States but as embodied
embedded in active developmental right
developmental dynamical systems and then
we and we also see that within the
framework of a central tradition then we
can get a good the answer about why we
see we tend to experience a subset of
these psychedelic experiences as
mystical and religious experiences so I
hope that answers your question
it's another the questions are getting
today and I mean this and I mean this is
complementary they're profound and so I
can't answer them by like oh if you give
PDP do it here's a how I answer you I've
got to give a long answer because
there's a lot that's working these
questions so this question from Rob hey
Rob who's also patron is there anything
like stoic poetry that you
demand as the more poetic text to do
Lexi oh he's talking about Lexi Oh
Davina with if there is not do you have
any Taoist or Buddhist source texts or
commentaries that you'd like and why and
thanks John and a more for all you do I
thank you for wrote for thinking that's
always appreciated so there are a few
sort of stoic hymns
bye bye bye : s disease and I think also
by Zeno tu suce I don't know if that
you'd find those particularly powerful I
yes stoic poetry not too much of it has
survived I'm trying to think of a modern
analog to it I I can't think of anybody
that comes to mind there's a bit in in
Gerard Manley Hopkins that feels like a
lot of how the stoic sort of felt the
vibrancy of the logos in reality that's
definitely the case but Dartmouth and
Hopkins is a Christian a Taoist text
that's like that
I think the toilet HN is really really
powerful but sorry I don't mean I don't
mean to be disheartening the talent hm
has to be in order to do Lexi Oh with
something like the talent HN it's a good
idea that you're doing that you'd be are
doing some Dallas practices as well like
some of the Chico or Taichi evident some
of the Chicana I've been teaching or
perhaps Taichi so if you want to start
using the talented Chan as a text or the
or the schwa Rosa I would recommend also
in addition to doing Lexie oh I would
recommend doing some appropriate Taoist
practices as a way of properly setting
the intention for the Lexie oh and
properly activating and actualizing the
right mode right epistemic and
existential modes for engaging with the
text so that you can enter deeply into
Lexi Oh Davina I perhaps I mean it's a
licinia's book on the handbook for
platonism it's on Platonism permits but
it's also from middle platonism and
therefore it feels a lot more stoic and
has a lot more stoic elements in it that
might also be potentially valuable I
done let Co to be knit with that and
found it valuable there are also there
are there I have a couple of anthologies
there's called sort of current stoic
writing and perhaps some of that writing
is poetry rather the prose you might
want to check that out you might want to
also contact Peter Lindbergh my dear
friend who runs the stoah and he might
have you might know of or be able to put
you in touch with somebody and could
give you a better answer to your
question so Rob that's my that's my best
attempt to try and answer your question
question yes is a patron as well how to
work with a punitive tyrannical
super-ego so this question is really
right for me um I might one of my
dearest deepest friends who has kind of
access to the depths of my psyche and
I've written with them and collaborated
with him
Leo Ferraro has told me that he thinks
at times I have a sadistic super-ego and
I take this very seriously precisely
because I was brought up in a kind of
fundamentalist Christianity very very
punitive it you know and it you know
tells you that you're born through no
fault of your own you are diseased with
original sin and there's nothing you can
do about it and all of your attempts to
dry it try and do anything about it or
ultimately self-deceptive it's
self-destructive and you're trapped in
it and there's nothing that you can do
except feel very very very guilty all
the time
about
and constantly abase yourself to an
authority and right that has absolute
dictatorship over you and and that
that's all you do is permanent Jenya
flexion between sorry permanent
genuflection towards this being who who
will save you even though you in no way
deserve it and I've talked about this in
the series and how this of course is
breeding ground really ripe reading
ground for narcissism in our culture of
very powerful ways and before I bring it
up of course is this kind of upbringing
man does it does it does it put inside
you a sadistic super-ego and so and it's
a very it's a very powerful thing I'm
I'm constantly having to note how it can
get activated and then I have to be
careful around how it is making me
reactive to certain ways in which people
are talking or thinking when I was doing
the episode around Luther in the
wakening for the meeting crisis I
probably if I was trying to be very self
aware some people said you know I got a
little too maybe angry sounding but I
wanna I mean and I mean this
respectfully thank God for Paul van der
clay because he had a very appreciative
and other Christians had a very
appreciative response to that that
episode on Luther it's a long preamble
because it's an important preamble
because I want to tell you I wanted me I
want to try and make clear to you that I
deeply understand what you're talking
about
I deeply understand what you're talking
about so how to work with a putative
tyrannical mine is it can you know even
at times be sadistic those from Bella's
have a song we don't know I believe it
is and there's a part of the course
where there's something in my mind
that's killing me and like I really get
what he's singing about there
how to work with a punitive tyrannical
super-ego when engaging with one's
ecology of practices it seems to be able
to parasitize excellent excellent way of
putting it any practice with an
imperative forceful attitude even in a
recursive manner you must not be
forceful yes yeah I know that that the
the the the adaptive resiliency of these
deepest these deeper complexes of
parasitic processing yeah how does one
break the cycle and afford on the gapek
compassionate grip on self
transformation well first of all the
fact and you're alluding to it the fact
that you're engaging in an ecology of
practices is part of the answer I
suppose one of the really hesitant is
they don't want to make it sound like
well you do these four things and then
foo you're free because I'm not under
the hubristic illusion that I'll ever be
free from this statistic super-ego what
I hope to do is ameliorate it somewhat
reliably so can I so I can reduce the
self-harm and the other harm that it
drives so that being said engaging in an
ecology of practices and you have to
engage in it for a long time so that it
becomes a correspondingly complex and
adaptive and resilient entity that can
wrestle right in a complex and adaptive
and almost like a martial art fluency
way with that parasitic processing
that's ultimately the most fundamental
answer any sort of isolated technique I
would give you or say to you now won't
will be parasitizes just like you
mentioned it will just be drawn in and
taken up by this so that's I'm going to
make use of a buda streamer here that's
the buddha part of it the that that
participating in and deeply
internalizing you know a counter active
dynamical system
I think you want to enter into the third
thing which is Dharma which is you know
learn more about from probably a supper
dynamic perspective how there are
various therapeutic interventions and
interactions that can help you to deal
with a sadistic super-ego and try to
incorporate that into your ecology so
this is where I think this like the
dynamic domain can afford some very
beneficial health so I would strongly
recommend you becoming more familiar
with the work of my dear friend and
colleague Anderson talk about all of
this aspect because I think you might
find that particularly helpful you might
even consider that and this doesn't mean
there's anything wrong with you right
you might want to enter into a
therapeutic relationship just to get the
dialogic right response going I knew
that was that was helpful to me I went
through Union therapy in order to in
order to wrestle with that and then
Sangha joining a community of fellow
travelers that can see your biases much
better than you can and this is what I
keep saying that we should give up the
idea of monologic reason we should give
up the idea of sort of the the
individual which is not giving up
individual responsibility individual
responsibility I've been that's what
what I've been talking about all along
here but giving up the idea of the self
enclosed self sufficient individual and
that reason is a monologic treatise
right level of law right but that our
capacity for self correction pales in
comparison to the self correction that
others afford us if we enter into bounds
of genuine bonds I should say and also
bounds that works - bonds of
Pylea genuine fellowship and friendship
and a commitment to each other on the
commitment to a process of reciprocal
opening and the affordance and the
celebration of the expressions of agape
and connectedness and flourishing and
insight and transformation like we're
doing here now so that's what's helped
me that's what continues to help me and
so I don't want to give anything to you
from rose tinted glasses I suspect
there's a sense in which so here's
there's the darker news
you'll probably be wrestling with this
for a very long time maybe all your life
but here's the good news
you can wrestle better you can wrestle
well and you can ameliorate things a lot
and you can reliably reduce the self
harm now I don't mean physically cutting
yourself I mean psychological emotional
self harm you can reliably reduce the
self harm and the other harm and I
really wish you well in that endeavor
because as I said I identify with it
very profoundly I have been over the
past few years and having to work on the
awakening series and all this other work
I've done with people has made me
because I've been trying to pull apart
my appreciation of Christianity and
agape from the way the particular
version that I was brought up look what
my hand is doing look oh my hand is
doing the way it traumatized me and
raked and shredded me in powerful ways
and even saying that I'm trying to let
go of the tightness of the resentment
and try to open up again so I hope
that's helpful to you I hope that is
really really helpful to you okay we'll
be shifting to live questions from the
chat I want to thank the patreon
subscribers and everyone watching right
now
your support of course is very crucial
to produce these videos and for
supporting the science we're doing to
find solutions to the meeting crisis
this is from soft conscious Gilder my
first question when I have a difficult
time and in wrestling with myself I see
guidance and people like you and alike
where do you go to or what do you do in
difficult times so I I have this I'm
trying to think about how to friend it
the fact that I sort of teach and lead
is saying it doesn't mean that this look
look what's happened in my previous
answer doesn't that's also deeply
helpful in nurturing and and nourishing
to me so there's that I turn to people
beloved I turn I turn I I am I'm deeply
grateful and privileged to be in
relationship with an astonishing woman
who's whose soulfully deep and beautiful
and I don't just mean physically she's
physically beautiful but I I mean like
she's beauty of mine and a beauty of
spirit and a beauty of soul and I I've
been with her now for most of five and
half years I can reliably turn to her
and she is deeply and ought to
transformative ly helpful to me I have
my son who is a constant companion and
he is the best at shooting little
powerful little arrows to break you to
hubristic inflationary bubbles that are
forming in me so that's what helpful I
have been a fantastic fantastic set of
friends Marv is one of them who are just
there for me reliably and then I have I
have the path what I call the you know
the Buddha the Dharma and the Sangha and
I and I have internalized sages and
saints around that of course really
important to me that's two decades of
work on
this is that the work can play serious
play Socrates and then also the whole
Neoplatonic tradition but great poets
roomy and Rilke great philosophers like
Platina and Plato and Spinoza I turned
to them reliably and they're there for
me and I have turned as I said to
professional therapy when I felt really
stuck in my life
you'll get therapy I both wanted to
understand it but I also needed to be
transformed by it and those weren't
those were actually deeply in sync with
each other karateka lee in sync so
that's where I've turned to and I've
been through this series it's right that
Awakening I've come to meet people that
I turned to like I sensed on in Jordan
Hall to get discussion and even the
people like I've mentioned that I've
worked with who were all so dear friends
like Leo Ferraro and Anderson Todd and
Chris mustard Pietro III have I and I've
been really trying to wake up to this
over the last couple weeks laughs I have
so much so many people that I love and
who loved me deeply and who are
supporting me in everything I'm doing I
I feel tremendously grateful and
tremendously supported so I hope that
answers your question
so then Gow I want to explain parasitic
processing to a friend who seems to be
suffering from it can you recommend a
sick sick sinked article or video video
she does not have a cog site background
but is in therapy uh yeah if you can get
there's there's a there's a blog so it's
really popularized in the good sense of
the word on this by Mark Lewis on
reciprocal narrowing in addiction so I
recommend that
and then if she wants to deepen that she
could read his his met his autobiography
Memoirs of an addicted brain so she can
get a first-person perspective of it but
I would strongly recommend the work of
Mark Lewis for sure especially that blog
choice for you I joy I find it hard to
imagine imagine improvement during
mindfulness practice so there's a lack
of direction here in my practice can you
help me imagine how the salient
landscape changes changes feel like so
one of the things I regular regularly
recommend is try is not to especially
look for the changes in the practice our
third Eichmann put this really well or
on time ago
it's not about altered states of
consciousness it's about altered traits
of character I think that's what I come
back to that again and again and again
instead trying to pick up on where as
you're doing the practice moments
outside your practice where you've had
an insight where you've caught
self-deception and then then answer your
question what did it feel like what was
my salience landscape in doing such that
I became aware of my self-deception or
such that I was able to oh I can enhance
my connectedness here yes this feels
more real this feels like I really
understood her we really connected if
you sit back outside if you try to get
an on perspective on non-participatory
sense of this it's not going to work and
if you try and realize it just in your
meditative practice chances are it's not
going to take what you're doing is
facilitating the sensitivities and the
sensibilities and the skills that will
then germinate as an enacted virtue in
your life and when the virtue in virtue
of that virtue you start to undergo
these transformations then look for the
phenomenology and I I mean this
seriously we'll try to remember it at
the end of the day celebrate it
write it down not inflationary but so
that you can build up this felt sense of
what it's like and then that will start
to carry naturally into the meditative
practice and it will start to go like
this so in Telecom tile which is sort of
I believe an adjective version of
Aristotle's notion of an Intel ontology
as with all the focus on locus and
intelligibility was wondering what was
the place of arrows and Dionysian I
think I think it your meaning Dionysian
in the median sense rather than
Dionysian Dionysius the area off the
guide the really important mystic in the
religion that's not a religion what he
make amici is the will to a system is a
lack of integrity well given that
Nietzsche attacking universe given that
Nietzsche really exemplified that and I
think he believed there's a sense in
which the notion of ecology of practices
is deeply reflective of that Nietzsche
and sense of trying to get multi voices
not working once my criticism
Nietzsche's he stayed at the
propositional level mostly and therefore
he tried to capture in a multi vocality
what I think should be captured in a
multi praxis so I think that there is a
kind of integrity when you switch over
to embodied practices and ecology
practices it's not the integrity of
systematic logical coherence it's the
integrity of a dynamically adopted and
involving self-organization now I focus
on there's been actually the some of the
recent stuff I've been writing with
Chris eros that part the role of arrows
within the logos which is a deeply
platonic notion contra - I think you
choose misrepresentation of Plato the
arrows within logos is something that
Chris and I are
writing about and exploring so I think
that the ability to break frame which
the Dionysian represents is just as
crucial as the ability to make frame
which is what the Apollonian is and you
need a dynamical opponent processing
between them and I think there is always
a relationship between arrows and logos
but I think one of the things that
happens when they one of the marks of
right relationship between arrows and
logos is that arrows doesn't get reduced
to just a static conceptual coherence
it's right it is the evolving gathering
together of things that come to belong
together in a mutuality of enhanced and
increasing relevance realization and the
arrows is transformed when it is no
longer reduced to just the oneness of
consumption Plato talks about when the
arrows is brought into right
relationship with logos via the logos
bias the encounter with Socrates that
the arrows goes from being consumptive
oneness to generative oneness that what
the the erotic impulses transformed into
I want when I encounter Beauty I don't
want to consume it I want to generate
more beautiful things I want to generate
beauty within Beauty and so I think the
relationship between logos and eros is
really fundamentally important and we
can see how logo we can look for marks
of right relationship within logos and
marks of right relationship between them
it between us and them and marks of
right relationship in eros and when we
see both of those I think that's an
answer to your question and I think that
also is completely in sync with the
Dionysian need to break frame and the
Apple Apollonian need to make frame and
how it's only the fluency between them
that affords insight and ongoing dynamic
adaptivity on a b c d e f do you have a
tentative time for the book release I'm
not sure which book you mean
they're what Chris and I are working on
an anthology on inner another diet the
Ilocos dialogues if all goes to plan is
according to plan maybe later this year
the book the cognitive continuum I think
that's also maybe the end of this year
early next year
Daniel is working really really hard and
thank you all for who our help with the
IndieGoGo campaign helped fund him
during COBIT so it could continue in
depth work on this the those are the two
ones perhaps that most readily come to
mind perhaps also talking about the meta
modern reader in which the chapter that
Chris and I have an article coming out I
believe that's going to be sometime
later this year sorry that's all very
vague because I'm not quite clear which
one you're referring to and of those
three that come most readily to my mind
as you can imagine COBIT has put all
deadlines into this weird sort of space
so I hope that's an answer so sways of
love can you explain and expand on what
you mean from multiple realisability
especially referring to organic versus
mechanical intelligence thank you
multiple realizability is this idea
multiple realizability is it's bound up
with terms we we people use all the time
without fully appreciating them and this
is the distinction between software and
hardware within computer a computer
science and computer use right so think
of a program software and think of how
that program could be run on many
different pieces of hardware I could be
running word in this computer or this
computer or this computer or this
computer I could even be running word
and on machines that are not built like
the standard computer is I could be
running it on something that's been
organized like a neural network what
it's made of and there
computers used to be much larger and
have transistors right and now they have
microchips and so even the material so
the the physical media within which the
software has to run so the physical
medium is the hardware and the idea is I
can run the same software on maybe many
many different kinds of hardware made of
many different kinds of physical stuff
and so it's a mistake to try to
understand the software by looking at
this particular hardware alright so
here's the software and oh well I look
at how a Mac runs and that will make me
understand how the software runs well
that's not right because that same
software can run in many different
machines there are many different things
it'd be like trying to understand chess
but you find people playing chess and
let's say the the pieces are made of a
plessy's ah I know what I'll do I'll
study the material that the board and
the pieces are made out of and that will
help me to understand chess and you go
that's not going to get you chess
doesn't work that way that you can play
chess with pieces of plastic pieces of
wood you can play it electronically you
could play it just with little marks on
pieces of paper it's multiple realizable
now what that means therefore is that
you can't reduce the software make it
identical to any particular hardware
what this means by the way and most
people don't realize that is there's
actually a deep people think that these
two things go together and they're just
really happy bedfellows right which is
artificial intelligence and neuroscience
yeah they're actually kind of opposed to
each other because neuroscience says
well I'm gonna understand the mind by
looking at a particular kind of hardware
of the brain an artificial intelligence
says no no that's the wrong place to
look you should be looking instead at
the software because the software is
where you're going to under the that the
hardware might turn out to be largely
irrelevant like the plastic of the
pieces in the chest being irrelevant
understand
chess now i'm presenting these as
extremes of course what that means is we
have got to examine that very
computational metaphor because it's a
first of all that challenges the idea
that we can simply equate minded braids
but that doesn't mean that your mind is
some you know ghostly thing that can
float free from your brain we said but I
can move my software program around you
can but you can never have software
that's not running on hardware I can't
smash all the computers and then the
software somehow floats into some
metaphysical heaven that's a deep
mistake on the other hand as we move
into cognitive science that is much more
embodied and embedded and extended and
enacted we're coming to understand that
cognition is not independent from
biology that there's a deep continuity
now doesn't mean we can't have
artificial intelligence it might but it
tends to point towards this idea that if
we want to create artificial
intelligence we're simultaneously and in
integrated fashion probably gonna have
to create something like artificial life
life that is genuinely autopoietic so
multiple realizability is is just a
fraught topic and it is just it's a
central topic when i'm trying to
introduce our cognitive science to
people because it gets you deeply
thinking outside of the of our common
sense obvious nosov up mind and brain oh
wow that's when more complex them that i
thought it was and then and then once
you challenge that common sense with the
computational metaphor you then
challenge the computational metaphor
with for econ of science and then you're
very far from the cultural cognitive
grammar by which we have always talked
at least since Descartes about mind and
body and that's what well that's where
multiple realizability takes you okay
we've gone much longer than we normally
did and I guess Ammar thought that this
was just flowing wonderfully and I
always just bowed to his expert
and his judgment I want to thank you for
joining me in this QA I guess many of
you probably got a sense that I really
got into it and I found this a very very
powerful session so I want to thank
everybody very much for that sorry we
couldn't get everybody's questions your
questions will not go into the void they
will show up or the next Q&A some of you
may want to bring them into the Q&A at
the end of the Sangha if there are more
practical questions and I'll try to
address them there we're doing these
every third Friday of the month we'll do
another one in July I again I want to
thank all you supporters patreon you
helped keep a lot of what I genuinely
think is vital worth going and I deeply
appreciate that you can support my work
on the meaning height crisis like going
to patreon.com/crashcourse a sea and I
do appreciate I don't draw any income
from this this is all about the work
it's all about the work we have a
discord server where people are having
some really interesting conversations
you could check the description in this
video for the link and we have a lot of
people on there like Paul Van Dyck Lee
Jonathan so I got Jonathan Pope Jordan
Hall Gregg Leakes has been there guy
send stock has been there so many people
that are on voices with Ravi key and up
there and David Pascal and so I highly
recommend going to the discord server
and you'll just find a really vibrant
community there vital discussion about
all of all though that's right it's not
quite all of my work and everything that
is sort of spinning off from it in a
healthy fashion a reminder that we're
doing the meditation and contemplation
sits every weekday morning at 9:30
Eastern Time and finally I want to thank
my dear friend and Tecna major mark my
beloved son Jason they're always in the
background helping me and again all of
youth thank you one and all
goodbye and I'll see you up from now
take good care