[Music]
so we're following up our last piece on
how to make sense of the pandemic with a
piece based on building resilience how
do we respond both individually and as
groups
what are the anti fragile and resilient
communities around the world we're going
to talk to a few people who are doing
really good work provide some links and
offer some tips for ways of kind of
getting through we've got the medical
crisis which is huge and potentially
enormous we've got a financial crisis
that's growing we've got the the crisis
of like the emotional crisis and there's
sort of sense that all of us have that
everything's changing at such such a
speed and I think we'll return in the
future to sort of some of the deeper
systemic things that we've been talking
about on the channel a lot but right now
I think the the right thing to do is to
focus on what we can do individually and
what we can do collectively there is a
silver lining in it as well which is
that I've really noticed a lot of people
saying that they feel like they're being
called us to step up in some way I think
a lot of the people we've had on the
channel have been talking about these
sort of deeper systemic issues and
intuiting that something like this was
likely to happen or if something like
this did happen that our systems were no
longer resilient enough to to actually
kind of cope and this crisis will stress
test all of them and it will last a long
time so I caught up with some one we had
on the channel quite a lot Jamie wheal
earlier on today and we did a workshop
with Jamie in London last October that
was called collective sense making in an
age of existential risk it's coming
anyway right your vortex is about to be
overwhelmed by a tsunami so this is loud
missus sanzu better to be a warrior in
the garden than a gardener in the war so
we're still in our gardens we're blessed
for now amen right train it was
originally only available to members but
we're going to make that available now
to everyone and put it up on the site
and I caught up with Jamie on zoom
earlier
today Jamie so you did a workshop with
us fairly recently we'll put that out as
well around a sense making in a time of
existential risk which seems at the time
when when you did it I did kind of think
well is Jamie going a little bit over
the top but now I don't think that
anymore
what should people be preparing for
first yeah I mean I think the shorter
answer is is you know a massive great be
determined but in the sense of you know
if you put it on a kind of an XY axis
there's sort of likelihood of something
happening and severity of something
happening so if it's likely but not
severe don't worry about it very much
business as usual but if it's unlikely
but very severe you probably want to
look after it and that's fire fire
alarms in the house right that's home
insurance that's all those kinds of
things which is if it's it's a rare
event but it's catastrophic if it
happens
better to be buffered against it and if
it's likely and potentially severe you
sure as hell want to keep your eye on it
so there's kind of that grid work and
it's not all so that it's not logical or
linear so you sort of want to be doing
both another way to think of it is sort
of Pareto preparedness which is what is
the 20% of the actions you can take that
cover 80% of immediate contingencies and
that's very straightforward you can look
at ngos doing aid work in refugee camps
or any kind of disaster areas you can
look at you know camping -
mountaineering as sort of a spectrum of
just what is resilient self-sufficiency
look like as just humans on the earth
and we basically need access to clean
water drinkable you know we need food
security we need the ability to sleep
warm and dry right Ordinaries dammit we
need sustainable durable communication
ability and right now that's the
internet and but it could also be local
app based connections that can work off
cell towers it can be way back in the
day you know it's am/fm and weather
radios little hand crank
things that still let me get you know
the bbc1 you know Voice of America kind
of thing and and then some form of
medical supplies that allow me or mine
to be basically avoiding anything that
would be a you know life-saving and
health preserving but then also avoiding
cluttering emergency medical systems and
health systems that are going to be
absolutely at capacity so go down those
checklists see what available they see
the cash and resources you have consider
leveraging credit now that you might not
normally if you're sort of fiscally
conservative and like to pay as you go
now's the time to make the most of your
credit card limits and avoid black
market pricing spikes or just you know
inability to secure things and make sure
that your core family unit is in a safe
stable spot and if it cuz because if it
is and you're already ahead of a lot of
less fortunate folks and once you can do
that then you can expand your sphere of
concern to your Dunbar community and be
of more use and more service so start
with that and and there's no need to be
such you know stuck with the notion of
overreacting would be embarrassing or if
I did that kind of thing would I be that
sort of a person you know far better to
act decide me basically in considering
what we're facing right now if you take
on too much of it it can collapse you
into despair if you don't like how that
feels a few of us do the other
temptation is to go back to denial
minimization dismissal and and neither
of those is a is a resourceful state so
what you want to do is you want to claim
the center which is deliberate and
decide so think clearly and then act
clearly and separate your emotions from
your deliberations and your decisions if
you're not used to thinking in emergent
environments crisis situations life
death situations a lot of this is really
overwhelming but just breathe and take
the right actions early West case
scenario is you prepared and you can
give it back to someone who didn't the
best-case scenario is you actually
needed it and you're really grateful you
did when you did I remember in the the
talk that you gave you talked about that
the biggest difference between survival
was people who recognized the danger
early and reacted and responded
appropriately yeah I mean we're
massively socially conditioned creatures
of habit and you know the old Oscar
Wilde joke if it's you know it's it's
every Englishman's solitary goal to make
it to the grave unembarrassed like
things like that and habit and you know
people often talk about fight/flight
which rhymes so it's memorable but it's
wrong that that's not that's not the
Cascade the Cascade is first freeze then
flee and then an entirely different
activation circuit is fight so as little
rodents as little mammals etc our first
move is just get small and do nothing
then rut panic and run for your
life and only after that if neither of
those options is available and you're
still there then there's activation
energy and there's a move to actually do
something so we need to identify the
freeze flee impulses move through them
and get to not fight but act with energy
early so a few of the people have been
speaking to over the last couple of days
are talking about how to create kind of
resilient communities and supports and I
think a lot of people in that place what
can people do to do that to kind of
support each of people around them and
to kind of create more anti fragile
communities yeah and I mean you know
we're seeing that globally right now
which is really encouraging and
uplifting and you know Jordan Hall our
our friend and colleague it's here on
rebel wisdom quite a bit you know often
refers to it as SOC I or
like self-organizing Collective
Intelligence and we're seeing lots of
that on the highly credentialed
epidemiological level so we've been
helping coordinate interactive
interactions between Stanford Harvard
MIT Media labs hackathons lots of people
doing both redundant and complementary
activities public health and and
research so that's happening at those
levels and it's fantastic as well as
messaging into your executive branch
policy to the extent that we possibly
can and then there's also just
grassroots bottom-up which is first get
to higher ground secure yourself in a
way that is sustainable so that you can
be part of the solution and not and not
another casualty that needs someone else
looking after you so first do that and
make no bones about it once you've got
that sorted the very natural human
impulse is who else needs help and how
can I help and what we're seeing there's
a couple of things and in telehealth
which is now a Facebook group it was
started you know less than a week ago as
of this recording has ballooned and now
has basically a combinations of people
with resources who are saying I can give
and here's my town and country and state
and then people who are saying ask I
have a need and this is no no
solicitations just food and clothing
medications basics and people are doing
this and it's explicitly apolitical it
originated here in Austin Texas by a
friend of ours it's going national and
international as we speak and it's very
specific because it's saying we are all
neighbors we are all Patriots of
whatever flag we're flying this is the
time to act from our from our better
angels and the response is profound and
interestingly highly self-organized this
was our mates idea he did a recording
four or five days ago
it is scaling to complete strangers and
now has 53 units which represent the
states and the you know BVI's and Puerto
Rico and mekin stuff and is becoming
self-organizing so who know this is
dynamic subordination which is who knows
what to do next is in charge so that is
a profound example and hopefully we'll
get modeled in a hundred thousand
different ways as people understand this
is how we need to do it and no one's
trying to hold the wheel there's not
bottlenecks there's clear community
enforcement this is what we are and this
is what we're not but once those
parameters are in place allowing humans
to do good things it's critical so Jamie
talked about a few practical things
including the in tele Health Group
that's just been set up so I'm gonna put
a link to that below and a link to a few
of the other resources that Jamie
mentioned so one thing that seems clear
is that people are responding to the
crisis in very different ways so some
people are feeling that it's very
stressful they're treating and it is
very stressful but a lot of other people
are at the same time kind of increasing
their agency being more active wanting
to get involved in things and feeling
this sort of singular point of focus and
that was we had a group call last night
with I think there may be 25 people on
it members call and that energy was you
know there was mixed but there was
certainly an energy with lots of forward
momentum and focus and intention so we
recorded with Diane Michelle Hamilton
yesterday who is a really superstar Zen
teacher and mediator
recording for our online course that
we're running she's one of the faculty
on the online course but it seemed a
really good opportunity to ask her about
this like how do we take care of
ourselves how do we how do we understand
kind of the neuroscience of fear of
contagious fear and how do we kind of
resource ourselves in the middle of this
one of the reasons that fear is so
contagious is again just our
evolutionary history so we have a very
powerful sensing system for threat and
we refer to that as fight-or-flight and
it comes from the oldest part of the
brain the reptilian brain but the
midbrain the mammalian brain is also
responsible for limbic resonance meaning
that felt experience we have when we
walk into a room and it's celebrative
and we immediately feel happier we walk
into a room that's tense and suddenly we
find ourselves gripped or or the way in
which we pick up fear just simply by
reading or listening to others there's
fear in the space and therefore it's
part of its it's partly it it
communicates directly into our system
and a bypasses cognition so in order to
work with it we actually have to be
to notice it and be able to label it as
fear or anxiety in my mind I make a
distinction between fear and anxiety
fear there is usually an object I'm
afraid of there not being any supplies
in the grocery stores right and anxiety
is object less there's an uncertain
future there's a not knowing to some
degree
anxiety is free-floating you could say
where fear is quite specific and so in
order to work with that we first have to
be able to notice it in the body what
the sensations of fear are and you know
they correlate to stress hormones so
there's often a rushing sensation in the
limbs there's a rushing sensation in the
body there can be a nausea or a sort of
pit in the stomach there can be
clenching in the throat there can be
hunched up shoulders in a contracted jaw
I mean contracted neck generally there's
contraction because when we contract
we're being poised to be able to move
right so if we're afraid we can tract in
order for this explosive movement so
often there's a sense of contraction we
might feel Clos cold and we noticed that
the mind is rushing a lot and there's
usually a flurry of thoughts because
we're trying to strategize what to do so
when we become aware of all these these
symptoms if you will of fear then we can
just label it really directly as fear
and then what is the response to having
a lot of fear in the body well the
response to having fear in the body if
is first of all to notice the kinds of
thoughts that are happening and mostly
they're related to the future so just
slow the mind down and bring one's
attention into the here and now and even
when the mind is slowed and quieted the
sensations in the body will persist
they'll still be that rushing sensations
the need to move the feeling of slight
amount of nausea there's tension and
just to sit quietly and include those
sensations any more tips
with the be in a conflict that maybe
people are failing at the moment yeah
just being in the here now and using the
breath and then being in conversation
and here's a really really important
point that I would offer everyone is
make it a discipline in the conversation
to talk about what you're upset by what
is challenging what is fear inducing and
then when you've done that to make sure
that in your conversations you return to
a positive view and reflect on all the
goodness that's happening right now what
are all the things that you're seeing
people do for one another what are the
ways in which people have extended care
to you or concern or kindness and just
be sure that we don't let the negativity
bias of our evolution take over our
perception because as I said before mr.
Rogers mother said always look for the
helpers it's extremely supportive human
beings know how to come together under
crisis and this is actually wonderful
and it's not wonderful
it's what it's one of what's wonderful
is that we're so connected and that
we're sharing such a similar experience
so just to pick up off some of the
things I was talking about about the
importance of our inner resilience we're
gonna be recording a whole film around
that and going in a lot more detail
around some of the practices that we
found useful we're gonna be releasing
publicly some of the practices we've
designed but the online course because
we feel they're very important right now
and just delving into just on a really
practical level what can we do to
increase our resilience internally as
individuals so we also caught up with
rich Bartlett who wrote a piece that
went kind of viral recently about
community building and how to create
anti fragile relationships and he's a
New Zealander he lives in Italy at the
moment so he's in lockdown himself
trying to think about how to turn some
of the tips and tools that he's worked
on which are kind of mostly for in
person into an online manual for
community building yeah rich you you
wrote this really amazing piece that
went kind of viral about creating
resilient small communities creating
what you've called micro solidarity can
you talk about like some of the
principles for that what what a sort of
some of the tools some of the ideas that
people can take away
especially now that we're all like
needing sort of more resilience and
needing to kind of build an to fragile
communities and connections maybe one of
the first parts is this idea of courage
what is courage for and where do we get
it from my sense is that we are facing
really significant threats and huge
uncertainty and the way that you hold up
to that and show up to that and stay
with the trouble is with a huge amount
of courage and where do you get courage
from I think you get it from
encouragement I think it's a social
process that people contribute to each
other that we animate each others we
contribute to each other's courage
account by encouraging each other and
the courage means to persist without the
guarantee of a positive outcome you know
like to just keep showing up keep
standing up keep donating that needs to
be done I think it's a social phenomenon
and I think the other part is meaning
like where does meaning come from for me
meaning is a social phenomenon as well
like the way that I understand what's
happening is there's a phenomenon and
then there are my peers who I'm close to
people who I know really well and I see
how am i reacting to this phenomenon and
how and my peers reacting and do some
kind of mental mathematics to to
construct a picture like what does this
thing mean if these 10 different people
are having these 10 different reactions
where do I sort of position myself I
think that's a social phenomenon in
having really high bandwidth connections
with people helps me to feel grounded in
like I know I know what's going on in
the world because I've bounced the
signal off these 10 reflectors that I
know and trust and I understand kind of
what biases they're each bringing so
that's kind of the why why I want a
methodology is for those two theses and
in the structure of it is think that
we've been trained for individualism and
and it's really it's severely
undermining our resilience and that the
answers that we need involve us
developing relational competence
learning how to be in groups
and as I said I've been traveling with
my partner for a few years working with
groups working with collaborative groups
decentralized groups non hierarchical
groups and what we realized from working
with more than a thousand of these
different collectives and companies and
so on is people are really bad at
collaboration they're really really bad
at it and it's because they were raised
wrong and I weren't trained you know
they weren't trained for the work and
and so like micro Sol adara tea is set
of methodologies to train people in how
to be a group and so it's micro
solidarities kind of acting some
artificial architecture to recreate that
social fabric which you would hope would
kind of arise spontaneously between
people but I think we need some
prosthetics to help us recreate it or
for some people to create it for the
first time and probably probably one of
the essential pieces of the theory to
just have in mind is my language and I'm
not attached to the language other
people can use their own terminology I
talked about dyads so that's two people
and then I talked about a crew which is
somewhere between like three and eight
people I limit it to how many people you
can have dinner with they're going to
sit in a circle with it it's a small
table and then I name the congregation
which is basically limited by dumbells
number so like one or two hundred people
you know so like a group that's small
enough where everyone can know everyone
and then beyond the congregation I say
any group bigger than I just call that a
crowd because once you get beyond that
number the majority of people are
strangers to each other
the proposal is we need more
congregations and and what's the point
of a congregation it's to find your crew
it's to find your small group of people
that are going to really go through the
hard times with you and hold you up and
support you probably the highest
leverage thing that everyone can do so
sort of like top tip is in a small group
of people make a small commitment so
like I said find three people and say
we're gonna meet four times over the
next week you know each week for four
weeks and we're just going to talk to
each other for an hour and this is you
know some very big idea about why and
what sort of principles we have
and at the end having done that forth
four times on the fifth time we're going
to stop and reflect that's the thing
that makes all the different stuff and
reflect and say okay so we met four
times what did you like about it what
was really good what was not so good
what could be done differently and
getting in this habit of collective
reflection and collective self-awareness
and saying okay we did a little
something we tried something did it help
did we did we you know did you feel more
connected more sane more ambitious more
courageous and what what do we need I
will put a link to some of Rich's
writings and resources below in the show
notes so in the first film we put out a
couple of days ago Joe Edelman of human
systems mentioned a few communities
around the world that he thought was
doing really good work and a few names
of people that he thought were creating
good anti fragile communities ones that
are actually being sort of getting
stronger under the stress rather than
getting weaker and one of the people he
mentioned was a woman called Sarah Ness
who's based in Austin CA well I found
really interesting about the community
that she's part of and what she's doing
is it's really based around a lot of the
relational practices that we've talked
about on the channel we've talked about
circling we've talked about inquiry
we've talked about authentic relating
before and she's really central to a lot
of those communities and those kind of
practices seem to be really important
for building resilience and like tight
social bonds that within these sort of
times of crisis will really come to the
fore so I caught up with her and talked
about that yesterday with everything
that's going on I think it's really
important to look at which communities
are kind of sure self-organizing and
building resilience and which ones
aren't and he mentioned you as someone
that he thought was doing really really
good work can you talk about what what
kind of work you're doing around this or
what work you've done around resilient
community yeah um I just want to say
it's really cool to have community
starting to come up as what feels like a
more kind of relevant topic as we're
transitioning most things online because
it's like this is what we've got right
now is how do we support each other and
I've been working in the authentic
relating and circling movement for the
last eight years
and I got into it because I was
interested in the housing cooperative
movement and I was trying to figure out
like how is it that people can co-exist
and support each other's needs in these
kind of smaller tribes really or like
conglomerates that don't just rely on
government or on work or on other people
or in school to provide our social
networks because after we graduate from
school there's not a lot of ways to form
connections if you don't have a church
or kind of a dedicated social
organization and so I got obsessed with
building these spaces that were focused
on a form of communication and
connection like often relational games
like expanded icebreakers almost that
gave people a space to just really
quickly get honest with each other about
like who we are what we want what's
important to us and something I found
that's been really cool is transitioning
to like the wider global network of the
more than 80 communities that are around
the world it's like people will come
through the community learn a practice
of communication take it and then like
form a hub with the people that are
close in their life or with others that
they found in that and it's like it
almost has become this pass-through
where it's like okay come in learn skill
connect with people go out form tribe
and as the Copa de epidemic has ramped
up like there's so many people sharing
information with each other creating
events with each other just yesterday I
was on a call with all the different
creators of different online connection
platforms we actually had a couple
people from human systems this platform
listen lis that does listening circle
anywhere and connect that do authentic
relating and circling online each of
these has online activity in many cases
every day or multiple times a day and we
were all coming together and going okay
can we prove can we create like an
emergency support network for first line
providers we've got you know 10 people
on this call they're all going yeah like
we'll divide up different pieces of this
we can give facilitators we can rally
hundreds of people at ago that have
these space holding skills that then can
translate out into different communities
great I mean that's a really good
example of a real-world operation or
real-world project can you give any
other examples of those real-world
projects mm-hmm yeah and there's another
I've been drawing some inspiration from
the Bay Area rationalist communities
that have beautiful they've been doing a
lot of coordination especially around
like gathering supplies and having
common hubs for it and then they put
together this spreadsheet of houses in
the Bay Area yeah and for each house it
has like a quarantine level and you know
who's in the house and I created a
version of that for my communities which
is like quarantine level but then also
needs and capacities so what is it that
you're needing because there are some
people in our community that are
immunocompromised and can't go out or
older so you know do you need food do
you need money whatever it is what are
your capacities what can you give and we
have like a thread of people that are
that are communicating on that and that
are updating something I've found I was
I was thinking a little bit this morning
about this call and what is it that
creates community there's this cool
intersection where I often am like well
I can just like create a resource and
put it out to people like here's this
amazing spreadsheet and something that I
love about the practices that I've been
engaged with over time is there's focus
on group connection but there's also a
lot of focus on one-on-one connection
and community feels only as strong as
the strength of the individual
connections that people do what their
friends are doing they do what their
close groups are doing so there's also a
lot of just and we're more checking in
that's happening okay how are you doing
what do you need is anybody caring for
this person or that person and this is
something that Joe Edelman spoke about
in the conversation I have with him that
actual cultural change or actual
systemic change comes from exactly
crises like this where we create kind of
local solutions to problems that
actually do things better than maybe can
be done so centrally do you get that
sense that that's happened starting to
happen yeah and it's
it's a cool loop back to like the
communities that I'm part of authentic
relating and circling are kind of rare
and that there's never been a governing
or organizing board there's now starting
to be kind of intimations of that but
every community has invented and
iterated its own way of doing things
invented its own governance systems
invented its own games the games manual
the authentic relating games manual
that's kind of used as the resource text
for these communities is created by
putting out a call and saying who's
invented games in the last year submit
them and so in that sense I've been
privileged to witness like what happens
when communities are allowed to really
develop develop their own facilitation
trainings like their own standards of
ethics and codes and it's been
successful and more and more communities
have been coming about every year and I
think as we've gotten as we've grown as
a country so there are so many people as
a world so there are so many people that
systems of government can no longer
address each of our individual needs I
think there really has been more very
under-the-radar development of friend
pods and community pods and practices
we're now on the internet it's really
amazing for me to witness how many
events are starting to happen that I
didn't care if when they were happening
in person but now that they're online
they're getting announcements like
online dance parties that were happening
every week before in different cities
online authentic relating games and
circles on-line conversations the online
meditations and yoga and there's so many
things that people have been doing in
small groups that it's it's really
amazing kind of seeing it seeing it pop
up like I think this is really it's it's
a call to connect we're just good but
it's also an awareness of the systems
that have been being built this network
across the world and are really what
people are depending on to keep them
alive and do you have any more
suggestions of resources to share or
ideas to share for people to start
creating kind of anti fragile
communities in in their own areas yeah I
think one thing is an
reaction I've often had as I've seen an
event pop up or I've seen someone do
something and I've been like okay well
now I can't do that because someone else
has done it like someone's already
holding a zoom dance party I don't need
to hold my own zoom dance party or
someone's already like reached out to
you know my phone so I don't need to
reach out to them and it's like
replicating the wheel right now is not a
bad thing so like if you have an idea
for what to do
that could resource even one person
around you like even sending a message
to one friend you're wondering about
like before you think that thought of Oh
someone else has probably done it just
pick up your phone and give it a trial
because the worst case is nobody comes
and you spend an hour on the internet
like by yourself having your own dance
party or that friend doesn't respond any
message three others I think one of the
things that's gonna most make us anti
photo right now is that willingness to
just do something try something learn
something offer something do it to a
group and distinguish doing it from a
group - doing it from an individual
because those are really different
feelings - doing it from - a system like
what can you do to support the systems
around around you is like another
question that I've been asking myself
and then also this practice of if you
get yeah active if you get scared
especially if that's in relation to
another person um I don't know I cut up
especially if that's in relation to
another person just see if you can ask a
question first that's the best hack I
have when you notice yourself wanting to
react ask the person a question like why
did you say this what's going on for you
are you scared
can I help and we've talked about sort
of a few of these practices claiming
authentic relating and if people watch
and maybe want to get involved or
experience than any suggestions there
mm-hmm
yeah one actually really good way to be
involved is we have an online platform
called Connect that has circling and
authentic relating multiple times a day
every day so that's a really good place
to come if you just want a space where
you can slow down drop-in talk about
what's going on and be held by some
really amazing facilitators all the
facilitators on there pretty highly
trained and that
it and then there's also on that same
site website auth rev there's a manual
of authentic relating games that you can
download that have just a ton of stuff
that you can pull out and you can play
even one-on-one like and I'd suggest
some really good ones there's a list of
sentence stems which are just like fun
questions to ask there's a game called
the curiosity game and a game called the
empathy game and a game called noticing
and those are three of our basics
noticing is just like going back and
forth sharing like how you feel in the
moment think I notice I'm like have you
know my throat feels kind of rough I
notice I feel scared I noticed like I'm
glad you're here curiosity is that that
game of having a couple minutes to just
ask questions of someone else it's
really amazing to find questions that
you never thought you could ask even if
someone that you've known for years and
years there's something special about
having a dedicated time and then empathy
is taken directly from nonviolent
communication it's a listen thing in
reflection game that can help clear some
of the build up of emotion that's
happening for many of us so there's a
lot of resources what Sarah was talking
about so the the manual of all of the
authentic relating games is available
online we'll put the link in the show
notes
and also the online community around
authentic relating are putting on a
whole program of different ways of
connecting different events and zoom
calls all through the day and they're
also offering access for free for
healthcare workers and health care
workers families for the next three
months and also just to mention that we
have we've been running something called
the wisdom gym for a little while
led by Peter Lindbergh a Toronto
correspondent and community manager and
we've been kind of trialing a few of
those and we're going to start rolling
those out we're going to basically speed
up that program we were kind of doing
testing of them and just seeing what
worked and we're gonna start rolling
those out in the next few days so kind
of watch this space those experiments
have been going really well the group
calls have been getting more and more
depth and more and more presents and
more and more yeah there's a real sort
of sense of shared purpose as well
coming through in a lot of the people
who
the members so do watch out for that and
just to say as well if you're new to
rebel wisdom and you haven't seen many
of our films we've been covering a lot
of these kind of broader topics of
systemic risk and the shift from one
system to another and what that might
mean what that might entail
I think are becoming increasingly
irrelevant and we'll return to that
topic as well kind of in the future but
for now we've put together a playlist
but we're calling the sense-making
playlist on youtube so if you have a
look at the homepage on youtube there's
a there's a new playlist there with some
of the films that we think are really
relevant to kind of understanding some
of the deeper issues that are going on
in the shifts that we're now kind of
being overwhelmed with on a kind of
daily basis so do have a look at that
we're going to continue to release films
around the kind of making sense of
what's going on on a regular basis so so
you think and we're just going to give
the final word to Diane musho Hamilton
you know being aware of one's entire
context is really really important and
so if it's important to prepare to go
shopping and prepare then that's what
people should do it's important to stay
in conversation with like-minded people
but particularly connect to people who
can maintain both relaxation in the
nervous system and also a positive
outlook even while being realistic about
the threat so I think remaining relaxed
and positive even while being realistic
is a really important character trait
that we need to seek out I think
websites like yours are extremely
important in this time because one can
actually self isolate and stay at home
and connect into people who have a big
picture vision who are going to support
people in not panicking who offer
practices like sitting meditation so if
you go to two arrows in my website there
are two times of the day that you can
get on and sit with other people and
actually experience a stable
relationship to body and mind and open
awareness and so I think the it's just
important to engage the situation as
practice in Zen we say that our life is
our practice so our life right now in
our own interior in relationship to our
choices and our behaviors in
relationship to how we mingle and
cluster and talk with others and to how
we work with the systems including the
healthcare system including the economic
system all those things are an important
part of the practice nothing is left out
it's our entire life and for someone
like me who's been practicing meditation
and mediation both for 40 years I feel
like it's time to to actually this is
where the rubber meets the road all of a
these years of practice if I can't
manifest some of what I've been taught
and learned over this time when am I
going to be able to so I hope we can we
can use the benefit of our practice and
share it with others during this time is
what I'm hoping yes I think I think that
under the circumstances that we use that
expression business as usual there is no
business as usual right now everybody is
in a little bit more or less an
alternative universe to the one they
were in before so decision making
conversations choice making sense making
everything is altered because of the
intensity of not just the threat to you
but the threat to it to everyone around
us so it isn't just that I might get
sick it's that I might be sick not know
it and infect someone near to me so
we're completely connected in this way
and this is the time to heighten our
awareness and actually use the clarity
of our mind
and the the openness of our heart to
include the well-being of everybody and
the efficiency and responsiveness of our
body and the tremendous stability of our
communication systems our internet if
you will I mean there's so many
downsides to it but right now it's
actually really really helpful because
we can get information directly and
that's really important and so I think
regarding our life as practice is the
first thing and then seeing where are
the places that we actually need support
so in relationship to how we show up to
each other are there room for multiple
perspective
is that something that we can create
space for I see some things on Facebook
where there's this kind of our people
being panicked or people not or what's
the truth and my guess is that it's a
combination of both and that there's
room for fear and there's room to be
fearless right now and is it possible to
listen in such a way that you create
space for multiple perspectives can you
calm your own nervous system in
relationship to somebody else who's
feeling panicked and you can simply by
receiving them not by comforting them
not by giving them advice but simply by
just listening to how they feel and
what's happening that that's a practice
that we've engaged in for years and we
all know that when we're in a state of
mind that is more in flow meaning that
we're not pressured by time meaning that
we're not coming from an egoic place
meaning that it's a natural
responsiveness as opposed to making
effort that we can move in flow and we
can execute really beautifully even
under stress and so any practice that
creates more flow in my system and
creates more flow and relationship to
you and relationship to the whole is
worth engaging at this time so all of us
are being challenged to bring more of
what's possible to this moment so I
would say our kind of casual and
unmindful way of being is not the best
approach so mindfulness awareness is the
drill right now rebel wisdom is a new
sense making platform bringing together
the most rebellious and inspiring
thinkers from around the world if you're
enjoying our content then you can help
us make more by becoming a subscriber
which will give you access to a load of
exclusive films also you can then join
our group zoom calls to discuss the
ideas in the films and you can send us
ideas for questions for upcoming
interviews we're also looking for
talented people to help us out with
editing graphics music that kind of
thing and if you're a regular viewer
you'll know we talked a lot about the
value of embodying or actually living
out the ideas that we talked about so
that's why we run regular events and
check out the links on the website for
more and hope to see you soon