howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
this is a special episode of the Jim
Brett show I appear on Peter Lindbergh
stoas show and I asked him some
questions he asked me some questions and
his audience gets involved hope you'll
enjoy it everyone welcome to the stoah I
am Peter Lindbergh the Stewart of the
stoah and I'm viewing this as a place
not just to practice and talk about
stoicism but a place for anyone to come
and go here in dialog but what matters
most at the knife's edge of this moment
and today Jim rod is here the lovable
Jim rut who currently is running the
excellent Jim Roth podcast or the gym
rat show podcast and how today came
about is I was talking to Jerry James
who is the producer of the Jim ruts show
and we're talking about culture war
stuff and how it's kind of heating up in
interesting ways and Jarrod was
mentioning this this go back to normal
narrative that is been occurring that
he's been seeing on Twitter and whatnot
and a term just came to my mind game a
fundamentalism work game a
fundamentalists so Jim I tweeted that
out and Jim reached out to me and said
they'd like me to come on his podcast do
one of his extra shorts and I said hey
let's do some game be collaboration I'm
like full-time doing this stoah thing
right now so how about we just combine
the two and then you come here we have a
chat about it and then he agreed so how
today is gonna work is that you know Jim
mentioned kind of his thoughts about
this game a fundamentalism can Co vid we
might have a brief exchange and then
we're gonna open up to Q&A to the group
and how that's going to work if you have
a question for for Jim or even me just
write it in the the chat box and then I
will call you and just unmute yourself
and ask it to Jim if you want me to read
it on your behalf
just indicate that in the chat as well
and there's one thing yeah there's just
with that tweet I'm gonna see if I can
share this in the in the file with that
tweet I sent this meme it's in the chat
box I think it's some graffiti from
China
it basically says we can't return to
normal because the normal that we had
was precisely
so with that I'll head over to Jim for
some opening thoughts
hey thanks Peter thanks for asking me to
be on the stoah great work that you're
doing is we talked earlier there's so
many people who who are physically
isolated particularly those isolated by
themselves for whom these kinds of four
are unbelievably valuable you know
myself I'm very fortunate that I'm with
my beloved wife and my daughter and her
husband and four of us are having
frankly too good a time together up here
in the mountains but I know a lot of
people are really struggling and so any
kind of social interaction there
conviviality that can be brought
together over the Internet's is a
wonderful thing so thank you for your
good work yes I was quite taken with
your quote and it fit in fairly well
with a conceptual framework which I'm
developing for the backside of kovat
when we think about complex dynamic
networks particularly social networks we
can think about two ways they respond to
a a probe or a shock and in network
theory dynamic network theory we can
think of those two as homeostasis which
is the tendency to return to the state
that you're in consider the human body
life itself is I would argue and have
argued is measured by its homeostasis
particularly on the a couple of seconds
or minute level of gases oxygen co2
nutrients toxins that circulate real
time and most shocks to the human body
result in homeostasis so for instance
you get a cold your immune system reacts
defeats the cold you return to where you
are on the other hand a bullet through
the heart is a hysteresis event the
cycles break down the the oxygen and co2
no longer circulate the toxins and the
nutrients and you transform from being a
living organism through a pile of rotten
meat so that's a hysteresis event and
there are things in between you know a
cold you fully recover from you get your
leg cut off in a farming accident
well you're not going to grow that one
back that's a hysteresis event and you
will have a very different life
trajectory afterwards now now we can
apply the same thinking to our social
economic operating system and this koban
19 event is a major shock certainly the
most major shock since World War two at
least in the West and to what degree
will the response be homeostasis the
tendency for the network to re weave
itself back together the way it was and
to what degree will it be hysteresis
that is the tendency be knocked into a
new trajectory that is not predetermined
by the gestalt of what we called game a
and when I saw your quote I said ah this
is very interesting because as we know
Peter has done this extraordinarily
interesting piece of work I don't know
what was it a year and a half ago where
he delineating the tribes I mean I refer
people to that document all the time and
it is such an illuminating document
makes you think about the world and in a
really truly different way it's really a
profound and important document and
we'll put a link to that document up on
the podcast version of this conversation
and I was thinking ah it's when we think
about society while these tribes are
artificial they're you know they're not
real people don't really live in these
tribes they are a very useful way to
think about it and one of the big forces
for homeostasis ie the world going back
to where it was will be aptly named
group coined by Peter a game a
fundamentalist I guess I should take a
moment here put my cards on the table
I've been working along with a number of
other people Laura large number of other
people on something called game B since
2013 where we are attempting to craft a
alternative narrative an alternative
socio-economic political operating
system that is not game a that is
designed to you know help people live a
life of self-actualization that's based
on radical transparency
organization decentralization Network
centricity and long-term metastability
unlike our game a what world which we to
argue is headed towards the cliff
sometime this century if we don't change
so count me as about as anti a game a
fundamentalist as possible I'm a person
who would prefer that this shock be used
constructively to move our
socio-economic operating system towards
a new basin of Attraction which is
distinctly not game a and let's call it
game B however it's important to
acknowledge that probably ninety percent
of the people at least would prefer at
least they think they prefer if they
have not been shown an alternative that
that we survive the shock and then game
a returns to a business-as-usual we
spend all of our time collecting shiny
objects and you know living a life of
status through materialism and
positional goods so I think it's you
know very very useful to make explicit
this concept of game a fundamentalists
and at least for my purposes and I would
encourage other people who think like we
do the game B people to think about how
do we help convert game a
fundamentalists to game B radicals so
those are my those are my reactions to
Peters provocative coining so here's
what's coming to mind so I think I have
a decent sensitivity to the narratives
that are at play
kind of like the ideologies or the
philosophies in the wild not in the
textbooks but are like happening under
Twitter on the internet and stuff like
that and also kind of leaning into the
emotions and then the states surrounding
those narratives and fueling them and I
think what when I like that distinction
you made of the homeostasis fishes the
hysteresis it's almost like two
narratives are emerging from this kind
of like uncertain liminal space that
were in that's like team homeostasis and
team hysteresis and I haven't been
tracking the last couple of days but I'm
curious if you're seeing these these
teams kind of like come to head
truthfully I haven't seen the last
couple of days as I mentioned I take a
two day intern
sabbatical over the weekend and I'm
gonna recommend that as a unbelievably
powerful practice I used to do it been
doing it for a year and a half year and
a half but then probably starting in
early February I've been wallowing in
this stuff on the internet and
truthfully you know if I look at the you
know the incidence of cases in
Bangladesh what the hell can I do about
it what does it tell me not much but I
sure have wasted a lot of time on it but
prior to that you know I can look back
and say the people in the game B world
and in the broader what we call the big
change movement the you know the people
regenerative ecology you know the world
and crisis people they all see this as a
real opportunity right both a tragedy
and an opportunity however what I would
say people the average person who
follows their nose through life which is
most people are fervently hoping that
this is just a blip and that life goes
back to normal I'm curious
the closing thought that you had about
how do we come into dialogue with the
game be fundamentalists or the people
that are being influenced by them you
have any thoughts oh how we might be
able to do that now yeah this is
unfortunately where game B is a little
behind the curve we did not expect this
crisis to occur so rapidly we expected a
crisis but of course being a complex
adaptive system the predictability such
crisis are almost zero right we don't
know when or where they came but they
came before it would have been nice
because unfortunately we do not yet have
the kind of popular narrative about game
B that would have been really good to be
able to point out but here's our six
minute video that explains what an
alternative way of organizing society
looks like so the best we can do is kind
of freelance it and so unfortunately
probably we can't right now use this as
the transition event right but what we
can do is grow the cadre find people who
are approximate who are not game a
fundamentalism I think that's the
distinction that there are gaming
fundamentalists we're not reachable
right now but there are other people who
are
following game a through inertia and
this is an opportunity to point out that
this is just another manifestation of
how broken game a is right you know a
society organized in the game beasts way
so that things are modular and localized
would have been very easy to stop this
right if hot spot occurs in a game v
world we would say all right shut down
module New Rochelle right and New
Rochelle would have had been evolved to
be very self-sufficient I had you know
stockpiled plenty of material and food
to get by for six months and we've been
no great hardship to just sniff the
connections to New Rochelle and
internalize it unfortunately money on a
world defined only by money on money
return efficiency which is the nature of
game a inevitably builds all these
highly complex cross links which are
nominal money on money return efficient
but they are not worried the robust or
resilient and communicating that concept
frankly we're not ready to communicate
it to the masses yet but we are ready to
communicate it to the ears who will hear
right so I see this as an opportunity to
grow the cadre from a few tens of
thousands of people to maybe a few
hundreds of thousands of people over the
next 90 days yeah I like that a lot and
like you said the game a fundamentalist
some of them might be we can't reach
them or like we put Jordan houses the
blue church priests you know like it's
the best not the audience that we want
to reach but there's just like there's
this term and the stoah someone was
talking about how a bunch of the
Apocalypse memes are happening right now
and the etymology of the word apocalypse
is to uncover to reveal and we're like
heating contact with reality quite hard
right now and a lot of the is
being revealed just like kick
case-in-point my wife you know she's
gets to work from home she works at a
university and then she's loving it you
know she's getting more work done she's
enjoying life more instead of like
driving like an hour to work all these
useless meetings just to work like two
or three hours a day type thing so just
like little things little scripts are
being revealed as not necessary as a lie
and I think this is like an opportunity
to kind of lean on that
absolutely and I've been predicting it
and frankly in doing things like
adjusting my investment portfolio
because I believe that will be a series
of mini history sees for instance
business travel what a waste of
time energy and depletion of our
atmosphere you know flying from New York
to San Francisco for a one-hour meeting
which I have done countless times in my
life so typically not New York either
Boston or Washington and we should have
stopped doing as much business travel as
we've been doing eight or ten years ago
once the internet got really fast and
stable we had good tools now that
everybody is using zoom or Skype or
WebEx or what have you they're going
what the hell were you doing sitting
around the country alright how annoying
is it to go from you know a horrible
airport to a beige hotel to uber to a
generic conference room and back spend
36 hours and $3,000 that right
you know I've been doing 5 to 20 zooms a
week now for the last year and I think
that habit will be spreading
exponentially and so that many
hysteresis will certainly occur the
other thing which I I as I was thinking
about this this morning I wish I'd said
it earlier but I'll say it now which is
this uncovering I'll I love that is not
know that was the root of apocalypse but
think about the fact that we are having
ourselves personally evolved by the
shock and the analogy I came up with it
may or may not be true but it seems true
so what the hell all right think of the
60s which really started rolling in
about 1965 slowly then exponentially by
67 then went crazy into the early 70s
there were two huge shocks to especially
American society where the 60s really
took off the first was the Cuban Missile
Crisis right the Cuban Missile Crisis
outlined the absurdity the literal
insanity of the nature of game a at that
time two superpowers were 30,000 nuclear
missiles pointed each other's big cities
then the second one was the Kennedy
assassination here it was the hope of
change suddenly cut down and then
co-opted by a classic political operator
Lyndon Johnson who did do some good but
was certainly not a JFK I have long
believed that those two events shook the
soul of many Americans not all Americans
not even a majority and that that was
the seed which sprouted a couple of
years later as the 60s so if we think of
these shocks that are happening to our
souls and these are the biggest shocks
that have happened to the souls of
individuals since World War two I'm
gonna say they're bigger than either the
cuban missile crisis or the kennedy
assassination or 9/11 even if they don't
produce the game a to game B transition
right now they are opening people's eyes
that they're giving them ears to hear in
ways that they had never had before so
they will not only can we recruit a
cadre of maybe 10x more in the next
three months but maybe 10 or 15% of the
people have had their cognitive
apparatus primed for more for bigger
challenges to game a right right this is
so uh I'll make one more statement or
question and then so if anyone has a
question for for Jim just write it in
the chat box and then I will either
calling you or I'll read on your behalf
if you would like me to read it on your
path so the last thing I'll share no I
want I want to see how this lands for
you John Drake II my friend John
reveille he was on this the stoah last
week and he said something boldly you
never could never heard him talk like
this he says he wants to steal the
culture away from those who have been
abusing us for so long I was like woo
and this that phrase steal the culture
because we can't win by playing the
previous game you know that that Joe
Montana quote comes to mind
he ain't cheating any trying right so
why try to win a corrupt game or kind of
like a pathologically designed game so
I'm curious how does that phrase land
for you steal a culture absolutely love
it right I think that's exactly right
and is what we've been trying to figure
out how to do slowly but surely in the
game be world we're not going to go
head-to-head with the blue church and
start the green church or anything
like that we're gonna instead operate in
a decentralized self-organizing network
centric fashion and if we can grow I
would say grow the alternative culture
maybe he's a little bit better than
steal the culture though though I'm
going to stop and say maybe the events
of this magnitude may allow us to steal
the culture and and that may be that we
call the short journey to game B I
recently wrote an essay and medium
called a journey to game be what's laid
out the non apocalyptic road to game B
over 60 years and I promised in that
essay to also write the short road to
game B which is around an apocalypse and
while this may not be quite extreme
enough apocalypse it might be so it's
worth thinking about but I would say
growing the alternative to the culture
maybe a little bit more accurate but the
end result is the same that the that the
trajectory the world line of culture has
to move to a new basin of Attraction
right right okay so Greg Walsh you have
a question would you like to go off mute
and ask it to Jim
alright I'll read the question then see
if I can expand so how does the
stratification of cultures development
affect our strategy or what we can
expect implement in gaming principles
and then so must the culture have at
least for their center of gravity in a
modern framework so you know this group
is like pretty meta I would say we're
just thinking big big questions here but
uh so I mean for us to sort of pass
through into game B we have to be in
this place as opposed to you know people
just trying to keep the lights on and
feed themselves you know maybe like
third world countries is there an
opportunity then for some of these like
decentralized technologies of just you
know maybe 3d printing or all these
things that even though they're not sort
of in a meta framework there are these
opportunities to sort of implement
things that are decentralized so
absolutely and I would say that it would
probably have been a fool's errand to
try to build game B in 1935 you know or
1955 at the you know the high water of
probably 1955 was the high-water mark of
centralized commodity mass production
right something like game B would not
even have been on the table at that time
and so it is the prerequisites that game
a created that have allowed game B to
emerge for instance the internet for
instance the neo the smart the 21st
century version of back to the land
which we see here in rural Virginia a
whole lot people young people
particularly quite innovative and very
capable local agriculture you know
unlike the fairly hilarious hippie
attempts in the 1970s which were almost
all incompetent almost all went bust
these are much more well thought out
because they're there's a much stronger
learning curve that's occurred so the
prerequisites are absolutely important
and as you mentioned an important one
will be decentralized energy that will
change a lot of thinking when you're no
longer dependent fully on the grid you
may have used the grid as a backup and
there's some important sort of
mathematical and network topology
why you still want a grid but if you
have you know say 50% of your
electricity which is enough to get by in
a crisis created locally that changes a
whole lot of things that answer your
question
yeah sure and then I guess so we have to
pass through that then so again it just
and then another I guess so much answer
is that you know what other
opportunities do we see then for
cultures who haven't even passed through
that you know again I keep thinking of
like third world countries that haven't
even passed through that yet well some
ways they have some advantages right
give you for instance even not exactly
third-world countries like even Japan
which had relatively rudimentary
wireline telephony they just left over
all that in the 90s we went directly to
sell technology I have a good friend
Thor Muller who was actually one of the
cofounders of game B who has been very
active with his company in selling
totally localized sort of Hut level
solar energy in East Africa for instance
they may not build out a National Grid
in East Africa and so they can follow
with these prerequisites and stitch
together their own appropriate society
right right okay
you know cool so um amy has a question
and she actually might have a better
cleaners in game a fundamentalist and
she said game a reactionaries I like
that so Amy would you like to go out
mute and ask your question to Jim
sure hi everyone hi Jim so basically I
was wondering if game B is just kind of
a natural evolution that will be
occurring from game a so instead of
seeing game B is a reaction to game a
it's more like an evolution and as a
people that are involved in game being
now are sort of more early adopters than
game a reactionaries does that make
sense
makes perfect sense and it's almost
exactly how we've long thought about it
the original game B team included two
evolutionary scientists Eric Weinstein
and John Wilkins and so evolutionary
thinking was fundamental
to the ethos of game B and then we also
had in our startup team several
successful executive business executives
who had essentially marketing
backgrounds myself Jordan Hall Mike
Needham a couple others and we always
use the language of innovator early
adopter early majority late majority and
laggards right and so I think it's
absolutely appropriate to think of game
B as a natural evolution from game a
unfortunately it's not the only one I
have written an essay called in search
of the fifth attractor on medium where I
lay out other alternatives and you can
see that you know game B is not the only
alternative other alternatives that seem
like they could also evolve out of it
are neo-fascism I would give China its
example of neo-fascism
I can easily see game a transitioning to
Chinese style state capitalism plus
militarism plus nationalism neo
feudalism to my mind extreme
libertarianism of the Peter teal or the
Koch brothers variety is really a form
of feudalism where there's a few at the
top who build a hierarchy of control via
money of the people underneath them I
could actually see our society going
that way I could see us transitioning to
a neo Dark Ages if somehow the religious
fundamentalists use this moment to
mobilize and move us from a game a
operating system to something like the
Dark Ages where religion was everything
and of course you know our anti friend
chaos is always an alternative you know
if the infrastructure breaks down we
could end up in a chaotic regime which
would not be good so game a to game B is
an evolutionary potential pathway but
when we have to fight for to land in
this right v attractor which we believe
makes for a much better world for us and
for our descendants cool side Donovan
Smith you had a question for Jim yeah hi
Jim thanks Peter Jim I heard you
mentioned on a linear podcasts with I
think either jordan daniel trachtenberg
the specific idea of
building redundancy into the electoral
grid like a second set of Transformers
next to everyone we've got in the event
of a Carrington event that sort of
catastrophe and I like what you said
about this being more a moment for
building the cadre and not for you know
maybe not a transition point for such
big moves like that but I wonder what
you think that the possibility might be
for this being maybe an event to spark
some infrastructural type change within
gaming on a shorter term great question
and in fact it is the topic mostly of
the brief extra podcast I did with
Jordan Hall last week that's mostly what
we talked about that we hope even within
the game a context let's call it you
know enlighten game a ISM that we've got
to find a way to deflect our social
allocations away from the rigors of pure
economic money on money and return
deficiency and investing in the
Carrington event is a perfect example
for those who don't know there was a
major solar flare was it 1857 something
like that during the era before
electricity was at all a thing but the
telegraph was a thing and the solar
flare basically hit the telegraph lines
and was telegraph lines worked as
antennas which concentrated the solar
flare and produced fires and actually
killed a couple telegraph operators it's
now thought that if we had a solar flare
of that intensity today it would utterly
destroy the grid or at least it would
destroy enough of the key components
that it could be a year or two before
the grid came up and I should add the
astronomers believe a Carrington event
solar flare hitting the earth is about a
1 in 500 chance so essentially two
tenths of a percent per year that's a
big percent right you know if
someone were to say with a two-tenths of
a percent per year of having a nuclear
war we'd be ourselves pretty
much right though I will say that's how
we thought of it 1962 during the Cuban
Missile Crisis probably thought it's
more like 5% a year but it's insane that
we have not taken the relatively
inexpensive preparatory of
to be able to recover much more rapidly
from a Carrington event for instance
storing replacements for the
Transformers in caves you don't want
them sitting right next to the other
Transformers you want them in places
where they won't be hit by the solar
flare further having physical breaks in
the wiring that could be literally ten
foot of wire taken out in many places
the nice thing about a solar flare you
have two or three days warning which is
an unusual kind of event so yeah
absolutely i hope i hope that this
priming and we think of the cognitive
science concept of priming you see one
thing and then you see other things that
fit the same pattern so you know
especially in in the united states and
then much of western europe
we were grossly under invested why
didn't we have stockpiles of ventilators
why didn't we have stockpiles of 95 and
n99 masks very inexpensive hedge for
what everybody knew was going to happen
you know these virus pandemics have been
happening about every eight to ten years
for several years and anyone who studies
statistical variation knows that sooner
or later a strong one was going to hit
and this is by no means the strongest
one that could have had so hopefully
this is a gigantic wake up lesson that
will help us prepare not only for
pandemics but for other exogenous events
such as solar flares
you know EMPs by terrorists cyberattacks
on our financial and communications
infrastructure etc so excellent question
thank you okay we have a lot of good
questions we might not get to all of
them and I'm not reading them out in
order so I'm using my discernment here
but let's go next with Benjamin thanks
Peter and I question from my own
personal place most student teachers
college right now and I can't speak for
all teachers colleges but I can say is
very much like a game a world where
there's a lot of busy work a lot of work
that is really unnecessary to make good
teachers and they're holding on to me
and my friends and other colleges also
I'm in Israel by the way pretty tightly
giving us a lot of work to do that
and as this is in some ways a shake up
period between game a and game B I want
to know kind of going off about John for
bacon he said about stealing mythical
journeys a kind of grown in the culture
is this a time to rebell in a certain
sense where people who are kind of in
this place where they can afford a
somewhat sacrificing parts of game a and
getting the grades or ever would be in
order to throw themselves at things like
and coronavirus or other projects that
are much more game B party ended or do
you think that that would be a mistake
by going too early and really part of
developing game you require people on
top of game a kind of and climbing up
that ladder it'll be a better long-term
investment that's a damn good question
tell you the truth let me think about
that a second before I answer
okay here's the answer and it's probably
not a surprise it depends if you have a
office move to a game be alternative say
for instance to build a game be venture
one of the things I talked about in a
journey the game B is the idea of game B
ventures and you know we would expect
them to be operated as coops or
community owned or funded in
non-predatory financial means such as
good enough rate of return right if you
have such a thing either proximal to you
or that you could create an Israel you
have the very interesting example of
kibbutz which while has its issues also
has some great learnings on how to have
a I would say a game be proximate style
of business if you have an alternative
take it but don't cut your own throat I
think we don't want game B people who
are getting ready for game B to bail
from their game a senators too early so
don't be a fool be wise be thinking
about creating a game B alternative I
will say you know my business career was
mostly being an entrepreneur and helping
entrepreneurs and when people came to me
with a business plan one of the first
things I say how long you've been
working on this right and if the answer
was two weeks and I'd say once you go
back and do some more work I seldom
found a good business idea that didn't
take nine months of study and research
and development before I was ready to
launch about the same times it takes to
grow a baby so you know move when that
when you have a place to move to but
don't cut your throat in the interim and
be thinking about the move be organizing
with people to create the move that you
want to make does that answer your
question well yeah I mean the best that
you could write because it depends thank
you for the streams of thoughts yeah
that's definitely nuts a lot thank you
very much thanks for the question
all right drew buck Miller I was just
wondering so a lot of the talk about gay
B is about you know allowing people to
do
for the the projects that are not
necessarily you know the modern money
returns and I'm wondering long-term a
universal basic income makes a lot of
sense but I'm wondering in a
transitionary period and I'm calling the
the talk that the the neuro hacker
founders did called it the transition
from the three groups of you know stop
being immediate bad things who have been
an interface transitionary period that
can interact with game a in a future
game be if in that transitionary period
is there a role for people who have been
successful in game aid to fund basic
income for some people it wouldn't be a
universal basic income but a basic
income for people who maybe are in a
position to really contribute to a
future that they wouldn't otherwise be
able to if they had to work to survive
will certainly be part of it and it's
already part of it in to a very small
degree there are people who are working
a little bit on the background of game B
who have been funded by some of the you
know game a successful people on the
other hand even unless they're you know
Bill Gates level then the amount they
can realistic they could realistically
fund is relatively small so game B has
to be smart at parasitizing game a we
can catalyze with a little bit of
founder money if you want to call it
that but game B can't be a bunch of
hippies living in mud huts right game B
has to be able to create value to sell
back the game a and it's at least our
operating hypothesis and again I'd point
you to my long essay a journey to game
beyond medium which lays this out in
some detail it is our working hypothesis
that a group of people operating in
honesty and good faith with high
coherence with high sovereignty not only
ought to build a better society in a
place that we'd be proud to live in but
I'll be able to compete the hell out of
game a in its own game and from the very
beginning in fact Jordan halls a very
original concept of game a in January
2013 was that this new way of
would not only be a better way of being
but could actively parasitize game a so
the idea of game B ventures is
absolutely critical to this and this is
where you know some founder money could
be useful in the same way that seed
capital is useful in the game a world so
we could and I should add one of the
projects that we're actively working on
in game B is to set up an extended
crowdfunding platform so that people of
all levels of capital accumulation can
invest either on a donation basis or in
a you know non exploitive financed basis
in these early game a game B ventures
however if they're going to scale the
game B ventures have to be able to win
in game a terms which is seems like a
contradiction right how do you beat game
a by playing the game of honesty and
good faith but I say their answer to
that is by having higher coherence
higher sovereignty self-organization and
network centricity built deeply into
your DNA that's that's really good
Nikolas you had a similar question do
you want to piggyback on what we just
said sure so we have a startup we've
been working on it for five years and
we've consciously eschewed traditional
forms of investment and that's been very
very difficult for us so we've been
bootstrapping and we want to get in we
consider ourselves a game B venture but
we have very few means that our disposal
so we've considered crowdfunding and and
are at a loss as to where to go in order
to tap into the supposed impact game B
investor network if there is one I
thought yeah that's a lot of people are
in the same place you are
frankly because today there is no such
mechanism as you have discovered right
once in a while you find a good hearted
person who is in your extended social
network and they help you out but
there's no way to make your project
visible to a lot of people nor is there
a trusted intermediary to aggregate the
funds and we believe that is one of the
earliest things that game
NEADS and in fact it is my number one
game be project that and a honorable and
game be gig economy pool platform those
are my two short-term goals if we could
have a gig economy platform that was
owned by the by the talent and if we
could have a quite sophisticated crowd
funding that went everywhere from
donations to the equivalent of
securities on a non rapacious financial
basis and we had you know social
reputation networks around those to vet
both ventures and employees I think we
have three of the most important things
necessary to do what you're saying but
unfortunately they don't exist today but
they're very high on my list of
priorities and on other people's lists
the priorities to get done thank you and
by the way if you'd like I'd be happy to
chat with you on a video conference
which give you whatever thoughts I have
that may or may not help but now you'll
get every be worth every penny you pay
for it which it'll be free we love that
thanks Dino you had a question for Jim
hi Jim hey everyone yeah this is a
little bit metaphysical maybe but I was
listening a lot to your show a lot from
Daniel and Jordan and there's a lot of
framing around how we make better sense
of plan plan a to then step into plan B
and a little bit around the framework
and maybe logical steps we can take to
action it and then I got listening to
Nora Bateson and a more feminine
approach to it and she was basically
saying we can't really make a logical
step two step framework for Plan B but
more so meet complexity with complexity
and even though that's very metaphysical
I thought what what is your thoughts
around that because I'm not something a
lot of masculine lot of men in this
space but these are complex times and I
noticed the intuition of a woman and
translating that into a maybe actionable
process is important I was just wanting
your thoughts around that okay thank you
for the question if you've listened to
my show you know that one of my famous
statements is when I hear the word
metaphysics I reach
my pistol here's my pistol right and but
nonetheless your question is not a
metaphysical one so I will entertain it
was actually a core question and one
that I think most game B people agree
with you know complexity science has
informed game B from the beginning in
fact the very root of what became the
emancipation party which by the way the
website still exists if not the party
emancipation party or you can read the
work that we did in 2012 originally
Jordan Hall and I met after a Santa Fe
Institute board meeting we were both on
the board of trustees we had a meeting
in 2008 and we talked for like six hours
and we were like holy here's the
other person that sees the world like we
do I talked about it perhaps more than
Jordan I can we both complexity is deep
deep deep in the game a toolkit and we
strongly believe that the unfair
advantage game be will have against game
a is game a is one doesn't understand
complexity what it understands it's
complicated right a you know a factory
that builds you know Toyota's is
complicated it's not really complex it's
more can play it's work complex than a
General Motors Factory from 1975 but it
is not truly complex and so we believe
that understanding the complicated in
the context of the complex is going to
be an important game B advantage and
allow us over time to literally
out-compete game a and by the way I did
a episode with Norah on my podcast and I
truly respect her as a thinker and she
is one of the important thinkers in the
game B movement you know and it is
interesting that's masculine/feminine I
don't know I don't worry about that
too much I'm what I call an equality
feminist I believe men and women at the
end of the day are more similar than
they are different there are some
differences but you know I not not
something I spend too much time thinking
about but I do wish there were more
women's voices in the game be movement
it's about 25% today it would be nice if
it was 30
five percent or 45 percent and Feldman
your question with respect to Medan era
Tubbs what do you see is the deep
archetypes deep attractors and memes
that are quote and quote pulling us into
a just and regenerated future ok
meta-narratives well you know I think
the first one this is one Daniel schmock
timber ger has emphasized I think he's
correct and why something alike game be
better win and that is game a it was is
by no means all bad right game a and you
know I had another podcast with Jordan
back in July Jordan Hall about the
history of mostly about the history of
game a and you can argue it goes back
12,000 years or it goes back to my
favorite 1694 with the events of the
Bank England but if we really want to
think of it it's fully modern form let's
start with 1800 and that is when fossil
fuels became the underpinning starting
to become the underpinning of society
and humanity got this bonus where we
were able to finally transcend the
limits of animal power and a little bit
of wind and water to very rapidly at an
insane rate build the energetic
intensity of our society between 1800
and let's call it you know today maybe
we peaked around well weren't we still
haven't peaked and we liberated humanity
from the drudgery that had been in since
12,000 years ago when we accidentally
fell into agriculture where in 1890 plus
percent of humans 95 percent of humans
were peasants working the land at the
verge of starvation physical drudgery
rife with superstition etc and this game
a explosion of energy and science and
technology has brought us to a world
where we can be self actualized I mean
hardly anybody was self actualized in a
a few noblemen maybe almost no noble
women because the patriarchy was at its
fullest power however this is you know
the key insight game a is a game out of
control its operating system money on
money return empowered all this amazing
 over the last 200 plus years but it
doesn't know how to turn itself off and
if it doesn't turn itself off we're
gonna go right over the cliff we're
gonna overpopulate though that finally
seems to be turning down but more
importantly we're gonna fry the world
we're gonna deplete the resources we're
gonna kill all the natural life we're
gonna lose our soils a game a does not
know how to think about the long term
because it's money on money return for
those who studied finance is literally
an exponential it discounts the future
exponentially it doesn't give a
about the future if you take a 6% rate
of return which is a fairly low one and
risk finance a hundred years out is
worth almost nothing and that is you
know immoral and intolerable from a
perspective of the long-term success of
the human race
so the first meta-narrative is while
game a brought us here to a not bad
place I mean the cards we have today are
pretty good
we have photovoltaics we have advanced
wind you know we have distributed grid
we have artificial intelligence which
can be either our servant or our master
depending on how we deal with it but if
we let game a run in its exponential
fashion it'll destroy it all so that's
the number one meta-narrative the number
two meta-narrative is that game a has
programmed us through its messaging
particularly the mass messaging of TV
and then the kind of surrogate of TV
which is Facebook to think in terms of
material possessions and positional
goods as them as the meaning of one
status in life that meant a narrative
also has to be broken in fact the two go
together to the degree that status and
positional goods are what defines
yourself worth and of course more and
more more growth growth growth
is what you want so the two need to be
broken together we need to develop a new
meta narrative about meaning and you
know the one I've been pushing for since
2012 has been not he who dies with the
most toys wins but he or she who dies
with the most skills accomplishments and
insights wins the self-actualized person
is the one with the highest status and
if we can have that as what motivates
the person then we have the ability to
turn off the insane exponential growth
this machine which is within a hundred
years of destroying us all sorry for the
rant but I feel passionate about this
it's a treat hearing a Jim rut grant
rather that's not him so we'll end with
this question from Adam Robert and he
asked me to read it on his behalf
Jim how do you see the emerging dynamic
exemplified vividly during kovat 19 news
reporting between citizen reporting and
their thoroughness on one hand and
mainstream media and expert reporting on
the other the good advice seems to be
coming from minor voices what are the
risks and benefits of the new media
landscape does this conversation map
onto game a and game B at all ah a very
very important question and this is one
that is in flux right now game B
strongly believes in the collective
intelligence network I think the
foundational document is Jordan Hall
situation a situational assessment 2017
which is on medium in his deep code
collection where he talks a lot about
the decentralized network versus what he
calls the blue church which we could
think of as mainstream media and the
establishment however and this is
important so far we don't have the right
tools for the collective intelligence
network to do uniformly high-quality
sense-making there is not only a lot of
good material out in the peer-to-peer
information world but there's also a lot
of real horseshit and I would say 90% of
people don't have the
discernment powers to tell one from the
other in a precoded world
an example is some screwy ass thing
called queuing on right which is a
classic decentralized grassroots
conspiracy theory which to my mind is an
example of a peer-to-peer distributed
network having a schizophrenic event
that resonates with a number of the
equivalent of neurons meaning humans and
has produced very bad garbage which has
filled the minds of many millions of
people with worse than useless horseshit
we don't yet have the tools for mass
discernment that could have
downregulated queuing on to all right
there's a few freaks over there
let them freak but let's not many of us
pay too much attention to it in the
kovin world we are in an ad hoc fashion
finding these ways to filter and I
believe one of the thing one of the
learnings that will come out of the Koba
19 crisis is how does one do group peer
to peer discernment to separate the
from the shinola the wheat from the
chaff and there's on rally point alpha
one of the Facebook groups that's in
some ways related to game a there's a
pretty good topic on that is well
filtered for sense I'm also a member of
a private chat messaging thing Facebook
message whatever the hell they call
their goofy ass messenger service which
is self-organized and it is quite good
and it uses both mainstream media and
peer-to-peer media but because it is by
invitation only and people who are not
crazy
the discern the collective discernment
is way better than our individual
discernment so that's a long answer to a
perhaps a brisker question which is
longer-term peer to peer is going to be
very important experts will also be
important but we also need the challenge
experts you know experts have their
vested interests but appear to
here needs group discernment tools to be
truly effective and we are developing
them in an ad hoc fashion in this crisis
and I would strongly encourage people
who want to make sense to not listen to
the infinite chatter it's just too much
noise it's too hard to turn signal to
noise but to self-organize into groups
of people who you know groups I'd say no
more than a few a thousand maybe at the
most of high quality people who can use
group discernment to figure out what
makes sense from the peer-to-peer world
what makes sense from the experts and to
synthesize a view for action right so
we'll end here some excellent questions
today and is what I love kind of
outsourcing the questions to the
collective intelligence because you get
some goodies that you know I would have
never thought of Jim would you like to
kind of have any closing thoughts
closing thoughts be brave right be
hopeful right despair is useless have a
bias towards action don't sit on your
 ass if you see something to be
done do it reach out to other people you
know events like this are huge remember
the poor people who are who were locked
down by themselves which has got to be a
horrible thing reach out to them I'm you
know daily calling old friends from far
back as high school just cuz I'm a
natural extrovert and I love the
chat so I have some extra time and
energy so I'm literally gonna call a
friend who I haven't seen since junior
high school call later today we're gonna
chat so don't despair there was hope and
future on the other side lists
hysteresis works in our favor be ready
to join the cadre recruit others to the
cadre this is probably not quite yet the
revolutionary moment but it may be
relatively soon
beautiful beautiful
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music com
[Music]