welcome to the global waste a summit a
first-of-its-kind online journey into
collective consciousness and practice
for this event over 150 trailblazing
pioneers and we space experts from North
America and Europe have been invited to
share their latest insights and
reflections on the subject bringing our
best discernment inside these
conversations the many approaches of
each we space lineage come to life as we
explore pathways into the collective
development and transformation of our
lives and culture at this time we are
delighted to have you join us on this
journey
[Music]
you
hi welcome to this conversation we have
with us Daniel smacking burger and I
invade him invited Daniel today because
I find him to be really exquisite he
goes into a full flow of topics and
things that are really really important
for the civilizations that we want to
bring that we want to be signed and not
only in terms of the fury but also in
terms of the practice and the practice
not only in the interpreter ships and
the things that he creates a manifest in
the world but in buttoning himself he
has been my perspective a very
pioneering spirit and a very curious
mind and a very sharp intellect but very
well grounded in his heart so today
we're gonna have this conversation would
they know about the we spaces but we're
going to enter into one questions
through one particular part of the work
that I'm interested in in sharing with
the integral people which is nootropics
and complex medicine science I will
rephrase that but then we'll be going
and navigating into different types of
things that will open up but all
directed into sensing what is that we
need to do in this moment where are the
practical steps where are the actions
activities what is happening the world
that can inform us what what we can do
in this moment of transition what we can
do to develop higher ways and better
senses who we are together as collective
so hi Daniel
happy to be here thank you I'm delighted
to have you here today so as I mentioned
I want to have like one entry point
question for us to start with around
nootropics
and around the the work that you do and
then your hacker collective but first
perhaps the first question is can
you tell us what the tropics are so that
people just like can't understand sure
why it's important yeah yeah so the
tropics are chemicals that enhance some
aspect of cognitive function the kind of
formal best definition of nootropics is
any chemical that can enhance some
aspect of cognitive function like memory
or focus or herbal fluency or pattern
recognition beyond someone's normal
baseline without meaningful negative
side effects and so this is in Contra
distinction to brain nutrients which are
all the vitamins minerals amino acids
fatty acids that brain just naturally
needs your nervous system or whole
factory embodied cognition a whole
physiology needs to be able to process
information well those aren't gonna
really elevate capacity beyond baseline
they're just gonna bring you back to
baseline if there's deficiency because
those are really part of the
evolutionary environment right so brain
nutrients are foundational things and
then what we think of as smart drugs
which are usually pharmaceuticals that
are for a DD or sometimes narcolepsy or
sometimes neurodegenerative diseases
that can enhance some aspect of
cognitive function but usually it's
fairly narrow and usually it's with some
side effects so this is adderall
modafinil vyvanse ritalin you know those
kinds of psychostimulants psych meds and
many other things so the tropics are
this kind of interesting category that's
trying to see if we can elevate aspects
of cognitive and then more widely also
psycho cognitive function from a neuro
physiological you know biochemistry
perspective and if we can do it without
negative side effects in even ideally
with lasting benefits so that's kind of
the field and why it's interesting
mm-hmm yes for me it's really
interesting I started to do a research
similar to that back in the late 90s
before red wool or those were getting
companies and I started to use like
Warren and I started to use like ginkgo
biloba and things like that and just
like notice what happened to me what
happened regards to my memory what
happens to the rest of my close ability
to focus
and that was really interesting and I
know that you've been developing a
product when the product is out and I've
been testing that and I really really
enjoy it I can tell you many different
experiences that I had who with with
while yet but that's not the point for
the conversation but the preneur that I
want to enter into is do these I
understand that that by using nootropics
we can enhance our cognitive function
but have you used it or have you
experienced what does it create when
when a certain group of people do it
together the SID and hence the
collective capacity mm-hmm it's an
interesting question so when we think of
chemistry we think of affecting neuro
chemistry in a way that's gonna affect
people's psyches that are gonna affect
them in our personally in terms of
positive experiences we usually think of
in pathogens right so whether we're
talking about on the very violent side
so many reasons that people come
together and drink alcohol together or
use marijuana together is because they
get access some shared state of
experience and maybe one that decreases
inhibitions or decreases anxiety and
allows for some increased bandwidth of
connectivity and then deeper than that
is things like MDMA MDA other usually
phenethylamine some tripped means some
other categories of psychedelic but that
are specifically empathy increasing that
are kind of relationship increasing in
terms of the neural chemistry they
affect which is almost exactly opposite
to it usually happens with the no tropic
class of chemicals so if we reference
not know tropics but smart drugs again
most people are taking smart drugs for
pretty individualistic purposes right
they're having a hard time focusing and
they're not accomplishing as much as
they want to they want to increase their
creative productive output when they're
on kind of single solo work and so
how to roll works for that you know it
as a dopamine agonist will increase
focus and will increase motivation no
unfortunately as a pretty strong
exhaustion Asst dopamine agonist it also
means that if you use that for a while
it's going to decrease your own
endogenous dopamine regulatory process
which means addiction and memories
really not primarily dopamine mediated
its acetylcholine and and you know many
other neurotransmitters blue tomates
involved in other catecholamines are
involved so the brain is a very complex
organ right and the brain nervous system
body mind environment complex as a whole
complex of complex systems and when
we're especially dealing with not just
human physiology but we're dealing with
kind of the psychiatry or psycho neural
interface where we're looking at the way
that the upper right quadrant affects
the other left right we could look at
the other side of the way mindfulness
and phenomenological in the upper left
affect you know the upper right but
typically when we're thinking of the
psychiatry direction we're looking at
the effect of body on mind this is a
really tricky thing to do from an
epistemology point of view because not
only do we have to factor complex
systems and many different complex
systems got brain access and methylation
and genomics and head trauma and so many
things but we also have to factor across
the best technologic categories how do
we assess causation of something arising
in consciousness from something arising
in Physiology without reducing one
quadrant to the other so mmm causation
isn't an adequate way of thinking about
it but so there's a lot of reasons that
the whole field of psychiatry and
psychopharmacology are just profoundly
in how to quit to the scope of the
actual needs of that space into the
ontology of how the space works but you
know because we're typically with
psychostimulants or that people are
taking for notable effects they're gonna
be affecting a pretty narrow bandwidth
of things they're usually actually
things that decrease empathy mmm if you
Drive dopamine and then that's going to
turn into increased norepinephrine and
epinephrine you can move into a more
sympathetic less parasympathetic place
and so one of the common experiences
that people have when they're on
psychostimulants for increased
productivity is as they get more
frustrated when someone interrupts them
and they have to do task switching they
have less empathy and sometimes even
depersonalization or derealization
and so one of our main goals was can we
increase can we support increasing focus
and attention and concentration and
memory and pattern recognition and those
kinds of cognitive traits without
negatively affecting their psychosocial
and maybe even positively affecting it
so this was like one of our our big
goals and if you think about it as how
to affect both sides of the meaningful
dialectics at once more ability to
intensely focus and better task
switching those are very very different
tracks and so then we're not talking
about a brain that's more optimized for
one or the other or a psyche that's more
optimized for one of the other we're
talking about a more adaptive system
they can actually respond adaptively
environment needs yeah so that was a
really interesting deep dive for us to
look at the chemistry and the neurology
that was associated with very different
types of cognitive and psychomotor
states and see how can we seek to
benefit the adaptive capacity of the
whole system the endogenous regulatory
capacity of the whole system and across
those kind of dialectic differences and
has it been in your experience like
stories of of success what have you been
observing in your big site you know in
your own experience of course well I
mean so with with this product that
we've got to bring to a lot of people
now qualia we have a pretty meaningful
amount of data that's come back to us
mm-hm and one of the things that a lot
of people have reported is increased
empathy increased vicarious experience
increased social intelligence social
awareness and a lot of decrease
of inner anxiety inner critic that
damages people's social capacity right
that has them so caught in internal glue
that they actually have less capacity to
actually pay attention to other people
rather than project possible triggers on
other people and so even though that
wasn't what it was designed for it was a
design constraint we were hoping it
would move in the direction of it's been
beautiful to see that that's actually
been the experience of many people
especially factoring that usually the
processes that drive cognitive chemistry
did the opposite that's interesting yeah
I use it once for for going into a
keynote and that I did a presentation
and I was so happy that they first I was
so exhausted the day before and then
that day if I was so on and then I felt
so happy I was really literally feeling
a beautiful connection with people and
very aware I just said like there's a
very specific form of presence that
happens so I think that there could be a
lot of research that can be done around
what happens when we intentionally go
into the space as individuals to create
a specific way space while empowering
ourselves or enhancing ourselves through
the use of a nootropic
so that that would be interesting and
speaking about pattern recognition but
in a collective I would like to
definitely see that pattern recognition
there's something fun that you said
which is you know when we look at the
pharmacology of it pattern recognition
is significantly mediated by dopamine
right so when we get excessive dopamine
we get schizophrenia and see patterns
that aren't there
and I mean that's oversimplifying but
drug-induced methamphetamine induced
schizophrenic breaks are exactly that
right starting to perceive and recognize
patterns that aren't actually there
because of over pattern fitting from
being over dopamine
and under dopaminergic means not
recognizing patterns that most people
would recognize so that's a cognitive
thing but dopamine is also a major
aspect of emotional function in terms of
people's motivational and kind of reward
circuitry processes and what's so
interesting is that all the chemicals
that mediate cognitive process also
affect emotional process and vice-versa
and so a clearer thinking mind and a
emotionally more well-balanced person
from a physiologic point of view
correspond very much and that doesn't
mean there aren't certain cases where
one can you know have a certain set of
clear thinking while having existential
depression but for the most part those
seem to be simultaneously optimized
generally mmm-hmm there's also this
thing where again this is not a complete
story and whenever I'm speaking with the
integrins we have to make sure we're not
over assessing cut causation from one
quadrant to another but the the side of
cognitive behavioral therapy which is
true which is that we are not just
perceiving the world directly we're
perceiving the world making meaning of
it and then emotionally reacting to not
just the perceptions with the meaning
that's basically not thinking clearly
right fair to say that's actually not
perceiving the world exactly as it is
not assessing risk appropriately right
not assessing reward or meaning or
interpretation appropriately taking old
traumas and over weighting certain
things in terms of meaning that's being
added so there's a way in which just
sinking more clearly relieves a lot of
emotional drama and dynamics because you
are not making up stories that just
aren't actually true and that aren't
clear thinking yes the brain is like
more active and more impressive able to
go faster into identifying things that
might be detrimental or fears or
bothering or cognitive biases and just
like see that with with clarity and then
moving on rapidly there's this really
fun chemical that is in Phase two
clinical trials for major depressive
disorder
by a company called neural stem right
now many people familiar with nootropics
will have heard of its called NS I 189
and it is basically a neurogenic this
company neural stem started out doing
als work and they were actually
developing neural stem cells and
injecting them they were also going to
do spinal cord injuries and they started
looking for small molecules that could
actually increase the proliferation of
the neural stem cells and they found
about six that did and then si 189 was
their best shot and so rather than have
to actually put the stem cells end they
can use the small molecule orally and
the body's own process of creating you
know of neurogenesis creating new neural
and hippocampus then they can move
throughout anywhere in the nervous
system is just increased this is like
super interesting there's a lot of ways
that you can increase neurogenesis but
this is actually a drug that's pretty
far along and even though it was for ALS
to begin with and it was for then you
know starting to look at actually
repairing damaged nervous system either
from neurodegenerative disease or injury
the reason it's curing major depressive
disorder their hypothesis is that
they're actually seeing increased
hippocampal volume gray matter density
volume in the hippocampus with use and
seeing decreased depression they're
actually seeing the depression as an
inability to process the total amount of
emotional information within it coming
and that as they can actually process
the information better they can actually
find solutions and conclusions and not
be overwhelmed and you know left in
those those emotional places and there's
a number of other techniques and
processes that work through neurogenesis
that are finding this so this is very
interesting of like increased
information processing capacity not
being just a cognitive thing but being
very related to emotion which then of
course relates to someone's capacity for
we space right it's like that then it
seems that it's a capacity to perceive
right because what is how do we perceive
that emotional information so I said
like 10 I tend to think is the heart
right there is like we have like that
capacity to sense and to sense someone
else when we're there in presence with
them what is happening in their space or
intuition or instead
but then we get the insights from the
verbal communication of whatever they're
telling us and you can see when somebody
is tight or is open or and then that
also creates a certain space of trust a
satanist space of feeling together in in
resonance I would say with one another
you said perception I'd say a way that
we think about often is sensory input
perception improving processing of that
sensory input to make meaning out of it
and informed choices and then choice
actuator output and then being able to
perceive again the effect of our actions
and we have a closed loop that really
defines what is adaptive in any complex
adaptive system and in any kind of
animal any biologic system sentry input
is worthless by itself if we can't
actually make sense of it and act on it
right action capacity would be
meaningless if it couldn't be informed
by the right information necessary to
make it the right action so evolution is
actually selecting for this closed loop
information cycle of information input
information processing sense making
meaning making actuator output and then
learning and that's what allows
development and so then we think about
that from a neurologic point of view
what is the what are the what's the
neurophysiology involved in all three of
those stages and how do we actually
increase the effectiveness of that
learning loop that information
processing them so you would name what
are the levels of development that that
nootropics would work on what would with
those I mean it's obviously the
cognitive one but would they be also
like in the emotional one or would be
because I have heard many learning right
learning and skill but I also seen
videos of people that are doing artistry
are not doing arts and are you
introducing it for more flow
so it's right-brain left-brain so could
you talk a little bit more about that
I think the word no tropics is maybe too
narrow here right because that that word
is usually used to denote cognitive
function specifically but as we've been
talking about cognitive and emotional
are not that separate and and athletic
capacities that relate to sensing and
motor capacity faster the acetylcholine
that increases motor capacity is the
same acetylcholine that's focused on
memory consolidation and so the idea
that those different lines of
developments are totally different
independent separately developable
pathways inside our physiology is just
not how it works right it's much more
integrated system than that and so
affecting any of those things you're
gonna have some effect on all of them
and that's why we really think about how
do we increase it but in one way you can
call them all information processing
different types of information being
processed in different ways right and so
how do we increase the effective
information processing capacity of the
entire system across all the lines of
development thank you that made me think
about information processing in the
collective level and I know that part of
what you're doing this work is larger
than just medicine isn't why I would
want to attract what was your intent
what is your true intent what lies
behind this innovation what do you truly
want to create in the world by launching
this initiative this product the reason
I mean this product is one of lots of
products that we've got in development
both for medical applications and
wellness enhancement applications and
all of that just scratching the surface
of what kind of the future of human
wellbeing optimization looks like but
why that whole field is interesting I
mean one unnecessary suffering sucks
right and our system of medicine in our
system of well-being science is good at
a few things and we've kind of tapped
those things out it's really good when
the causation is
really obvious and that usually means
acute causation and if the causation is
not really obvious because it's either
delayed in time or it's multifactorial
or it has a complex causal cascade then
we call it not immune disease and
neurodegenerative disease aging cancer
and just really there already a path
that we don't really know so we just do
symptomatic treatment the underlying
fiscal structure of medicine is
misaligned between good medicine because
if we're as a business if we want to
optimize the lifetime value of a
customer and a customer is a patient
then we're not really looking at
preventing illness and we're not really
looking at curing it quickly because if
I got to do a billion dollars to go
through phase three clinical trials and
then we cure someone very quickly how
can we ever make the money back right
we're not interested eases that don't
affect that many people in
symptom treatment is great right symptom
treatment that causes side effects that
you need another drug that's a cross
seller and upsell like from a business
point of view that's great
so the financial structure is basically
broken the IP structure where we can
only look at synthetic molecules that
are patentable and then only during
their patent life and then we have to
pretend like we're innovating new better
stuff just because they ran out of
patent life like the IP structures
broken and the epistemology which is
that we're trying to do complicated
system science on complex systems right
we're trying to pretend that you can
adjust one or two variables in a
radically complex system and understand
what it's gonna do like causation
doesn't make sense that way in a complex
system we have to think of it more
dispositional II and was much more
complex dynamics of in our causation so
we're interested in just a completely
new version of medicine and not even I
mean obsoleting medicine of well-being
science and optimization at the
physiology level but then obviously
that's just the upper right and that's
obviously affected by the environments
that people are in and lower right by
their psyche in the upper left right so
then this now we get into how does the
individual affect the collective and how
are they affected by the collective and
how do we work on those things together
so if we make better if we make an
environment that is less
toxicity in it then we're not dealing
with diseases that are toxic illogic in
origin right the individual the better
systems of agriculture better systems of
education media but the better economic
system that doesn't create stress
economic systems governance system sense
making systems now how can we affect
individuals today so that they influence
the collective in the right direction
both directions are true right the
Republican Democrat historic debates the
libertarian Marxist debates have been
around which of those directions were
more important and they are reciprocal
and so why we were real interested in
the kind of individual optimization side
is obviously human quality of life is
intrinsically meaningful period and it's
just intrinsically meaningful it's
actually meaning reifies in subjective
experience and the next step is that
we're not just interested in humans
having increased quality of life but
also increase capacity to act
meaningfully in ways that affect the
quality of life of everyone else right
not just human but all all things and so
it happens to be that what really
increases human capacity and what
increases their quality of life is the
same thing this is again optimizing
across a dialectic and so when we were
looking at existential crisis right
existential threats who are looking at
catastrophic risks of all kind and
environmental humanitarian social
economic dynamics and we're looking at
the way that they're all contributed to
by human action then the question
becomes well what are what are all the
influences of human action and how can
we work with those to predispose
fundamentally more Omni considerate
human action and of course there are
things that influence human behavior in
all parts and you know thinking about
the way the upper-left influences
behavior is pretty clear right
psychological trauma when you're a kid
you need psychotherapy you need better
education you need a better definition
of success and you're kind of
individual mimetic structure and the way
the lower-left read the way that
macroeconomics effects human behavior in
terms of what do we actually incent
people to do we make we have an economic
system where the whales worth a million
dollars dead as well me but nothing
alive were actually affecting human
behavior in a pretty clear way through
incentives right through cultures were
all status things through language right
patterns of reception affected by
language that affect behavior so all of
the quadrants lower right environmental
psychologies effect on human behaviors
radical right the upper right human
physiology affects you in behavior not
just meaning like mostly when people
start thinking about this they start
thinking about eugenics in a hurry and
what genes are fundamentally better and
worse and this this is a really not
adequate understanding when someone's
hormones are out of balance when their
neurotransmitters are out of balance
when their gut is in dysbiosis they feel
very differently and they behave
differently they have different
behavioral dispositions and different
capacities everyone's had a hangover
where like joy is just not accessible
it's not even an accessible thing and
it's pretty hard not to have negative
reactivity and other people have had
states were it's almost hard to be
negatively reactive based on physiologic
state and so we started looking at the
the neuro chemistry and the neuro
structure of psychopathy versus the
neuro chemistry and neuro structure of
people with very high empathy and the
neuro chemistry of neuro structure of
impulse control disorders and of
aggressive patterns and recognizing how
much of human behaviors actually
influenced by physiology and what we can
do with both better agriculture systems
and better medicine systems better
activity systems I mean everything is
the the paint in these walls is
producing VOCs that are neurotoxic
there's like fundamentally to really
have optimally healthy people requires
rebuilding civilization from scratch
with that in mind right we can start now
to take people who are interested and
radically increase their quality of life
and capacity so then they can start to
affect all the rest of what needs to
happen more and we can get virtuous
cycles
Wow
okay that's that's an entry point to the
integral civilizations design work that
you've been doing so what is in your
perspective the things that people in
their ordinary people are listening to
us need to be looking into like these
steps that people can be more aware in
their lives so that we move together
into a pattern of well being well it's a
tricky question because I don't know
who's listening and what capacities they
have and what interests and
availabilities and etc so I would I
would generally talk about that and the
more personalized and hopefully relevant
way most of the times we think about
actions we can all do in our own life to
make things better at a global level we
think about pretty trivial and I don't
mean to say these things aren't
important but trivial relative to the
scope and urgency of the issues and
complexity we think about basically
consuming less stuff and consuming
better stuff or less stuff right now
which our focus is being less bad where
we are net negative we're basically
liabilities on nature's balance sheet
right rather than assets on nature's
balance sheet if you want to look at the
component of biodiversity or the health
and complexity of the biosphere as a
whole and we're looking at can we slow
how bad we are like it's just a totally
wrong way of thinking about it I mean
it's a fine starting point to think
about but really we actually have to
build a new human civilization that is
fundamentally on the asset side of
nature's balance sheet that is net
positive to everything that's meaningful
and that doesn't look like a retrofit of
this civilization at all it looks like
fundamental ground
redesign work I mean there now I don't
know how deep will go and how familiar
people are but there-there is no system
there's no version of capitalism it is
adequate as a system of macroeconomics
in the presence of exponential
technology and in the presence of enter
complexity and the fragility of the
biosphere at this point and etc that
doesn't lead to catastrophic tipping
bones there's no version of
representative democracy within
nationalist governments that doesn't
lead to catastrophic problems so the
kind of shift that we need is axiom
level and I'm not gonna propose Marxism
or socialism or any other thing that
hasn't worked I'm gonna propose things
that are reverse engineered from design
constraints of what's actually necessary
and sufficient that are fundamentally
different than any kinds of systems
proposed so far but have learned from
them and learn a lot from how nature and
complement systems work so yeah if I if
I was to be saying in general what can
people do to be helpful to that I would
say be aware that civilization as we
know it is self terminating stop trying
to win at a self terminating game I know
what start really earnestly exploring
what alternatives that might be viable
look like and how you can contribute
your life energy to them mm-hmm so yeah
let me do that they have to agree with
you in in refers to how we're facing in
these collapse in all levels and the
complexity is way too fast for anyone to
really know exactly how so the amount of
number of paths possible it's
overwhelming it's really really
overwhelming so yeah why have you found
in your research that gives a hope for
the future
what is that you found in your research
that it would say have you find these
places where you say we would find these
then we could reverse into an infinite
game we can actually do this can we
actually do this yeah you know speaking
to an abroad Ian's there are things that
are very helpful in each quadrant and
then across all the quadrants that are
already plausible and lower-right we
need to stop building complicated
technology complicated built worlds and
start actually building emergent complex
worlds that are extensions of the design
principles and complexity of the natural
world and that are commensurate with it
and this means that you stop building
individual pieces of tech and you build
whole tech ecosystems right that are
regenerative closed-loop post growth
upcycling techy ecosystems and this
means entire materials economies where
you have a closed loop on the atoms
right the atoms are actually you're not
needing new atom acquisition from mining
or virgin resource acquisition and
you're not turning any of the atoms into
waste your fundamental circular economy
yeah
circular closed-loop economy and that
where the same stuff gets to keep being
better in better forms within a fixed
number of atoms a post growth system so
basically steady-state system with a
we're looking at steady-state
populations that are aligned with the
carrying capacity of the planet and
they're up cycling because pattern
information continues to evolve and we
continue to impound new photons so we
have to think of atoms photons energy
and pattern as three totally different
non fungible things in the future of
economics we're gonna be dealing with a
finite number of atoms we're gonna be
dealing with a much larger and less
bounded amount of energy and an almost
unbounded amount of information and so
those are those are non fungible with
each other so you can't relate them all
to a currency and trade them it doesn't
make any sense because
actually tradable so so building the
right kinds of infrastructure that are
actually resilient complex closed-loop
up cycling infrastructure that's a very
hopeful and exciting thing is possible
right in the lower left we can think
about building new systems of sense
making intelligence right new systems of
governance choice making new systems of
meaning making collective meaning making
you know culture I talked about
economics actually new systems of
basically resource allocation and human
influencing patterns of human behavior
which are the two things that economics
really deeply does as we are moving to a
world where most of the shitty jobs can
be automated
one of the major axioms of why
capitalism mattered was how do we get
people to be the shitty jobs they're
like it's fun to lay roads for a day for
a couple days and learn how to do it but
nobody wants to spend their whole you
know multiple decades doing that 40 plus
hours a week but society needs it done
and so if the jobs need the people to
get done then we got to make it to where
the people need the jobs otherwise you
know if you do a Marxist thing we spread
the resources between everybody then
nobody wants to do the shitty jobs in
the state has to force when we call it
imperialism and so we don't like Marxism
so we like it when the market which is
if you don't do the shitty jobs you just
starve right but that's free and then we
say but you can educate yourself and get
a better job
but that statistically I mean it is
theoretically possible but statistically
very hard when those who are born into
more have more resources to create more
resources with those were born into less
have less she get these ever widening
gaps etc so but when you can start to
automate and you know we're looking at
automation of most of the jobs over the
next not not too many years I'm not only
you know all kinds of jobs not only the
automated very shitty jobs for also
high-level right like diagnosis medical
anything that you can write a procedure
for
you can if you can write a procedure for
it you can make a machine to it better
than us if you can write a procedure for
it it's not that fun for creative beings
to spend must at much of their life
doing yeah and so you would have to
extrinsic lee and sent them to do it
because infants are consented wants to
do things that are either connection or
creativity based yes and so what happens
is either we try and stick with
capitalism and have the most grotesque
inequality come with technological
unemployment or we say we'll wait the
whole reason major part of the
reason fit of capitalism I'm using one
axiom there's obviously twenty others
but we can go through all of them is
well now that we the people that jobs
don't need the people anymore we can
also create a Commonwealth economics
where the people don't need the jobs and
we move from an economics of extrinsic
motive to a system of intrinsic motives
or than education is really about
facilitating the unique intrinsic mode
of genius of everyone so we actually
have the ability to build a new macro
economy where the incentive of every
agent and the well-being of every other
agent and of the Commons are perfectly
aligned with no gap that gap is the
basis for externality and we've had
externality for forever but with
exponential tech most people don't
really understand what exponential
curves do it it means that our intuition
and best practices of the past get
obsolete faster right our externalities
have already brought the biodiversity of
the planet radically down a very short
period of time post industrialization
but with exponential tech in this part
of the curve any externality becomes
catastrophic fairly quickly and so in
the presence of exponential tech this
the radically increased capacity of
individuals to affect reality we have to
affect reality and we have to have we
have to have our choice making increase
as exponentially as our impact of our
choices do and so the movement into
exponential on any consideration right
exponential good choice making but we
actually do have the ability to make a
macroeconomic system based on that
where the all systems of systemic
incentive have no externality mean
they're perfectly aligned with
well-being now it would take a while to
get into it but we actually have
architectures for how to do that so I'm
giving a few examples but I want to let
you so yes what is hopeful
what's hopeful is that all the things
that suck are changeable mm-hmm and that
there actually are adequate
architectures for what is necessary and
sufficient not just for survival but for
entering a fundamentally new phase of
civilization is actually worthy of that
term whether we do it or not as a
question mark but the possibilities of
all know the possibility he's always or
ask for gnarly taursus is like race
crisis is a terrible opportunity to
waste so this is the moment and you've
spoken a lot about many economic systems
and sense-making and and then in the run
I will want to go a little deeper in the
realm of the lower left quadrant in the
type of the terms of the week so to get
it round into the part of how we create
those higher weeks right why does it
matter for people to right now get
together and get a better sense of each
other and connect not only mentally and
cognitively but also in terms of
resonance and an energy because yes we
want to be sign according to living
systems and according to nature and and
we are we are nature and as part of
nature and its evolution we also have
this Finkle identity and these things
called ego and these things called
shadow and these things called cognitive
biases that 3-stone neces don't have and
so but what would it be that part of of
what the weave of the other people can
do now and what is to get activated
together so that that we can inform each
other because you know in the way I see
it if jobs are our gt-r I would who made
it please and go ahead with it do it all
machines thank you I think that human
beings that have the space for
innovation have a space for philosophy
have a space for culture have a space
for creativity and for other things that
we don't know
you know realms that have been
unexplored because we don't have we
haven't had that time we but we need new
ways of making meaning together many
people make meaning because they have a
job even if it's a bad job that they
don't necessarily like they learn how to
make mini based upon that little realm
Inquisitor increase there can be active
so the integral people that are
exploring the way spaces I find that
that I would like to see that part of
the research or part of that reflects an
outcome that is more mainstream that
tells people how to connect when when
you're not necessarily in in alignment
in the levels of IDs or in the level of
values but you're in alignment with
other parts of yourself that's why I was
interested in seeing what are the the
ways in which we can create higher
states of consciousness or does that
make sense
great ok so we can see the world in a
phase of increasing radicalization
currently in many parts of the world
many parts of the industrialized world
and the the political philosophy around
this has been kind of the Machiavellian
enemy hypothesis which is the only way
to get people of very different
dispositions together as if there's a
larger enemy where they have to band
together otherwise they'll keep going
tribal til they get down to the Dunbar
number and that has been mostly true
right and so when you look at the
kind of very bizarre version of
post-modernism control left that is
really driving the cohesion of a bunch
of different groups into what's now
called the alt-right and the white
nationalist and etc movements with it
and you look at how far apart those are
from each other the do you bring
that together right and how the
does that not become civil war and how
does civil war in the United States not
become world war well if the only way to
bring it together is to have an external
enemy we've been in Moore for decades
now right if is to have an external
enemy big enough that the right and left
our friends in relationships that
external enemy that's also world war yes
all right so these strategies just don't
look good at all
and so one of the things is that the
first even people who understand
military strategy military history I
think underestimates both anthro
complexity the complexity and the
unpredictability of seven billion people
and how many non-state actors have so
much power and etc and I think they
underestimate what exponential tech
really means in terms of thinking that
anything applicable in the past is it is
cool now so to kind of get into that you
know we saw a couple weeks ago now I
don't know when this airs maybe it'll be
months ago a drone drop a thermite bomb
in the in the Ukraine on a munitions
factory and it created a you know a
multibillion-dollar level of damage from
one little drone you know a near nuclear
level of damage and we don't know who
did it but it's easy to do and that was
not even a swarm of drones and building
a swarm of drones with AI swarming
algorithms from github that you can
build in your own garage and web like we
have exponential tech capability where
non-state actors were little bitty
actors that we can't even know if we're
doing anything have catastrophic
capability
that's a big fun and it's in Greece
Christmas cards just became $1,000 a
year ago think about what that means
think about what the increasing AI and
nanotech capacities mean right and so
the first existential technology we had
detect where we could actually
everything that was the bomb but the
bomb was such a expensive difficult
thing to build the US was the only one
who had it and then US and Russia two
superpowers they could be locked in meet
you sure destruction with their Intel
systems locked on each other nobody
could use it we lived in the Cold War as
a method of safety yeah but as soon as
we have so many nuclear powers and you
have powers that are as significant as
nuclear that you don't even know where
they are they're radically multipolar
right how the did how do we make it
through that so one you know when we
define what we're interested in working
on one of the things we define is a
civilization that is resilient and anti
fragile in the presence of X radically
distributed exponential tech right how
do how do we have resilience and
antifragility in the presence of that
well most answers to that go Orwellian
in a hurry ooh big word it's Universal
surveillance you know who's doing what
to be able to shut it down because we
can't let it happen right well that's
already a fan state because that level
of disco hearin stress perspective leads
to fields help say for other reasons in
dystopian so the only answer we have to
make it through our power curve involves
we space involved a radical upregulation
of people knowing each other
knowing when someone is off no one being
that off because they feel so isolated
and disenfranchised and existential
angst Ville right and that being
structurally built in a way where it is
ubiquitous we actually have no
making it through that doesn't include
that at the center now let me say it
another way because I think it is
valuable to think of it this way you
mentioned moving from finite to infinite
games and if there's anyone who hasn't
read that book it's a classic finding
infinite games to come into I'm gonna
speak to it in a even more popular and
simple way which is all finite games are
win-lose games we're actually coming to
an end of when lose game theory at a
social level and this is actually a key
way of thinking about we space on a
sports team we create a sense of we with
our team and we'll have a lot of
coherence with each other to beat to
beat the other ones and we have a bay
with them right so we get to do in-group
out-group mentality now that's a
training - for kids to be good at that
psychology for when it's time for war
and you know whatever else frame go back
to tribes event the time of tribes would
create coherence with each other to be
able to be competitive with another
tribe if need be now if there's low
population relative to lots of resources
we're all cool with each other if the
population gets high relative to not
that many resources we start raising
that kill and the other people is a
viable strategy and trying to
out-compete them for the scarce
resources also and so those are two
methods of competing now compete them
for scarce resources and directly
militarily attack now throughout all of
history two things have been true one
this strategy worked
you actually could kill the other people
get the river front and life is better
for you and your people and two if
anyone else played win lose games you
had two or lose by default
if you didn't create a military and
anyone else has realized this killing
other people thinking works didn't you
just die by default and so militaristic
win lose games have been necessary and
then a couple tribes joined together to
be able to fight the bigger tribe they
couldn't fight and so then you get more
tribes banding together so now we get
villages and kingdoms and nation-states
and global economic trading
and the tools of commerce increase we
get fiat currencies fractional reserve
banking etc to increase our power our
tools of extraction of resource from the
environment and our military tools
increase this is just upping the ante on
win-lose games right until we have the
biggest players we can possibly
have with the biggest tech we can have
in both our ability to compete for
scarce resource and to direct attack
each other we need it but you get to a
place about now where you have so much
power that you can no longer win that
winning requires destroying the playing
field equals losing and if we try to
out-compete each other for the scarce
resource we just ruin the biosphere its
capacity to support us and we give then
massive migrations of humans causing
Wars and everything else and if we try
and actually beat each other with our
military technologies everybody dies
because we have way too much military
technology that's never been true before
war always worked out competing them for
resource always worked it will never
work again and so we're at a place where
win lose game theory which equals
strategy the word strategy means win
lose game theory how to be effective in
the news game that's like all military
strategy and business strategy derived
from military strategy that's gone
because that becomes Omni lose-lose so
either we figure out AMI win-win which
means how do we meet needs while meeting
the needs of everyone else involved and
the biosphere without externalizing harm
at all either we figure that out or our
species has finished its experiment so
what does that mean from a we space as
it means there is no other so we
actually have to get off in-group
out-group mentality there is no answer
to making it through our technological
capacity an existential risk without
getting past in-group out-group
mentality and having an all be in-group
so by developing the capacity to be
together capacity to trust each other
capacity to in these moments where we
don't know where things are going it's
probably a good idea for people to be
starting deeper relationships with one
another for all the people who thought
Hillary was gonna win before the
election to understand how badly broken
their sense-making systems were that the
world that they thought they lived in
the world they actually live in are not
the same they don't map and that if your
sense making is not good you are not
adaptive at all you will lose all
adaptive capacity and we put our sense
making outside in the wrong places in
your Facebook feed and then your you
know whatever pundits you listen to that
are not actually informed either
and so the thing to get is if you're if
you are bending it if you're doing
in-group out-group stuff right and
whether it's the lean green meemers or
you're out group or it's alright as
you're out group your capacity to
actually improve things is pretty much
none at all
you
okay I'm gonna take a deep breath with
all that steel feel the connection - and
I don't want to see it's a hope because
pro feels a bit passive but to that
place of opportunity within ourselves to
come into these times and leave our own
you to our own not I would say it was
like Hollywood shows us all this
dystopias and they seem to be fun and
when will you talk about utopias and we
would have utopic movies probably
nowhere it would go right you know so
but if we can hold that together that we
can go into that curve that we can lift
each other up we couldn't compete
wouldn't one another through the
creation of community through the
creation of relationship with people
that we don't necessarily want to relate
with or they're not the same of us or
they don't sure it's excitable use but
it seems that is the time for us to get
over our edges with one another and
enter and try to do those weak spaces
with the people that are not necessarily
similar to us this is the key part I
want people to give it's so easy for us
to reach a point of what seems like
fundamental disagreement and then just
disconnect I'm not gonna hang out with
this person for I'm not gonna hang out
this group of people or them let's
start a war or let's just ignore them
right let's just get rid of those people
because they are actively bad to us
doesn't work anymore we actually can't
win those wars because there's a lot of
people that think that whatever that
thing is and they have exponential tech
- and as soon as you realize that we
shared the planet and we actually can't
get the other groups off then you say
 I've got to actually figure out
what is it that is meaningful to them
and add a value and where can we build
bridges and the whole just
I'm I'm going to not interact with them
and them that just doesn't work and
so then you start asking more questions
and you open up your willingness and
capacity for understanding understanding
bridge building what so what is their
understanding of bridge building and
where are transition technologies that
you see already happening that people
can start to be aware of we're
prototyping a very interesting process
of sense making right now that involves
human sensors and I'll tell you one step
in it
partner partner mine forest land
redevelop this Partners got a really
beautiful insight so group of people
come together for governance for choice
making you can't do choice make them
before you've done since making because
you don't know what the to do right
you and so one of the one thing we can
say is that if your governance system
involves voting it's already broken
because voting means that some things
that are valuable are going to be
benefited at the cost of other things
that are valuable and we're gonna see
who values which ones more again in an
exponential curve world that just
doesn't work whenever things are being
harmed and they're becoming catastrophic
and you polarized the people who are
associated with the different values so
typically when we have a choice to make
it's like do we vote yes or no on this
proposition both sides suck because it
was a welfare it was a ill firm
proposition right so he factory we get
the we get the economics but we destroy
the environment or we keep the
environment destroy the economy we
actually need to do a better job of
understanding everything that is
meaningful regarding this decision and
all that's interconnected first and take
all those as designed constraints to an
integrated design process and so there's
a sense making that proceeds a choice
making and so part of how this process
works is group of people come together
to do the sense making regarding an
issue and let's say
the issue is do we build this bridge or
not right or the issue is what is a
adequate governance system or whatever
so we start with a whole bunch of
questions right we have a whole bunch of
questions that are relevant to answer
this and so the question might be let's
say we're asking say we were leading one
on governance itself what do we think of
liquid democracy what do we think of
voting currencies what do we think of
non voting systems what do we what are
the strengths and weaknesses of dynamic
governance or socio Krissy you know
whatever right you have a whole bunch of
fittings what about when is meritocracy
useful versus consensus so then you have
all these questions and then people that
are interested in those questions break
off into small groups and they ask a few
questions related to that question one
question is in order to answer this
question what additional questions would
we have to ask and there's a process
that is facilitated well I guess in
order to to you know answer that
question regarding say is a voting
currency a good system we'd have to say
well what what are the effects of voting
systems at all and how do we define what
kind of choice should be benefited or
are there different kinds of choices
that need different kinds of governance
systems and how do we relate it to sense
makes it and you start to find there's a
whole taxonomy of questions underneath
it that you just either didn't pay
attention to or you assumed the answers
to now everyone in the group will have
different insights as to what questions
what is the level of consciousness and
training of the people that are involved
in order to be able to engage in it how
much civic engagement training is
necessary whatever at all these
questions and then you also ask what
underlying assumptions are there and
what is ultimately meaningful that this
is trying to address now as you go
around in a structured process no one is
actually giving answers anywhere and no
one is proposing strategies they're
saying this question has these other
questions connected and then everyone
gets be like oh I wouldn't have
even thought of that question oh that's
interesting and because we're not
jumping straight to vote you don't get
pissed off that I want this thing that
feels like it's going to take away
from your thing you get to say well yeah
I guess but Adele's are interesting too
right if there is a way of doing it that
doesn't damage my kid getting a job and
oh I guess I do have that assumption
underneath it and I guess this is
actually what's meaningful to me well
should the things that they said are
meaningful to them or meaningful to me
too so in the process not only does a
huge amount of information get surfaced
that then can go into a choice making
process that can lead to better choices
but all of the people understood each
other better and they actually
understood how to do an aspect of we
space better which is they understood
how to notice their own assumptions how
to notice what's actually meaningful to
them that is driving where their emotion
is and how to ask more questions and
they became more you know educated about
the topic and they they do this a bunch
of times they start to take for granted
that there's a huge amount of stuff they
don't know about everything they're
passionate about and they start to take
for granted that other people that have
perspectives that they thought they
would have differed with actually have
meaningful things to share that baby can
know via going through that process so
of course we end up surfacing some
sense-making in the form of documents
but we surface sense-making in the form
of all of the people being better sense
makers are you actually training a kind
of civic engagement so when you ask what
are some tools or processes to be able
to help people actually connect and
relate better that's this one example
and just said okay so it's like by is
trying to develop selves bacon by
developing more sense making in the
forms of questions and then starts by
asking those questions and then helping
people to actually relate first to that
instead of trying to get into the
answers by doing that they create some
empathic connection because there's
nothing to oppose there are just
questions so we're just sort of seeing
that which we don't know and then but
then how do you go from that because you
know in the inner when we do collective
intelligence processes we can have all
these huge amounts of data and this huge
amount of harvesting but I tend to think
about it like in in form of a spiral
right so we go from the outer to the
inside and the ins
well we want to find that answer to our
question and sometimes what happens is
that people are not able to then see the
whole of what is emerging in a way that
makes sense we can develop a huge map
but that doesn't mean people will be
able to make sense of that map so how
what is the process in which you go into
that kind of huge amount of data and
questions into the actual more focused
way of sense making from that to this
seeing what you're actually want to see
yeah so the second simplicity on the
other side of the complexity is actually
an integrated design right so you
surface all of this complexity of
questions and of things that are
meaningful and things that matter right
that's ultimately gonna create a series
of design constraints right for sure and
then the design constraints are going to
be the beginning of a integrated design
process and the simplicity the choice
that's made is actually a design that
meets all the design constraints and so
the future of governance and economics
actually here is around integrated
design this is a really different thing
it's not optimization and it's not game
theory so when we think of optimization
right we say okay we have a we have a
system and there's a whole bunch of
different needs that need met and I've
got you know I have my government budget
my state budget or my federal budget or
whatever it is and I've got military
needs and healthcare needs and all these
things where I have a company and I have
our total amount of money and I've got
marketing needs and HR needs and product
needs and R&D needs but now I'm gonna
allocate the resources the same scare
seemingly competitive resources to each
of the different areas in light of what
they'll be able to do in that area how
it all comes together that will create
the best whole I'm thinking about the
whole from an optimization point of view
so we look for global Optimum's
when we look for Nash equilibriums and
things like that that's kind of how
we've done it that will definitely not
work moving forward
and for a few reasons
one is when we think about optimization
we are assuming that we're dealing with
theory of trade-offs that the same
resource going to this area is taking
away from this area and coming here
here's taking away from this one which
when you actually get into integrated
design where you look at the synergy
possibility of how can these things be
mutually beneficial it's not about how
much resource goes here and here it's
about what is a design that works for
both of these things together better
than the inside of either of them on
their own would have and so as long as
we have underlying theory of trade-offs
we will have people that are associating
with whatever value metric they care
about particularly and will continue to
radicalize and polarize people just
through the underlying theory of
trade-offs though the key is not how do
we top-down allocate or how do we
bottom-up have a bunch of agents to try
to find Nash equilibriums it's how does
everyone surface what is ultimately
meaningful to them and we take all these
sources of meaningfulness as design
constraints and then we go into a
collaborative design process with the
people who have the appropriate
capabilities for that particular kind of
thing and a design that meets all the
design constraints can move forward with
consent Wow so that's how would you
describe integrated design when we go
from the sense making into identifying
the design constraints and then we find
the most simple elegant way of meaning
those design constraints and what about
paradox what about those design
constraints that come from paradoxical
sets of needs some people may think they
need this and another people think they
need it and there's like there's
opposition of that so always false
dichotomy and the key there is to move
from false dichotomy into dialectic and
then synthesis on the dialectic and so
people strategies for how to meet a need
will be fundamentally and reconcilable
but the actual need
will not be fundamentally unreconciled
also we have to be able to tease apart
the strategy for how to meet the need in
the actual need and so this is again
where we get into assumptions right
there's an assumption that this
particular strategy is the way to meet
that need and there is a meaningful -
right what is actually meaningful here
well okay so my strategy to meet the
need for freedom is lays a fair free
market capitalism
well no but my strategy for the way of
meeting my need for tending to though
tending to the disabled and those who
are in you know harder off positions
intending to the Commons as Marxism well
no that's like over the strategies and
say what I care about is individual
freedom and sovereignty me and the
creative capacity of the individual what
I care about is the Commons and the
Commonwealth and those who are not in
positions to be able to fully take care
of themselves sovereignly being taken
care of great those are not in
fundamental dichotomy with each other
yeah but the strategies to fulfill them
might be in fundamental dichotomy so we
come to what is fundamentally meaningful
and ultimately what we end up finding is
that the same things are meaningful to
everyone it's not obvious at all but
everything that is actually meaningful
when you strip the strategy way is
meaningful to everyone now that that's a
process of Revelation that we actually
all have the same values which is all of
them right everything fundamentally
valuable then we get to say how do we do
an integrated design strategy it meets
both of these things simultaneously and
takes them out of being seen as
paradoxical right out of being seen as
fundamentally dichotomous because we can
meet them both simultaneously
I'm so happy
during this world they mail and - so how
far is this initiative and is there
gonna be tools or is there gonna be a
process that will help people to do the
sense-making and and and you plan to
release that process or is there a
certain technology certain tool that
would help to do that and in the in the
beginning I think I heard you say
sensors but that I don't know if it's
applies to sense-making order to actual
sensors yes there I was saying human
sensors meaning that we're not in this
particular process we're looking at
humans as things that have sensed into
the world around them and can then share
their sense making and then there's a
way of being able to synthesize very
harvesting something as opposed to sense
making from say data mining on the
internet or physical sensors which are
also important and where you know they
those all need combined when we start to
talk about the future of infrastructure
physical sensors are actually a major
part of a self adapting system the
system I was just sharing of kind of
small group sense making process has
gone through architecture which is
actually very non-trivial as you're
hearing it's not it's not like a small
adaptation of holacracy or so she offers
here some other thing it was starting by
reverse engineering from the actual
social dynamic means and there's a
there's several different processes that
was one of them and just started to go
into prototyping and now there's a lot
of prototype work to do and I would
actually love to have people from the
you know collective intelligence
communities especially if they were
interested in helping to develop these
things further to do so because you know
a lot of work is needed yeah thank you
you
just as you were saying that I was
thinking about how to then enhance the
capacity of the sensors right and how do
you do that when you enter in collecting
intelligence because we can operate here
and we can interview our peers or we can
enter through our emotion or we can
enter that we can bring our whole selves
and that's literally all the good and
the bad and the ugly and the beautiful
and so when you prepare a collective
field like if you think about the we
spaces preview part of who of the
practices are developing collective
sentence I'm developing a way on on how
we connect to each other so deeply but
also to the center to do that which is
bigger than ourselves and then through
that when we have reached a certain
space where where were literally buzzing
like we literally feel the space is
impregnated with our beingness together
with our easiness in that particular
moment of the collective and then we go
to the mind then more powerful things
can happen and I feel that bad when you
mix that and I experience when you mix
that with music let's say that in a
certain point the group reach the limit
of their sensing and then you bring an
important piece of music or art or so
that that you have meant the
possibilities of the right brain and
left brain interaction in the space and
the body so I would say that it would
have to be larger than the mind it would
have to involve all of who we are so
that our scent source are really fully
activated and that would be my answer I
think that is beautiful and desirable
and not necessary for everyone to start
you're describing a kind of all level
all line all quadrants inner being right
synchrony some people live in fairly
narrows parts of their own being in
terms of what types of intelligences
they use and so if there's someone who
is living in a
really cognitive digital space without a
whole lot of somatic awareness they can
still get cognitively that there is no
way for win lose game theory to work and
the interconnectivity and the
interdependence of everything and they
can to the degree that that is actually
a basis of choice making for them they
can start making choices lined with that
and they can develop those other types
of intelligence I say this because I
find that some groups that I connect
with should all do ayahuasca together
and then all dance together and have a
snuggle party and like you can connect
them that way and then they do strategy
in their other groups of autists who
actually do really good strategy
together just by starting with data and
so I want to make it as deep and rich as
possible and as widely appealing as
possible thank you that addresses that
we are unique and that there is
displaces for uniqueness and then the
places where certain groups yeah I think
that that you know one of the the
recordings that that I did on fury of
the embodied we with Erica is brown or
Arthur broad and they were speaking
about certain practices like game
shifting to make some words that create
collective awareness of where we are at
so it's like that immediate sense making
while we are in process to know if we
have bypassed something that that we
actually wanted to agree upon in the
movie in the moment how help us keep our
agreements in the field help us know
where we're at in regards to a process
in any given moment and jump in from
example from a facilitated fully
facilitated group to uh oh now we're a
group facilitating or now we're popcorn
doing popcorn oh now we need to to dive
deeper into ourselves and connect
vertically and we want to soar so let's
take a brief before breath before we
speak and let's try to make the
conversations lower and then but then
you can dynamically do that right so
it's like in a way you could have
you know boards that could that could
show that that could indicate where the
collective is at in any given moment and
individual words that could indicate
where you are at in an individual moment
yes and it's tricky because when we
think about complex when we think about
complex adaptive systems and the kind of
mmm
merging changing flowing dynamics that
can occur right if we look at at bees
and termites and ants and flocks and
schools like you mentioned earlier they
don't have prefrontal cortices and in
the stigma jeddak dynamics that do hive
intelligence that can be that adaptive
all of the members of the hive are
fungible to each other right they there
is no uniqueness of activity or role
based on the individual they all can do
exactly the same thing so they which is
why sting or G works as a signaling
system because they'll all do the same
thing to the same signal it's also why
they're fairly expendable as part of the
strategy of the hive but it's also why
they can count on each other to they can
pretty much know what the one intern of
them is going to do now when we come
into a situation and people have very
different learning styles and they have
different skills and different
attributes and so much so that we're
into full kind of uniqueness of self
then I can't assume that these six
people are going to operate at all the
same as the last six that I had which is
why command and control hierarchy has
worked to us is just all that
complexity let's make a complicated
system that we can rule and let's make
people fungible let's make sure that
everyone who's had an MBA can do these
things and everyone who's on the
assembly line can do these things but of
course that system is end-of-life right
and and running out so one of the things
I would say is that as we move in the
systems where we have to have more
complex and inner dynamical you know
relationships okay we've got to learn to
listen so
much better and that communicates so
much better and to be able to actually
adapt to different processes and
different people which requires real
authentic full communication and so this
is where you're saying what is the what
is the development at the level of
individuals needed to make those kinds
of processes effective Wow I'm gonna
wrap because we've been going on and of
course we can keep going on and it's
just so beautiful but I want a name into
that last piece of just said on this
make it really presence that we need to
be listening better that we need to be
then developing our sensing capacities
and our sense source and our way to
receive signals so that we can become
better players over that we space of
that collective and that is a beautiful
challenge for each one of us and a very
possible one is actually a very fun one
if you ask me yes thank you
so anything last question something that
I haven't asked that you want to to
share or any last sharing that you would
want to express very fun to be in this
conversation with you really a delight
and I appreciate it Thank You Daniel me
as well I appreciate talking with you
and just seeing you light up with your
bright bright genius and presence and
thank you for all the work that you're
doing likewise thank you
[Music]
thank you for joining us on this
collective journeys to sample more
speakers from the global we space summit
- min - triple w the whis face sauna
calm here you will find over 150
trailblazing pioneers and we face
experts as well as 26 catalysts
convening these conversations at the
next stage of collective consciousness
and culture
[Music]