[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we tried
something somewhat pretentious I hope it
was still valuable we endeavored to
discuss the contributions to the notions
of meaning and wisdom that were made by
the advent of Christianity in particular
we looked Jesus of Nazareth and the
exemplification his right of this
participatory knowing in God's a Gothic
creativity this forgiving of personhood
to others John's radical idea that God
is in fact this agape that that is
actually what we've always been talking
about when we didn't go talking about
God and then Paul's radical
personalization of this and how the
metanoia of his own transformation is
seen by him as a powerful instance of
this gnosis agape but how that also
carried with it a potential darkside in
which elements of our of his identity
get projected onto cosmic history and
the idea of inner conflict within
history within God as being reflecting
reflected of and reflected in his own
inner conflict between the old Saul and
the new Paul and how much this gnosis
participatory knowing is bound up with
an exploration and an understanding of
how our agency can be fractured how we
can be at war at ourselves with
ourselves how we can suffer and I want
to take this up because the notion of
how we can suffer how we can become at
war with ourselves how our agency could
be undermined
and how much cosmic forces may be
aligned with our suffering becomes a
central idea amongst a group of people
known or at least called by their
enemies the Gnostics now a lot of
controversy about whether or not this is
a useful theoretical construct it's
there there were there might have been
some gnosis communities it's more it's
more apt to think of Gnosticism as a
style and a way of thinking like
existentialism or fundamentalism right
it's it's you don't go to like a
fundamentalist a church you belong to a
branch of Christianity there might be
fundamentalist right it's it's a way of
orienting yourself that is not like
belonging to a particular community or a
participant a particular political or
socio-economic group nevertheless this
sense right of inner conflict this sense
of right losing agency the sense of the
importance of gnosis in agape are all
made central to this style this movement
now I for I talk about them in
particular I want to reverse how I want
to present this what I want to do is
instead of trying to historically teach
you about them first I want to try and
make clear to you from the inside so to
speak what gnosis is and how you are
probably at some point seeking it or
will be seeking it or have sought it in
your life and then once we get this
existential understanding of what gnosis
is then through that lens I think it is
more appropriate to try and understand
the history
Oracle figures the the Gnostics are sort
of I don't know what to say sexy hot
right now a lot of conspiracy theories
and Dan Brown kind of crap around all of
this and I think that's the wrong way
you don't really understand the Gnostics
right as a movement unless you
understand what gnosis is itself this is
going to turn out to be important
because I think a way we can understand
the Gnostics is they are the axial
revolution within the axial revolution
they are the attempt to take the axial
revolution to its culmination to its
rational culmination and they are going
to provide the undercurrent to Western
cultures understanding of its spiritual
history and direction so for a long time
you won't hear me talk about the
Gnostics because like I did when I was
talking about the Buddha's enlightenment
and we did a lot of cognitive science on
higher states of consciousness I want to
try and do some significant cognitive
science before we turn back to the
history so let's let's get let's our
work our way into what this is we've
already got some sense of what this is
we've had a lot of discussion
participatory knowing and perspectival
knowing and gnosis has both of those
elements in it of transformative
experience we're gonna up try and draw
this all together but let's work our way
into this so we've talked about a world
view and a world view is when you have a
way you have this deeply integrate a
dynamically coupled way of seeing
yourself your agency and seeing the
world as an arena you have this
bi-directional modeling it is
simultaneously modeling the world to you
and modeling you to shape the world this
mutual conformity this reciprocal
revelation right so that's a worldview
now this has happened to me and I hope
something similar has happened to you
perhaps when you're reading a book a
novel or all you as an example I'm
reading the works of Appetit
philosopher let's say it's Spinoza right
and I'll be reading and I'll you know
and Spinoza's are profound and deep
thinker and you spend a lot of time and
you're reading the arguments and you're
you're trying to understand and you can
come to follow the arguments you can
come to follow the inferences you can
even come to believe some of Spinoza's
conclusions and so you have a lot of
beliefs and they're not they don't even
have to be inchoate they can be sort of
systematically related together but then
something else happens sometimes not
always but it's happened to me multiple
occasions and it's often what I'm trying
to convey above beyond what I'm saying
what I'm teaching other people I'm
reading Spinoza and there's it's like
there's this change I go from seeing
what Spinoza is saying to seeing things
the way Spinoza says that's a like right
but knows it goes from something I'm you
know I believe but Spinoza is saying
that and they're and they're they're
about the world and about right about
what it is to be human being I go from
that to actually seeing the world spin
as istic Lee it's because you know
Spinoza is now to use a metaphor of use
it's now the lens by which I'm both
seeing the world and myself I I'm now
living the world like as if as if
Spinoza was an adverb I'm living the
world spin assist achill II I might I
have the perspective of what it is like
to see the world the way Spinoza did and
what it is like to participate in that
worldview you get this advent of the
viability the livability of a worldview
James talks about that he talks about
the difference between James the great
psychologist and philosopher he talks
about the difference between believing
things
and it actually being a live option to
you so what happens there is at least
for some period of time right the agent
arena relationship the perspectival and
the participatory knowing are now right
conformed to at least it seems to me to
be that way
to what Spinoza had not just what right
Spinoza said what what what who and what
Spinoza was and what his world was to
him has become available to me now
that's important because that that
viability that ability to enter into a
particular agent arena configuration
will help me to take the next step
forward all right
so John Wright talks a lot about
sensibility transcendence and he talks
about it and it this is based on the
really important work of Iris Murdoch
and just an absolute gem of a book
called the sovereignty of the good if
you read ten books in your life one of
them should be the sovereignty of the
good your life will be less if you have
not read it so Murdoch was trying to get
beyond sort of the rules and reasons for
morality to something much more
important she was trying to get to that
viability of morality the way in which
we pay attention in such a way that our
salience landscape and the agent arena
relationship is transformed such that we
do the good
but
let's use Murdock's particular example
there's a mother-in-law she has a she
has a son the son is married to a woman
and she doesn't like this woman the
mother-in-law doesn't like the woman
it's obviously the mother-in-law to the
daughter-in-law she doesn't like this
woman because she finds her course finds
are loud and finds her kind of uncouth
therefore beneath the sort of elegance
and dignity of her son and then and it
think about agape and forgiving here
think about it got be unforgiving but
what happens here at some point Murdock
says and it happens like an insight it
happens like when you come out of the
nine dot problem the mother now realizes
something now and Murdock is clear about
this it's not a it's not a normal
insight like in a normal insight we
refrain how we're looking at something i
reframe how i look at the nine dots but
what's actually happening is the
mother-in-law is having a bi-directional
insight she's not only reframing how she
sees the world
she's reframing how she sees herself and
these are happening in a completely
interfused manner this is a
participatory change the agent are both
the agent and the arena side of the
relationship are being coach Ange
together so it's not a reframing of this
or that I often use this term it's a
trans framing it's not a reframing of a
particular problem it's a transformation
of the whole framing process both ends
because what's happening is the
mother-in-law is seeing the
daughter-in-law not as course but as
Fontaine
not as uncouth but sincere not as
lacking in elegance but as possessing
authenticity and then she's
simultaneously in Akko determining
fashion realizing that the way that she
the mother-in-law has framed things
habitually has been wrong she's having
what we've talked about before that
systemic insight not just an insight
here and here but there's a whole system
of errors that she's transformation that
she's transforming she's going through
that kind of developmental
transformation that we've talked about
right calls this sensibility
transcendence because what's happening
simultaneously is right the
daughter-in-law can be something that
she couldn't be before and the
mother-in-law is becoming somebody she
couldn't become before she couldn't be
before these two things are happening
together her sensibility her whole way
of participating in a worldview that
agent arena relationship is being
transformed and so both things are going
through transcendence do you see this
here's her self and here's right the
daughter the object of her attention and
this is going through self transcendence
but so is this and that's happening in a
completely conjoined way the mother
right the mother-in-law is becoming what
she couldn't be because of how she is
right opening up what the
daughter-in-law can be and precisely
because she's coming - right see have a
radical insight into what the
daughter-in-law could be right
opening up that she's opening up what
she can be it's again this process of
participatory knowing reciprocal
revelation right and and it's you know
this mutually accelerating disclosure
there's knowing by loving it's a
sensibility transcendence so
notice what's happening here there's a
way right you can see that I can I can
go through a process like this and enter
into a world view and of course that's
what Christianity was offering right it
was offering people that metanoia of how
they can go through this radical
transformation in this way opening up
the world opening up themselves etc now
why is that important because now I want
you to think of the opposite your
inability to enter into or make viable
to yourself a new way of being now in
order to get to that let me bring up
again somebody we've spoken before Harry
Frankfort remember he's the person who
talked about
Frankfort also talks about how the
wonderful book reasons for love and the
importance of what we care about how
much our reasoning depends on what we
love what we care about how we're bound
into an agent arena relationship now
Frankfort brings up an important notion
he brings up a notion he calls I don't
quite like this word but to be fair to
him I can't think of a better word he
calls the unthinkable so let me give you
an example of this so
the way to think of the unthinkable is
although you can make thoughts images
propositions run inferences you can't
actually make it viable you can't go
through the senseability transcendence
that would bring you into living that
worldview so here's my example my my
oldest son currently lives with me and
this has been such a blessing for me I
get to live with him and spend time with
him as right as he's building his career
right now I can think this thought it
would be great if I kicked Jason out I
can run this thought through my head
because if I did then the apartment
would be clean I'd have more money I can
draw I can imagine what it would look
like I can run the thought right I can
draw drive all the inferences but what I
can't do is actually make this a viable
alternative for me it's in that way the
thought it's unthinkable to me my love
for my son doesn't mean I can't run
these thoughts imagine these scenes draw
these inferences I can do all of that
what I can't do is bring myself to live
in that world
it's unthinkable to me perhaps a better
way of thinking about it is it's it's
not viable to me it's unlivable for me
now that's a good thing right so do you
see how I have a way right a sensibility
transcendence with my son that means
there's no effort on my part to treat
him morally and I'm not trying to be
self congratulatory what I'm trying to
say is right doing that thing of kicking
him out which I think would ultimately
be an immoral act is not viable to me so
right now this all sounds this is all
really great but there's a way in which
this can be twisted now I want you to
now think of the negative of it
all right what is you're stuck you're
stuck in a world view you don't want to
be in you want to go over there to that
world view but you can't you can't go
through the senseability transcendence
that will make that worldview viable to
you because you can run inferences in
your head you can run imagine scenes you
can state things to yourself you could
make all kinds of affirmations won't
catch you there you're stuck you can't
go through that change you experience a
kind of existential inertia people often
enter therapy for exactly this reason
they they can state who they want to be
and what kind of world they want to be
in they can imagine it they can make
inferences of what it would be right
like if they were there they can deeply
want to be there but they don't they
don't get there they stay stuck
I want to stop getting in these horrible
romantic relationships I want to be in a
relationship that is deep and profound
it would be so good I can imagine myself
there I can see myself but I can't get
there every time I try to get there I
end up here again every time somehow and
I don't understand how I don't
understand how the way I'm caring about
things the way I'm participating in
myself in my world is preventing me from
making that way of life a viable option
to me I want to be there think about
Paul and the old man in the new man I
want to be there I want to be that
person living there but all my efforts
to get there circle me back to here I
just can't get out of this existential
inertia I don't know how to bring about
the sensibility transcendence that's
going to make that way that person and
that world viable to me how do I get
there
how do I get there how do I stop
suffering
so one thing that can happen to people
is they can lose their agency remember
that's what suffering means because they
are they're there they're there they're
stuck like this they're losing any sense
of how to get to that other world view
that other self they're experiencing
radical existential inertia Jung used to
often Carl Jung used to talk about the
primary thing that people would have to
get to and have to express and why they
would come into therapy was precisely
because they felt stuck it might not
even be that there is particular
concrete problems in their life might be
that everything is actually going kind
of well but they're stuck they're stuck
there thwarted they they're there is
there's a sense of they're not moving
and they should be and although they can
talk and draw images and make inferences
about how they should move and where
they should move to they don't have the
participatory perspective of knowing
they don't know how to get there they
don't know how to engage in the
senseability transcendence they don't
know how to bring about the transforming
and often they enter into therapy and
therapy has an a gapek element into it
the therapist is affording an agape
transformation but in addition to being
stalked because of existential inertia
there's another problem people face when
they are seeking when they need
significant transformation and this goes
to the heart of one of the best books
I've already mentioned it before in this
series and I think philosophy in the
last 20 years this is la Paul's work a
transformative experience the
what la Paul's work points to is a way
in which these transformative
experiences render us the possibility of
such transformative experiences render
us kind of stupefied because what they
have us do is confront a deep kind of
existential ignorance that is endemic to
these transformative experiences and it
has to do again with this very
prospective allanne participatory
knowing that I'm talking about okay so
she gives the example but she first
starts with a very trivial example just
to to warm you up to the thinking she
she says somebody offers you to taste
this fruit that you've never tasted
before and the problem is people have a
very bimodal reaction they either things
Wow this fruit is so unlike any food
I've ever tasted it's so wonderful I
love it
or they say this fruit is so unlike any
food I've ever tasted
I hate it it tastes like vomit and the
thing is you don't know which reaction
you're gonna have until you bite the
fruit and she says well do you bite the
fruit and you may say well I don't know
the point is right you bite the fruit or
not you'll typically say well what does
it matter it's not there's nothing
significantly at risk if I have the
fruit that's true but what the fruit
example points to is the following
there's a kind of knowing that is
dependent on your state of being this is
your perspective on knowing you don't
know what it is like coz that's the core
of who you don't know what your salience
landscape will be like when you eat this
fruit until you have eaten the fruit
there's no way of knowing that ahead of
time you have to go through the
experience to know what it is like to
have the experience
you say okay I can sort of get that so
right this is kind of what she calls an
epistemic transformation but she says
some of the times what we're confronting
is something deeper where we're
confronting personal transformation
right this is where what's what's
happening again is knowing not just by
having a particular perspective this is
knowing by having the agent arena
relationship radically transformed you
don't know what it's like to be that
person in that world because you have to
actually be changed and the world has to
be changed in order for you to have that
participatory knowing so she talks about
the fact that what she means by like a
transformative experience is one in
which you're going to undergo that
change in perspective of knowing in that
change in participatory note so she
gives a good Donkin experiment to bring
that out first a thought experiment
she says imagine the following right she
said your friends come to you and they
revealed a secret they give you just in
like indubitable evidence that they can
do the following they convince you that
they can absolutely do the following
they can turn you into a vampire do you
do it do you do you become a vampire now
before you put this off as silly the
point of a philosophical thought
experience that is to play with
something free from your own life so you
can get clear about it what it means
after we've played with it we will go
back to our lives but here's the issue
you can't make any inferences about this
because you don't know what it's going
to be like to be a vampire and you don't
know who you're going to be when your
vampire because your preferences your
character everything is going to change
and your salience landscape
is going to radically change you don't
know what it's going to be like so
here's what you face I don't know what
I'm gonna lose if I become a vampire I
don't know what I'm going to lose once I
go through this change I will have lost
a way of being it will become
unthinkable to me I can't get back to it
but I don't know what I'm gonna lose
until I go through it so oh well then I
shouldn't do it ah but if I don't do it
I don't know what I'm missing I don't
know what I'm missing there could be a
way of being here that is amazing and
wonderful I don't know what I miss it
and I'm caught I equally don't know what
I'm going to lose and I don't know what
I'm going what I'm missing and I can't
do any calculations I don't know what my
values are going to are my values now
the right set of values are my values
then the right set of values is the
kinds of experience I'm having now or
the like there is no place above I can
make the comparison
I can't reason my way through it and now
unlike the fruit example everything is
at risk both the agent and the arena are
at risk and you go okay so what I get it
who cares I'm never gonna be a vampire
that's not the point the point is once
you acknowledge the logic of the problem
this is what she now gets you to realize
you confront these in your life at
multiple times here's an example so
relevant to everything we've been
talking about with agape should you have
a kid should you have a child do you see
how it's exactly the same you don't know
what you're missing if you don't have a
child because you are going to we talked
about it you're going to become a
different person with a different
salience landscape and until you have a
child you know what it's like so you
don't know what you're missing you also
don't know what you're going to lose all
people will tell you
but until you go through it you don't
know your existentially ignorant here's
another one should I enter into a
romantic relationship with that person
you don't know you don't know who you're
going to be because if it's a real
romantic relationship it's gonna change
you you don't know who you're gonna be
you don't know what you're sailing it's
dusk it's gonna be until you're on the
other side you don't know what you're
missing by not getting into the relation
but you don't know what you're gonna
lose until when you get into it so
should you do it or not
we face irreversible change and yet we
can't there's no way to reason our way
through it because on both sides of the
transformation we are confronted by
radical ignorance we don't know what
we're missing
and we don't know what we'll be losing
we don't know if we should stay here we
don't know if we should go there now
I've had the pleasure to talk to to LA
Paul Lawrie about some of this and
present a case to her which I think
there's some agreement about this and I
look forward to we have some future work
we're doing together as I pointed out to
Laurie that when whenever we're going
through any significant developmental
change like to use Paul's example point
from a child to an adult the child
doesn't know what they're going to lose
when they lose their childhood innocence
when they become an adult they don't
know but it has an adult right but if
the child also doesn't know what it's
gonna miss what it's missing if it
doesn't become an adult and you think oh
that's ridiculous no it's not do you
know how much people face difficulties
precisely because they get transfixed by
this they write if I grow up I'm gonna I
might lose stuff but if I don't grow up
I don't know what I'm missing huh what
should i do what should i do what should
I do
like if I choose this career I lose all
these wonderful potentialities but
should I just keep all my possibilities
open look at all my possibilities but
but if I choose this I'll lose and I and
some of those possibilities I don't even
know but if I don't ever choose what am
I missing
I'll never know because I've never
actually gotten into any particular
career so we can be stupefied as we face
the need for radical transformation so
people are not they go into therapy not
only because they're stuck they don't
know how to transform they're also
stupefied they don't know if they should
but should because I'm like oh what am i
what right and and and this is bound up
with the aspect disguise that people get
into when they're stuck and it shows
this stupid vacation and the stuckness
working together look somebody comes in
they're doing therapeutic work with you
right why are you here I'm stuck how are
you stuck oh well I'm so stubborn
it's like I'm stubborn I original and I
went on I need to get I need to be more
 okay and then you talk to them and
let's talk about other stuff come back
and what do you like most about yourself
oh I'm persistent I don't give up and
you see the very thing they're trying to
change it's the very thing about
themselves that they don't want to let
go of that they're most identified with
I'm stubborn and I won't change my mind
what do you like about yourself I'm
persistent I don't give up I don't
change my mind
they talk about the same thing one under
a negative aspect and one under a
positive aspect and they don't realize
it they're stuck and they're stupefied
and when we're stuck and were stupefied
when we're stuck we can't imagine how to
make an opponent of worldview
significant how to make it viable when
we're stupefied we can't imagine the
alternative we can't figure out how to
rationally make the choice so we get
this right inertia and indecision were
stuck and were stupefied and then we're
trapped
we're existentially trapped and then you
can think about how that could mix we
mixed up with the stuff we talked about
with the Buddha the parasitic process
setting the parasitic processing the
modal confusion but we get stuck how do
you get out what do you do in therapy
this therapy works what do you do how do
you like how do you get people out of
being existentially trapped well let's
go back to it let's try and work our way
through it
so what do some people do when they're
considering whether or not they want to
have a child well some people just throw
themselves into the darwinian flow and
just right but some people like oh
should we have a child or not right what
do some people do well I've noticed many
people doing this and it's very
interesting they get a pet they get a
dog typically and then they do is kind
of bizarre behaviour with the dog they
have pictures taken with the dog and
they give the dog a bed and some toys
and write and write insecure oh right
and what they're doing right is they're
doing something that's right kinda like
having a child should I enter into a
romantic relationship with this person
this is advice was actually given to me
when I was dating and I see people do go
on a trip with them go on a trip with
them live with them for seven days it's
kinda like living with them it's kind of
like being in a relationship with them
people say well well yeah I sort of get
that but even the things like the being
event how do people do that well they
play role-playing games and you say
that's just fantasy okay well pay
attention to the way this is evolving in
our culture so role-playing games have
moved into live-action versions where
you act out the role-playing and then
this has evolved into a Norwegian that's
like not Norwegian it's Scandinavian
style which is called Jeep form and a
Jeep form what you're doing is you're
given a scenario to act out and the
person that plays the role of like the
jund and master is like a movie director
they will tell you to cut scenes or
switch roles and here's the whole point
of Jeep form you you're trying to enact
emotionally difficult situations why
would you want to do that
what what people are seeking in Jeep
form is they're seeking a phenomenon
called bleed I want I'm gonna do this
role-playing and I'm getting this person
oh here's a director and they're doing
stuff to mess up with Mike my trans
framing and my role-playing because what
I'm trying to do is get so that the line
between my real life and what I'm doing
in this psycho drama bleeds so that the
line between the game and reality bleed
into each other
blurs and looking for bleed so that I
can play seriously play with the
possibilities do you see what's
happening here people engage and we have
to learn how to take this word seriously
again they engage in play the whole
point about play right the whole point
about play is it puts you in between
here's the world you're in and here's
the world you want to be in and then
there's this liminal zone where we can
play it's no coincidence that as
organisms become more intelligent more
need needed more in need of right
developmental transformations they also
become much more playful they need more
and more play and play is not a
frivolous thing what are the disasters
of our culture is we think of play as
only about fun
we've trivialized it now play can be fun
I don't think fun is what people are
after in Jeep form so I'm really fun
that people are out after when they
adopt a dog and treat it like a child
see the word play doesn't have to be
about fun because you can play music and
it could be heartbreaking music it could
be Mahler that you're playing in Tai Chi
you don't do Tai Chi you play Tai Chi
and it's
about having fun it's about a deep
engagement with processes of
transformation so the way to think about
this is what are people doing in all
these instances they're they're
confronting the possibility of a
transformative experience and so what
they do is they have an inactive analogy
this isn't an analogy of word or thought
because that's not going to work because
this is about perspectival and
participatory change this is an analogy
you enact you go through the actions now
this takes a lot of skill to create an
inactive analogy it creates a lot of
skill I got to get it right all right if
I'm doing the Jeep form I got to get it
right and that's what the director is
there to help might make do
role reversal suddenly give me an object
I got to use right the therapist will
suddenly get you to talk to that pretend
that that empty chair that your mother's
there and start talking right and you
got to get it right because the inactive
analogy has to be similar enough to the
world and the person you're trying to
become in that world it has to be
similar enough that you can feel it you
can start to get the perspectival and
participatory knowing but it's still
similar enough to this world that you
can pull out if you need to and you got
to get it's this delicate balancing out
it has to be relevant ly similar to the
world I want to go to but still
relevantly similar to the world that I'm
in because I want to put myself into a
place where I can play whether it's with
the two so that I can compare them
together this trick this creates this
creates it demands I should say it
demands tremendous skill this ability to
come up with a opt there's there's a
beauty and an elegance here an opt
metaphor that you can actually play
within that you can participate in so
that you can ah that's what it would be
like ah but I but I still know who I am
right now and I can feel and see and
sense the two together that's what
you're doing in therapy one of the
things we need to do as you can probably
see it where the implication of what I'm
saying as a part of a dressing the
meaning crisis is we have to recover
play and I hope you now understand what
I'm going to say and that is not meant
to be disrespectful one of the important
things that religion was was play
that's what ritual properly understood
is people are playing serious playing in
order to try and put themselves into a
liminal place a place between two worlds
the normal world and the sacred world
they want to dwell within they're
playing there in order to see how and
whether they should go through the
change in world and self that the
religion is demanding and affording now
notice in order to make a worldview
viable to me I have to go through this
self world sensibility transcendence but
you've seen that before you've seen that
before this is Anna gaga
and a Gaga is precisely to set things up
so that as this as this is transcending
as its decline as I'm coming more into
contact with what's real getting below
the illusion like Paul just seeing
things in mirror or just shadows on the
KFOR player as that opens up that
affords me transforming right so
sensibility transcendence is just I
think an acog a and Sensibility
transcendence is how I enter into a
world view so what I need is I need not
only an inactive analogy I need a way of
enacting and a gargy and that it's also
what religious ritual used to do for us
religious ritual was a way of playing
with inactive analogies so that I can
compare so I could overcome the
ignorance I can write I can that see
isn't even the right verb I can see be
these two worlds these two ways of being
these two persons within those worlds
but ritual also was enacted an ACOG a it
was giving you the skills for it knowing
how to get unstuck how to go through
sensibility transcendence how to make
that world world viable so in therapy
you're often doing this you're giving
people an active analogy okay so you're
having like it's coming clear that
you're stuck and it has to do with how
you're related to your mom okay so
pretend that your mom is in that chair I
know she's dead now forget that this
isn't literal
but it's not fun it's not frivolous it's
serious play pretend your mom is there
enact that get the analogy talk to her
and then here I'm a therapist I'll give
you ways of reframing her and reframing
yourself I'll help you to engage in
oggi so you'll start to know how to go
through the senseability transcendence
and that's how you get out of being
existentially trapped you have this
ritual behavior again like when I'm
doing Tai Chi look Tai Chi right these
are all this is an active analogy I'm
doing these motions this is how like if
somebody's this is how single whip is
helping me actually enact what it would
be like to be in a fight situation but
it's also an agogic right
the whole point about doing Tai Chi is
it's also radically transforming that's
one way of understanding Chi don't
understand it as magical energy
understandings instead as it's a way of
radically transforming how I'm
experiencing myself in the world and Tai
Chi we talked about the two eyes I have
an eye this looking out at the world and
looking at myself and what I'm doing is
I'm radically transforming them I'm
trying to bring about the know-how of an
agog a and I'm enacting the analogy of
fighting it's a ritual I'm seriously
playing with an inactive analogy and
enacting and a GOG ik transformation
that's why it's a path of wisdom and a
martial art at the same time you see
therapy real martial arts martial arts
that aren't just kicking punch but real
martial arts that we're all doing this
that's why so many people in the meaning
crisis are attracted to martial arts are
attracted to things like Jeep form
they're hungry that's why they go into
therapy they are hungry they are hungry
for ways of dealing with being
existentially trapped
so people are looking for ways of
transforming not just their cognition
their beliefs but prospectively
transforming their consciousness and a
participatory fashion transforming their
character what they identify with and
how they that identification enables
them to inhabit an agent arena
relationship we're close to telling you
what gnosis is so in nauseous what I'm
trying to do is bring about an altered
state of consciousness because that it's
going to put me into the flow State it's
got the possibility of giving me a
higher state of consciousness a mystical
experience that's transformative and
then what I'm doing is I'm setting this
within a ritual context where I'm
viewing an active analogy and I'm doing
inactive and agog a I'm doing serious
play and I have the flexibility the
cognitive flexibility this is how the
psychedelics can be a mesh why
psychedelics can improve therapy so much
because the psychedelics give you the
cognitive flexibility in the flow state
and the possibility even of a higher
state of consciousness that then right
empowers this process to get you free
from existential entrapment this is why
you give people right psychedelics and
you put them through the therapeutic
process and you can get them free from
post-traumatic stress disorder
okay so now
what's gnosis this is nauseous gnosis is
to have a set of psycho technologies
that create a ritual context like jeep
form like martial arts like therapy that
allows us to overcome being
existentially stock existentially
stupefied and that is being powered by
an altered state of consciousness that's
induced by chanting sleep deprivation
psychedelics and what this does what
gnosis does is it frees me from being
existentially trapped it's this
combination this integration of psycho
technologies that activate and transform
perspectival and participatory knowing
and give us a sense of a greater reality
that we want to live within and thereby
liberate sus from being existentially
trapped and heals us from our fractured
suffering our fragmented agency our
broken world that's gnosis so what I
want to look at next time is how gnosis
was taken up within a movement within
the same time period as early
Christianity thank you very much for
your time and attention
[Music]
you
you