[Music]
you've been spending quite a lot of time
quite a lot of your life I guess
investigating this kind of spirituality
atheism and your new book is actually
called spiritual atheist so I think this
is a really interesting place to start
there just been some very high-profile
interactions meetings between Jordan
Peterson and sam Harris discussing
exactly these topics the renewal of
religion versus atheism and I kind of
thought that one of in a way I see
they're talking past each other a lot of
the time yeah but also that the idea of
kind of spiritual atheism as an
expanding the concept of atheism beyond
what it is as a kind of pure negation of
religion and integrating science and
saying well actually these things are
not opposed to each other could be a way
through in my experience of the religion
versus science war you could call it is
really a walk as it's two positions and
I think the a the atheism that we've
seen for the last 50 years has become a
very specific type of atheism I don't
think it's all atheism I don't think
it's weig theism was when Francis Bacon
who was the purveyor of the scientific
method wrote a book on atheism
a heathens become essentially
materialism or materiality what I call
materials atheism it's a it's a species
of atheism which is very against
anything that's not measurable in matter
that doesn't it's anything that mean
what a theism has to be and I guess what
I've been trying to find as a form and
expression of atheism that fits with my
love of science my belief in reason my
belief in my mind my belief in Internet
my belief in proving things as the best
we can with science whilst acknowledging
that science has always been a project
focused on matter and it hasn't ever
wanted to speak about consciousness and
the inexperience of our lives and the
subjective experience it's likely not to
it very early on it so I'm not going to
do this doesn't meet doesn't exist
we're just not going to include it
inside
and I believe spiritual a theism is I
guess evidence-based the evidence of
science is obvious I don't have to go
into that net source of atheist evidence
base but I believe that there's an
evidence base for spiritual experience
which is millions of years of what
thousands of years of traditions
exploring if you go inside crying you're
busy busy mind intellect find out how to
access this heart area which I will call
the metaphor nursery of the heart but
the experience of thinking from here not
from hit this little bit here then
evidence the evidence shows you that you
will experience some form of unity
ecstatic or quiet continuation into
continuous nests but weenie and other
which is transformational it changes
everything about your life the one is a
spirit whatever you wanna call it
however you get there and there's ten
different ways to get there
but it does once you've had that
experience it becomes a organizing truth
that then re aligns everything around it
and what I had to do myself as how do I
make peace with this becoming the
organizing principle of my inner life
but still have science being the
organizing principle of the external
world which I don't argue with because
it's brilliant that's what I've sort of
been working on is how do you transcend
those two positions because always you
get just talking pastor you get the
Atheist staying an atheist maybe they
admit to meditation being useful from a
instrumental sense of stress and
whatever and maybe they admit to ritual
being really good and like you get the
kind of new churches the Atheist
churches but when the congregation comes
but they won't ever admit to a mystical
truth and then you get the richest
person going well I just believe in some
kind of revealed truth and science is
useful and everything and they're both
right you have to find a way to lift
them higher which is ultimately what
spirituality or wisdom is about which is
about finding opposites and then
bringing them into harmony with each
other as Heraclitus one of the
pre-socratic Greek philosophers said you
think those things are different but
actually they're part of one thing
and he called it a Pavan tonic harmony
create attention and I think that's the
job is how do I get myself every
individual how do I get to a place where
I can embrace what science has to say it
really does work it's really useful
keeps us alive but it can never answer
questions about this thing it does tell
this doesn't wasn't meant to doesn't
design to and when you get some like
Daniel Dennett the the philosopher
saying that even the consciousness
through which I expressed this thought
and write my book is an illusion you
know that's something not right there
you know it just doesn't it's just
purely from a pragmatic point of view
but in a way he's followed through this
materialist like an you see he's thought
things through to the logical logical
conclusion and isn't scared of the
conclusions he's reached it's like yes
if if this is the where this materialism
has left me then I am going you've got
to admire his kind of dedication to the
logical if you're going to think of
thought you have to follow it through
and if that part of all philosophy has
to be if I hold this to be true
I need to make sure I've got rid of all
what do you call them like little
doubles of potential self contradiction
which is which is what's really
interesting about the times now because
certainly online and I think also in in
the among the gatekeepers of the media
for quite a long time these this sort of
I call them the Four Horsemen of the of
the atheist or the Four Horseman Daniel
Dennett Hitchens Richard Dawkins and sam
Harris kind of this sort of very strong
materialist atheist been held sway and
what's really interesting especially
with the kind of success of Jordan
Pederson but more generally is I see a
lot of people online starting to lease
say I now appreciate religion for the
first time I now appreciate spirituality
for the first time I was an atheist and
now I my conceptions of what religion is
for and the reality that it's pointing
to is is deepened which is a really
interesting time it feels like there is
an opportunity for a new synthesis
arising which is why I think the
spiritual atheist perspective is
interesting there definitely is I think
I'm out there a lot in the world I teach
a lot of people this kind of stuff from
a practical point of view I spend a lot
of time doing leadership work which is
really very pragmatic is it's an
organization wanting its people to
perform better and yeah it's a dangerous
line for me to be talking about some of
these content because there's a
separation between church and state
which basically means corporation and
religion they don't shouldn't be
involved you know if you want me to be
in your company it's great but don't put
me on a Christian program that would be
outrageous like so therefore don't put
me on a leadership program that's got
some guy talking about spirituality and
love and because I see that as religion
so I always be very aware of that and
you know respectful of that separation
but I can't do my job Papa Eunice like
teach people about this unit unit of
experience of oneness and what then
emerges in your body in a very body
practical way
it's fittings of love it's like oh my
god I feel love because another word for
love is truth another word for love is
purpose so if you want a corporation we
want to be a public organization which
most 21st century companies that say
that there's no way of getting and
avoiding the conversation eventually has
to come around or something
you call up you can put a passion
compassion caring but they're just ways
of avoiding the reality which is we're
talking about loving the world loving
our consumers you know this is a big
conversation same with leaders you can't
talk about being a generous
service-oriented servant leader without
talking about caring for your team which
is love again right so it's a really
fine line but what I've noticed in the
last two or three years is I'm now I
almost void it more than I need to
because people are asking me but don't
you mean talking about love but I won't
use it until use it but but there's a
demand there's a yearning and I think
the challenge I think I've got we've got
at the moment is how do we ensure in the
world without religion
cuz I'm quite active religious I've got
that part of my mother militant atheism
is very much alive in me it's if I feel
any kind of rulebook anyone saying this
is the pathway rather than a pathway
this is the model and you see it across
the whole parcel developments
spiritual space is you see people
hurrying towards religion
you see people putting people into guru
/ priest mode so I'm like that stuff I
feel like sick with it
so for me the question is how do you
reinsure in the world without religion
in its to organize sense it has to come
from individual it has to come from
inside and it's a it's a it's the I
think it's a great topic of the next
20-30 years and another really
interesting topic you've talked about in
the past is the idea of the J curve
which is something I think is a huge
relevance now especially where a lot of
us have the sense that things are
breaking down and I'll let you explain
the Jay Cove in more detail but the idea
is that you cannot move from one state
to another without going through a
dissolution and a lot of people struggle
with that dissolution because I say
we're here we want to move to here yes
but you have to britain√≠s this goes with
personal growth as well if you want if
you want to improve how you are in the
world and you have to give up you'll put
some parts of your personality that
we're working okay go into chaos before
you can come out the other side and
that's a really interesting subject I
think it's a really interesting model
it's almost a I think it's an essential
thing for people to know if you want to
change anything
expect them to get worse first can you
can you can you describe that so the
tradition the material a of looking at
change is linear so as you say you want
thing I'm here now my life's okay my
Lycians okay but not really intimate and
not really conscious and that really
juicy I want to make them more conscious
and juicy I just wanna go from here to
here and the great tragicomedy of life
does I believe it's designed in
prevented by who go into that core topic
but it's designed into our system human
and therefore all systems political
organizational before you get from where
you are to this better place and when I
say better I don't so do you mean
externally validated is better I mean
for me if better as a fit a better fit
with the world but to fit with your
lover and your child
your company the way the world's moving
you have to first go down and that down
movement is the dissolution as you say
of old archetypes of our personality
structures of our belief systems and
ultimately of feelings then you touch
something new something emerges in that
moment which is fresh we call it an
epiphany an insight a realization our ha
and then you go up and try and build
that into your everyday life you know
everyday work you everyday patterning
which takes often months and years but
you gave me lots to talk about so the
bit I want to talk about is I was I was
lost and now I'm found you know the two
end points of the curve the curve of
this transformational curve J curve
break the curve use different words
which also maps on to the hero's journey
he makes enjoy everything learning
curves of learning it maps on to
entrepreneurship
you know startup companies have to first
spend a lot of money and maybe they come
out with a product that works and they
can make a lot of money but for five
years someone has to have trust and
faith that they're going to do that it
also maps onto political theory so old
duck dictatorships to break down but it
doesn't mean something gonna be all
wonderful democracy it's pretty gonna be
years of chaotic stuff that's what
you're seeing at the moment is people
trying to get away from that because
it's painful but not in the direction of
newness in the direction of wholeness
make Britain slash America great again
there's a ton of return to the old point
you're in which can never be relived
because it's gone time-based and in
there whether it's your personal journey
of change or whether it's trying to
change the world we have to be okay with
things being disassembled but the key is
to have the center hole and for me and
this is why I was reluctant spiritual
present the only thing I've found that
can keep this into holding and I mean
that in the most philosophical and most
pragmatic sense literally how to feel
okay in the middle of a breakdown of
your old life verse also how to feel
okay as the u.s. disk instructs itself
and hopefully something new comes is
what we would call spiritual which is
love which is connection which is this
sense of oneness it's the only thing I
know that's bigger than the fear
the chaos of disassembly because the
only thing you can really trust is what
you go deep enough inside yourself to
find or what that's part of it but the I
guess from a philosophical point of view
the only truth that I found that can't
be deconstructed by cynicism skepticism
is is this truth of oneness
so that's poly surface pathetically is
the truth of oneness emotionally it's
the feeling of oneness we've labeled
love some people say love is the truth
love is the massive love is the answer
what they're saying is the only thing
that remains when you break down all
your old patterns that you used to
survive life to deal with your mum and
dad until there's the pain of existence
when all that dissolved the only thing
that's left that you can hold on to is
this experience of oneness / / /
connection which is what we call
spiritual so I didn't want to be in the
spiritual world I don't want to be a
spiritual teacher I didn't want to be
anything to do with this thing it's the
least cool career if you bro up in
London in the 90s and you go to
Cambridge University in study science it
is the least cool thing in the world I
mean literally but it was the only truth
that I kept going back to over and over
and over again and often I would for
years I would discount it I would get
rid of books I had I would laugh at yoga
and meditation and as but it came after
me until I accepted it in I couldn't get
out my own Jacob I was stuck down the
bottom over and over again reliving
depression reliving anxiety reliving old
patterns shield background as you said
in science but also in philosophy yes I
studied science first promise to be a
medic
medical science then I was very lucky I
was given opportunity to spend a year
doing something else and I chose
philosophy of science and that was where
I first had like a explosion of
realizing that science isn't the only
way of understanding the world and even
thought of as if science can see that
science is as much constructed as it is
discovered so science isn't just
discovering the truth of nature we also
bring with us our own mind and concept
in fact you can't understand data
without concept
Thomas Kuhn believe my mind Fuko the
Scottish school of the construction of
science theory and I'm not harken
factionist I didn't believe all science
is constructed by theory I believe there
are data points which we call facts but
to make sense of those facts you have to
have narrative and narrative of
conscious and narrative this choice of
narrative of where the quantum theory
you believe in the many-worlds
interpretation where you believe in the
mobium pilot-wave interpretation or the
Copenhagen interpretation no fad will
ever tell you which of those is real
it's the Mason thing about Sciences and
you we can't verify which because we're
talking about something that's
unverifiable so by some nature is always
going to be a choice about what
narrative structure we interpret the
data in and that means science isn't
just a pure fact it's constructed a
little bit which is something that the
traditional Four Horsemen of the Atheist
apocalypse would net can't stomach and
it's yes it's something that we have to
be able to understand that science was
designed to understand matter from the
beginning when Galileo literally wrote
and said I'm going to get rid of
subjective experience not in brackets my
brackets not because I don't think it's
real and great to have feelings of love
and awareness and awe but because we
can't measure it it's never get another
maybe measurable and therefore it's a
pain in the ass for science let's just
get rid of it and focus on what he
called the primary qualities or primary
properties that's what science is good
at let's not force it to then become an
arbiter of conscience and consciousness
and the science of consciousness has
always been what people call their
wasn't editions and I guess we're in I
hope a time where we've had such alert
towards materialism certainly
philosophically life and certainly in
statehood the people are going this is
too much is too much
emptiness is too much externality I've
got a life in here I want some meaning
in this life the times we burn at the
moment is do people then go right back
into religion
which in the US you have seen but what
gives me hope is there's now a 25% group
of people in the US who couldn't have
spiritual not religious such as what I'm
trying to give a philosophy for
ultimately underpinning for because
otherwise the problem you've got with
spiritual not religious is well I cut
you know I don't know I other it's
called the fruit salad approach to
spirituality is that you pick all the
bits you like I want a like that Apple
and a bit of cherry I like a bit tantrum
like a bit of this chakra stuff and I
like a bit of this stuff but I don't
want all the other bits that come with
that particular tradition which is
transformation giving up the old
challenging my belief structures
challenging my ethics well integration
of the shadow ethics I think that's the
big issue of New Age life at the moment
is you can fruit salad all the stuff you
like the Bliss this and that's a big
problem
the blissing out of our spirituality
because ultimately all if you stay in
one tradition you end up having to do
the shadow work because that's what
they're designed to bring you into you
right and that's painful when you need a
lot of rigor and a lot of discipline and
I think new a jury has gone in has just
avoided it all and that's why so many
atheists look at it and go what a pile
of mumbo jumbo nonsense but also I think
there's a it's partly that but I also
think they put off by the kind of people
it's not just it's not just what people
are saying it's they look at people's
actions in the world and think well if
that spirituality I don't want a piece
of that it's so much hypocrisy involved
so by people who are only doing the
bliss out thing and not doing the inner
work I'm not doing the kind of
recognition of I might be an angel but
I'm also a demon correct and without
that shadow integration it just means
that if the whole thing is a trip of the
of a blissful ego and that's why
Christianity for example or the older
wisdom traditions that do integrate that
other side and at the core of them they
have stories like Cain and Abel this is
what happens if you get this resentful
this is how this is what resentment
begins being which in itself is a
theological thing yes resentment against
being on some deeper level like the way
the people act in the world is a
reflection of a deeper theological truth
was something that really I guess
reawakened in me a kind of respect for
those with
traditions hmm including Christianity
yes
interesting I guess Chris I see
ironically of all the resolutions the
wine least know about I think growing up
as a Jew in a Christian society didn't
massively
enamor meter to the path but also
listening to the but also many of these
stories are in the Jewish tradition what
that's the bit that uh me off the old
testament the fire and brimstone and the
anger and the disc God this a
disembodied voice going wow I can now
look at those texts and I can see wisdom
in them but when they're taken literally
and the connotation versus the
denotation really when they're taken
dinner you know the when we when we take
the story of the story which is what
most religions of the book actually
still do they take the story as the
story and miss out the metaphorical
narrative mythic meanings that are
actually the interesting bits for me
it's just a big no thank you not
interested in any of that doesn't make
sense to me at all but I've read a
translation of the Lord's Prayer for
example from the original Aramaic in a
poetic mythic way it's amazing beautiful
about one it's all about how to stay
connected to yourself even though all
these difficult things are happening
your life not to be resentful not to be
angry not to be disconnect not to
separate and I as Christianity is the
primary religion of the world it's
really important that there's an access
to Christian mysticism and Christian
Gnosticism for people so they can find
that wisdom again it's not my particular
meeting path because I do think we are
in a time where so if the if the 60s
were a time where we started becoming
really aware of the Eastern traditions
for the first time kind of integration
of taoism buddhism hinduism if there is
another awakening happening now and I
think areas and I think what we're
seeing is an integration of the the
Western traditions at a deeper level
Christian mysticism being one of them
probably the esoteric tradition and new
interest in that because we're actually
seeing a lot of things bubbling up
through the kind of corners in our
culture which is a really interesting
time to be and in a way there's a
there's a that is a potentially a deeper
resin
within us with that because they are our
lived traditions they're coming from our
own culture yes yes I mean if we think
about the Western tradition you've got
against this dialectic that's
flip-flopping between external focus and
the internal focus the great one was the
Scientific Revolution and the romantics
going hold on a minute what about love
what about passion and creativity the
genius of the individual all that stuff
right my hope is that we don't flip-flop
again and I think one of the problems
we've got in ours of our society is we
have this pendulum that goes patriarchy
let's go all about the feminists and we
just flip-flop between these extremes
and there's never goodness in the
extremes and my hope is we don't do what
we did in the 60s which we gave up the
goodness of science and the goodness of
material world and entrepreneurship and
all these things that really matter here
we forget all this I'm gonna be hippy
and give it all up and burn my
everything which we kinda did again in
the rave scene of the 90s and then even
the Burning Man countercultural so
experience I hope that we can live in
this world
but bringing the other world into it
rather than think we have to go off grid
and burn everything to do with the sort
of capitalist advanced structures that
we're in and I guess in my way of
putting that is I'm certainly am NOT
countercultural I'm for the culture I'm
believing the culture believe because
College of Arts or Society I didn't want
to fight the man I want to hold the man
I don't stick it to him I want to hold
him and go it's okay you know you are
loved and you look just like I say to my
kids every night you are part of this
universe your love your wanted you don't
buy Qadir
I think it's time to let go of all that
patterning out protection and allow
yourself to feel through the game and
feel caring and compassionate again and
all the things you want you want this
anyway man you know so as soon as we
stick it to the man we get back into the
worst excesses of new a jury where
you're just sitting going well I'm not
that and I think the if we can bring
these Western traditions back in there
are ours you know they're in the land
the juries thing you know that whole
piece where interestingly the political
and spiritual were part of one
conversation you know the Druids were
the political politicians of their time
the Daoists were originally advised us
to you know the big guys and they were
they they became a folk tradition
afterwards actually thousands
interesting story because then they
because the the politicians sort of
rejected them although as a path and
they were back into a more externality
path they then resorted into what became
our chemical Taoism about sex and kind
of stuff and I think I really hope we do
do it this awakening moment as I hope we
don't go well
capitalism sucks and politics sucks and
liberal liberal democracy sucks so I'm
just going to go invest in all this it's
a terrorist esoteric stuff and the
medicine plants and all this stuff I
really believe it's time to own all that
it's ours
it's our tradition it's part of our
tradition and it came from actually from
a Christian mindset right this that
science and cavil ISM were intrinsically
linked to Protestantism and all this
sort of stuff but just bring this
softer loving juicy dare I say feminine
holding within the center of it and that
will and I hope that will break down the
the the worst excesses of capitalism
without attending there's something else
that's going to work better so actually
I talk about this kind of connected
capitalism or compassionate capitalism
where we guided by purpose truly going
about purpose and that means giving up
things so we can bring love into the
system
you