good morning well that's interesting
I've never had that happen before
it didn't go live on periscope an error
occurred on periscope this is usually
temporary wait a moment and then try
again so I will try again to go live on
bears go I don't think it's gonna let me
that's interesting
obvious has to be on periscope today
clearly just on YouTube where there is a
link in the description
there isn't one on periscope so you
would need to find me on YouTube to be
able to join in today's topic is I don't
know if we're going to solve it during
this hour differently
try to solve it but yesterday I had some
understanding towards my addiction to
pot and a large part of why I'm smoking
a during the day is because of these
hours in the morning and I didn't quite
realize that cuz I didn't realize how
stressful these hours are but then I
need to counteract it with that and I
think just knowing that makes that less
likely to happen but what I would like
to do I know why these hours aren't
working isn't because they're not it's
because I'm trying to make them into
something they aren't but bigger than
that I don't like broadcast I don't like
being on video broadcasting to people I
prefer to have a conversation and so
even though we're on day 35 so we're in
there from day one I wanted this to look
more like a conversation how people join
and what that looks like and it I don't
think it looks like what it currently
does if there's people I don't plan
anything people joining and if and when
they want to with the description in the
video like there has to be some kind of
organization like with the solution
raising or idea cafe where there's a
process we go through for the hour on
different days and I'm spin a continue
to do these hours because it the
learning didn't tell me to stop doing it
it was like alter the way you're doing
it that I'm still supposed to be in the
seat for an hour but it's figuring out
what that looks like figuring out what
yeah I'm gonna try go live on periscope
again No
it really just doesn't want to be on
periscope today so hey guess we're not
on Twitter we're not on on periscope but
so finding a way to do this in a more
distributed way rather than broadcast
rather than me talking to a potential
well words a potential group of people
that watches you of viewers instead of
doing it for theoretical viewers
actually interacting with people like I
found on Sunday when I was telling my
story I'm like I need to get through
this like I need part of its neoneun the
feeling in my own body when I'm trying
to be in broadcast mode like I'm on my
little soapbox trying to profit eyes as
opposed to finding a way that allows for
an actual conversation back and forth
but more so because I'm allowing for it
jump on let's have a conversation but
while there's comments coming at me on
the comments I kind of ignore them
unless they're the only thing like as
part of the broadcast doesn't work for
me and now that I know that that was
part of the reason I was smoking pot
after nearly right after everyday and my
next learning in that aspect of my life
that when I'm ready to smoke on the day
just basically as soon as possible then
I spend the first hour of that cleaning
so that my house is clean because that's
the other reason I smoke pot for when
it's not for my higher purpose and it's
not calling me it's because I'm either
bored or trying to know him something
now and honestly those feelings feel
very similar that I don't even like I'm
bored and I don't want to feel them them
feeling I'm trying to gnome out so let's
just cut it off and now that I know this
hour is one of those things I'm cutting
off without being realizing for it I can
not do it with that but I also want to
honor it and turn this into something
that calls to me that I'm I am excited
to come on for an hour sometimes I get
off that I'm like white why didn't I say
the thing I was like why don't I use
these hours to actually explain part of
its me just stop saying that I don't
know how to explain the thing and just
try to explain the thing part of it is
me practicing which part of my body I'm
speaking from when I speak from my head
which I often do
and mostly due it's more discombobulated
than when I speak for my heart and my
brain has a Dede my heart doesn't and
there's nothing wrong my brains what
came up for the stuff but to communicate
it I need to be in my in my heart and
stick you for my heart and that is a
hard thing to do for an hour but so part
of me I'm not willing to cancel out
these hours yet
there might be in the next week or two
that I do cancel out the seven days a
week an hour a day I will still do end
date Wednesday solution raising and I
will still do like five-minute videos
that I'm going to like I was putting up
before but not going live every day so
try and maybe put in a five-minute video
every day I'm putting in front of a five
minute video every few days might be
what this goes into unless I can find a
powerful way to use this hour so that we
are moving the project forward I'm
exploring I mean this right now is
basically just my therapy so people open
to public and people listen and I don't
want it to need that I don't think it's
I think I'm past that point where I need
that and not therapy in general but just
like that I need a space to run my mind
for an hour I can just do that I do that
all day every day um stuff that has come
up within the last 24 hours since I came
on yesterday I miss that learning that
for this is will be the third day today
if I clean my house well stoned for my
first hour my house is cleaner I'm less
likely to want to smoke pot it's just
it's good right now I'm good with that
also this morning I had my second part
of my conversation with Raymond on a
protocol not love which is I believe
part of polo chain he's involved with
hello chain
yeah no it's part of all the J okay I'm
going to definitively state that unless
it's proven otherwise which was amazing
it was a great conversation it didn't
happen on Thursday like it was supposed
to that happened today I'm like there's
some reason there's some reason it
wasn't doesn't happen that day and part
of it's possibly that I needed to have
that conversation today after having
this learning over the weekends versus
now I also just before the pandemic hit
there was this other little blip in my
life of a crisis which was this guy that
I followed I'm
like his teaching and he has had him me
to stuff brought against him by multiple
women
he slept with clients he plied them with
alcohol he's the skeezy person I used to
look up to him and now I see him as a
sneezy person and when this first came
out how this woman had posted on her
Facebook group and then someone took
that post and posted it in another
adjacent to this guy group that's the
only one that you can post comments to
without it going through their central
body cuz all of their Facebook groups
they have to approve the posts and so
they're not gonna let you prove posts
that are negative towards the central
figure and dealing with this event that
happens and it's not even event to my
life it's an events and all these other
women's lives and in his life but him
not using his own teachings to deal with
it like he's trying to cover it up he's
not letting any did this like really
crappy apology and then stop people from
even posting that and he's just like not
showing up in the greatest way but the
thing that happened I was kind of out of
the community anyway when it happens I
wasn't paint I had two of his books and
the odd video I would watch of his but
I'd kind of learned what I meant to
learn from him but I would pass other
people to him to learn what I had
learned right like I can't teach you the
stuff he'll be the one to teach you I'm
gonna learn how to let your apple tree
produce apples how do I go how to do all
these things and then you can bring that
back to me create a better world
together I definitely do not push people
towards him it's like he's not he
doesn't even live by it those of us who
learned these techniques from him or
actually surpassed him in the ability to
ever not the point I can't tell him what
your story so when this woman posted
that she had a relationship with this
man for a period of time and then people
were either on her spider his side and
there and then multiple women came
forward but this is the case and he's
left clients he doesn't annotate for two
hours in the morning like he says he
does he's like you know bad-mouthing
clients behind their back he's sleeping
with them eat pies with alcohol just a
gross behavior but when the it had only
come out through through her we hadn't
yet heard his bat apology and it was
three or four days later it was like
right his brother I'm just
I'll cease as the guys name and Kyle
sees his brother wrote on this woman's
page to my comment like I was like right
when we don't have the other side of the
story yet I'm all for getting both sides
of the story but if he's silent and it's
like well it only came out four days ago
like cool your horses I'm like but did
it only come off four days ago this
wasn't an events that happened four days
ago this is an event that's happened
over years how do you preach transparent
our authenticity and truth and then not
expect these women you've asked to not
tell the truth is going to eventually
come out like anyone could see this
coming for and like everyone in the
meeting move men eventually was going to
come out but for this person in
particular can't sleep with client
anyway so his brother was like well you
have to wait for his side of the story
comes about like well that he better get
on that and his brothers seemed to be a
sibling and on his side as most
civilians are but this morning so anyway
I being involved in this group in a very
very adjacent way I got more involved
when this thing was falling apart
because I did a few videos and people
got in contact with me I because they
didn't feel comfortable creating the
group I created the group life after
Kyle sees and they're admitting it I'm
not admitting at all they're like well
this person's safe they're still
involved and this person is and I'm like
I don't know let whoever you want in
this is not about like discrediting him
that isn't about all of my all of our
energy now going to discrediting him but
we do want new people who are going to
be following him to know this is
something that exists when they start
anyway this morning someone posted in
that group that Kyle's brother had
posted a thing basically disowning his
brother saying like we've tried he's
he's destroyed our family sister all
this stuff which is huge as someone who
had just take a step away from my
sibling over the last year in seven
Theme without the world saying she's a
bad person as they are the Kyle anyway
so that just came to light so I'm like
oh that's interesting
oh that's interesting that he's he's
written that and that these little
things keep coming up there's something
very intimately tied with what's
happening with Kyle in all of his
although his followers both those that
are still there and still getting either
don't know what happened know what
happened and are okay with okay enough
with it and then I mean yeah like for
groups people who
aren't with him anymore and don't know
about it I don't care about that group
people who hard with many more know
about this stuff but having a central
figure start some kind of a movement and
then when they fall from grace it falls
from grace because because they have is
a problem having one person I mean he
what he's not the creator of any of the
techniques he's just brought together
this specific group of techniques right
like he's not the only person to
envision to do an visioning work in the
future right like like what he calls
head Legos because he does kind of
pretend he invention it with his friend
I'm like it what she did I mean that can
be authentic but also he didn't everyone
does visually and that's a pretty common
practice but that like just came to like
my learning around my addiction and
figuring that out and figuring out how
do we how do we do these hours since no
one's coming on we're not going to be
figuring out what to do with these hours
I'm just gonna keep showing up for these
hours until something materializes or I
get a very clear message from the
universe this isn't what I'm supposed to
be do it anymore
I'm supposed to not be doing this not
putting the that stress on myself and
then it will something else will emerge
and come out but this morning before
going live about an hour before after my
conversation with Raymond's which was
awesome I someone who joined game B and
when they you joined game B there's like
a welcome message and a lot of people
post under it like yes I'm so-and-so
thank you thank you for the welcome
here's what I'm into and this one person
she's a polymath and I've heard that
word before and I actually never knew
what I meant it's like I thought it was
a degree in math like I thought it was
actually a mathematical thing it's like
polygon yeah it's not it's people who
are what is it a butcher thinking the
definition people who have varying
interests and are good at those very
interests is the general definition so
not just that you have three or four
different interests you're also the top
of those three or four different
interests um I took a quiz and whether
I'm a polymath and I was like I a lot of
the quick like a lot of quizzes a lot of
them I'm like this is a bad quiz like
why I like one of them was
where would you prefer to live and it
was like in the city adjacent to the
city so you can still be in the city or
away from all people and it's like and
then there was a fourth option I wrote
it was I'm like I want to be I don't
like the city I want to be out of the
city but I want other people around I
want to be in like a small community
there's no option for that here and
there was a few that were like that that
were like neither of the two polymath
answers really work it's a combination
of the two so I'll pick this other one
that isn't so I end up getting 50%
polymathics like yeah plus I think I was
polymath before my brain damaged and it
stopped like since I can't put in new
information it kind of stops that but it
was interesting finding this person's
YouTube channel and finding out what a
polymath is and listening to her talk
about I this 15 minute video on like
what are common traits the polymaths
have this one in direct response to
their families and I was like I'm
interested I know my family helped shape
me for better or worse and yeah there's
a lot of stuff in common it's funny
because one of the things that they have
in common that nearly every polymath has
in common is that their parents are very
different from one another and they've
shared traits with both of them like yep
some of the polymaths had very what's
the word focused parenting right that
they were an only child they had a lot
of one-on-one time for their parents to
foster them and then other ones were
part of a larger family who they kind of
had a sibling who they were looking up
to and trying to keep up with that might
be more in alignment with what I what I
was but the back your parents are very
different and yet you're similar to both
of them we have traits and that the one
thing there's with a lot of these traits
it's that you're they eat like that they
either had an older sibling or focused
parenting right that's an either/or in
this case they were like they never had
polymath parents who have the same like
if they're both their parents were
doctors or both of their parents were
lawyers or both of their parents were
artists then it comes from having very
different parents and me in my siblings
um joke all this hi I'm good like our
parents were never meant to be together
they were so opposite they only got
together to have the three of us like
the humor verse was like yes these two
need to match up for 20 years sure are
just to create these three entities and
that we can disperse like my parents
couldn't be more different and at the
same time I have traits of both of them
and we all have traits of both of them
different traits from both of them which
make us very different so I just thought
that was interesting this was like hmm
yep my parents are pretty different if
you can pick a trait the other one has
the opposite one and so if you're like
you can't I can't rebel against both of
my parents because if I'm rebelling
against one I'm mimicking the other and
vice versa
either I've done no none of the Train or
both of the traits and that is actually
what I have in most things is like if
there's a spectrum on both sides of the
spectrum Oh
closing the chasm that my brother had
brought up in the Friday meeting for
together tag and I look to watch some
videos on it and the chasm oh so there's
the early adopters and then like there's
the pros it's in program technology
becoming into the world right there's
like the early adopters in the last part
of the laggards and i'm both of those
i'm both like oh no and don't ever give
me a new phone both of those
simultaneously and not the middle like I
don't think you can be both the focus I
am I am over those that's just yes part
of having two different parents
that they move around frequently which I
moved around a lot as a child I went to
the same junior high in high school like
the same junior high school and the same
high school but I went to seven
different elementary schools in my six
years I had like 15 different teachers
in my six years of elementary like a lot
of moving around it they attribute that
I atribute at to not knowing I had
autism but also yeah moving around and
you need to make new friends you need to
learn new customs even though they were
you know from Edmonton to Ramon's isn't
that big of a difference culturally when
you look at the world but like in our
little life it was a big difference
culturally between a big city Edmonton
in this small little Mormon town but
they that their family generally
appreciated learning that they were
allowed to learn
I would say that definitely applied to
my family my dad's librarian and even
when we were evangelical Christian we
were still allowed to question to some
degree as long as it was within the
biblical framework so it was like you
can be anything you want to be except
for these things and my parents kind of
benign neglect equal because one of the
other things polymaths have in common is
that they're parented their parents let
them pursue their own interests
my parents didn't help us pursue our
interests which is why one of the
questions on the quiz was like do you
have multiple hobbies I'm like I have no
hobbies if I considered a hobby it's
been cut out of my life
it's like who I asked me what I meant to
do is as as a human and nothing else and
which happens to be poly like it happens
to me that I have multiple interests
interests that was also what is your
bookshelf look like I'm like well now
that I can't read but it's very humble
you have books and they keep growing I
was like that actually still applies to
me even though I know I can't read I'll
still be up in the world and be like but
book I want to read it's never gonna
happen it's gonna come sit on your
bookshelf and so I've gotten rid of a
lot of my books that I had but if you
look at even the books behind me they're
very eclectic
they're very a lot of different
different things and these are the ones
I kept after con Mari in my place like
these ones bring me joy there's like
finance ones and self-help ones it wants
to be healthy and spiritual and kid a
lot of kids literature because I happens
to be the genre I like that's fiction
but for nonfiction it's across the
gambit it's like history and and
self-help and and all these things and
before there's part of that that's
innately mine but like I want to learn a
lot and then there's part of that that I
felt society was like in order to be a
full human being you have to know XY and
z and that got taken away because I
can't read and so I can't like if I
can't force all of the information in
and I have to choose what's truly
important to me to learn then it better
be my interest in on society is and so
and at the same time like my special
interest in for autism a lot of people a
lot of people not all of them have a
special interest and my special interest
is very eclectic my special interest is
like what's broken with the world and
how do we fix it
I work and how does other humans work in
response to that like where do I have in
common with other like I'm my special
interest in a very global way like it's
like oh that's how I work and that's new
about me and then also as far as I can
learn about other people it relates to
me like oh I'm not like that how neat
that you're like and oh I'm also like
that I'm very interested in and those
aren't the kind of thing that someone
else writes a book on and you can read
and so although I always had the feeling
that I could learn enough information to
save the world and therefore was putting
that information in I don't know like it
was the society when it wasn't
necessarily I'm interested in this so
therefore I'm gonna learn it and I do
think I don't know there's a way to just
also the way this woman talks about it's
like how to turn your kid into a
polymath as opposed to just what a lot
of the studies out there are it's like
the marshmallow test um it's a famous
study or they put marshmallow in front
of a kid it's like five or six and they
were like okay if you if you still have
this marshmallow here when we come back
we're gonna be gone sometimes they tell
them something we're gonna be gone five
minutes you sell the marshal when you a
night when we come back in five minutes
you get a second marshmallow if you've
eaten this marshmallow you only get that
marshmallow so if they can hear
self-control for five minutes they can
have two marshmallows and they studied
those people for decades and it turns
out if you can not have the marshmallow
right now you're gonna be really
successful in life the data shows they
did the same study years later and
realized that they didn't take
socioeconomic status into it and so it
was actually much more correlated with
your socioeconomic status if you were
poor you generally got like instant
gratification a lot because your parent
yeah like we don't know if we're gonna
money next paycheck so hey let's eat
let's so let's go let's so crazy and buy
a toy
whereas rich people don't do that as
often they're like wait for your
birthday for the toy wait for and so it
was along those lines not actually along
the lines of the individuals ability to
say yes or no that it was actually along
but even if that's not the case
it's
the marshmallow but they're not telling
you is how to get a five or six year old
not to eat a marshmallow they're just
like your set up for the rest of your
life to be a success or a failure based
on whether or not you meet a marshmallow
in your five that's not actually telling
you how to be more successful it's the
same it's like poly mapping like some
people are probably not
some people have multiple interests some
of those people with multiple interests
are going to be damn good all of those
interests and those people in are
pulling up that doesn't mean you can
actually turn your kid into one it just
means that like like I think the best
way the world can get more quality box
if you want that is to allow each child
to be unique and follow their own
interests and enough of those people who
follow their interests are both gonna
have you're gonna have people who
specialize in one interest and awesome
you're gonna people specialize in
multiple interests and other people who
specialize in multiple and singular
you're gonna have people who are the 1%
and people who follow the way along the
spectrum right we're the top 1% and the
bottom 1% we're really suck to be either
a polymath or individual and really
interested but shitty at learning
everything but then there's people who
are the opposite who their interest in
multiple things but they're really good
at learning and they're able that was me
before pretty damaged as I was able to
learn more things you don't even know
how smart you are until it's taken away
and so I don't know if I'm a polymath as
with most things like interesting am i
one would take the quiz and I got 50%
which says no but the quiz was 70
questions and kind of broken no no I
feel I need this chair closer so again I
don't know what this hour is supposed to
look like about this particular hour but
going forward but I know it's not
supposed to look like this it's not
supposed to look like me broadcasting
into the ether so that's what it's gonna
look like hurtling until I can figure it
either what it looks like or let it go
when I get the clear definitive because
I did believe it when I got the Epiphany
the other day the reason I'm smoking pot
during the day is at this hour there's
something about this hour that's
stressful for me because I don't feel
stress right now but it's like it takes
more spoons than doing something else
for an hour than having a conversation
like after my conversation with Raymond
I'm energized
it gives me more energy than it takes
these hours are not that these hours
take more energy than they give me
because it's broadcast and not a
conversation and I'm better with a
conversation so how does shift how to
shift it so that it's not taking my
energy and leaving me depleted at the
end is doing this this is my commitment
when I bought that epiphany I was like
so I can just get like oh the bow right
I can just like not show up anymore and
not do them and I'll do it by a minute
video every looks like one you have to
acknowledge that and come on and say it
but more than that no that's not not to
cut and sever that and then start
something new that there is something
that there's a reason I started doing
these and a reason we're doing it even
if it's just the solution raising on
once it's even if the life coaching
brings in one person from Friday like
there's something about and I'm
listening I'm doing it I'm here but it's
also not where I wanted it to be right
there aren't 15 people watching there
are 20 people watch you are not having a
as much of an interaction and that's
what I'm looking for is an interaction
so that's both being tied to an outcome
that I need it to look a certain way is
the broken piece in and of itself that
this just is what it is well it's well
it's on but there's also a truth there
that I do want to have one of the
interaction that if this is constantly
broadcast there's a reason it's
broadcast cuz broadcast is game a it's
what brings people in it's what does
that and yet I don't do it well supposin
is definitely gonna bring the people in
whereas the conversations I have I don't
try to make them good if you watch my
conversation with Raven this morning I'm
not doing it for you I'm not doing it
for the audience right I'm not doing it
so you get more information I love duck
protocol protocol that love I'm doing it
so I get more information on protocol
about love like I am curious and I want
to know what it is and it ends up being
fairly okay I was able to have those
conversations and edit them I could make
a podcast and maybe be successful
because it doesn't there's like what I'm
doing to learn my life and to produce my
apples and there's what society says is
is valuable and worthy of money and time
and they aren't necessarily in alignment
right now and that's okay
that game a isn't gonna provide for me
it's all gonna be game B I'm game B all
the way to the point where I push game a
away and other people who are able to
play in game a game B are going to be
more successful in both of them because
of that but we need both just like
polymath like we need people who are
interested in a broad array of topics at
whatever level they they can master that
at and people who are really
concentrated on one one isn't good in
one bad we need people doing what their
best self is and that's where like
trading my kid to be a polymath it's a
little ridiculous partly because it
literally is they involve the advice to
have if you wanted to call you math is a
little bit of benign benign neglect like
let your kid follow what they want to
follow and don't cut off their interests
let them be interested including an
adulthood right cuz that was another
thing get a lot of polygons
I mean childhood they were allowed to
have multiple interests in an adult but
it was like great now grow up and pick
something this is beep it needs
something I don't want to be a doctor I
don't want to be a lawyer I want to know
a lot about a little wonder a lot about
a lot it's really what a probably not
this it's like I for me anyway if I'm
any kind of what it was I just want all
the information I want all the knowledge
I've I'm curious about it and there were
some pieces that I wasn't gonna
naturally fill in because they weren't
my curiosity and I knew I had to fill
those in but in so trying to push it and
I well actually that didn't break my
brain my brain broke on different
reasons and I wasn't able to cram
information which was I think exactly it
was and that like you can't like you
look back like there's all of these
studies on like what smart people are
right ok if you swear more more smart
people swear more smart people I don't
know I'm gonna like sleep lay to wake up
earlier something right that there's
some anyer like it's fun but doesn't
mean if you go to bed early wake up late
that you're gonna be smart it doesn't
mean if you start swearing you're gonna
be smart it just means that like those
things correlate right and so that's the
difference between like statistics and
real life like there's a lot of
statistics that say single moms we
produced the criminals of the world us
and yet it my kid is 99% not going to be
a criminal because it's not like overall
not a great thing to do to be a single
parent cuz your kids not gonna have two
parents not gonna have but like if
however much energy you have however
much of your life you have you focus on
your child and and help them figure out
what makes them happy that's the key
like it's not actually having only one
parent it's like how present was your
parent how much do you feel like they
loved you for you and whatever you know
you're gonna undo your trauma your
goodies they're gonna recreate or undo
your trauma from your childhood but
you're probably gonna recreate new
trauma like me and my siblings
experienced similar childhoods at the
same time our response to those
childhoods were very different my
response to my child that was that I did
wasn't able to feel emotion and so I cut
that piece of me off and now I'm
learning an emotion from my child and
what I knew I could do for her was allow
her to express her emotion and in so
doing healed a piece of myself in that
and she gets to like being a Moute
emotive human being and I don't my point
of that was that's not my sister's or
slots to her childhood it's like no it's
like our parents didn't give us
structure and discipline and so we have
to give structure and discipline and I'm
like that's I don't feel structure and
discipline more lacking for my life my
brother also feels that same way that he
wants to he doesn't have kids yet but
then he wants to give them discipline
like he feels like he should even put in
martial arts as a kid so he's gonna put
his kid martial arts right I I'm like
yes I wish I would have had more hobbies
as a kid but the reason I didn't is
because I felt that it was a financial
strain on our family and my sister
pushed for them um my kid I want her to
follow her own interest I don't want her
to have like my sisters like right if
they get into ballet like ballet forever
like no well-balanced there's a balance
mines probably way too far the other way
like gonna swim I if I pay money for the
classes I want you to finish them and I
won't sign what for the next set but um
there is a respect of the human being
that's like no I thought I wanted these
things and now I don't anymore I don't
care if you paid for them it's not worth
the hour of my time I don't want to do
this anymore and I allow my kids do that
time which I can guarantee you my sister
wouldn't and it's not one's good and
ones bad it's just like the response to
our childhood she was right I didn't get
put in any lessons if I did I would have
carried me through I'm like no actually
you got put in a few and then you didn't
carry it through so then what's the
point financially is that we didn't get
put in them and I didn't I had way more
guilts asking for what I wanted didn't
need it then she did she was the older
child my brother was the youngest and he
didn't have an issue you just had to
figure out how to get it done anyway
that was my learning from this morning
was just discovering what a polymath was
and that I might be one I send it to you
yeah that's um respond that's all that's
really matter because everyone can see
on YouTube we're not on periscope today
yeah I made him public although I didn't
quite okay with Ramon's there's a
message just before like going all that
was like right it's like we're both
transparent we said in the beginning I'm
like the chance of us not being
transparent maybe we'll say something
that we want so if he wants to take it
down I'll take it down but then it'll be
unlisted yours
I also okay it if you saw the message
yes he's totally downs talking with you
it's funny because at the end of our
conversation there's what he's doing
which is very in alignment with what
everyone's doing would he be including
you and then there's also like his thing
is very particular and it's very in the
lineman with your values and burying
alignment with Kylie's Commons and I
don't know I don't know what I'm doing
the only a big sister but it's also like
the conversation and the system how can
we create something and what does that
look like I just I love talking to
people who have I have these big ideas
and if thought have thought about gaming
game be and like what that means to them
and how we get there both the like game
and what's broken about it and most of
us can agree on that and there's like
what is game be and that isn't
necessarily an agreement but it's enough
and agreement we can move towards it and
then there's like what step do we take
that it's definitely a good agreement
but it's the best that it's not an
agreement because like some people are
taking steps with the values and some
people are taking steps with the
protocol and some people are taking
steps with the governance and all those
people thinking that's the most
important thing all of us are getting
like that a little bit and it doesn't
feel like that because all of them rooms
are in
see all of them are in there like like
protocol that lob is a lot further on
than together tech for sure and so there
are ways you can actually work through
this as a corporation to incorporate in
this way together text not text like how
do we get involved good question come
and have it come and get involved and
decide how you get involved like it's a
little bit fly by reseda my pants till
it falls apart and then we fix it and
then we fly by the seat of our pants
still falls apart we fix it that is what
we're doing like that is dealing with a
yeah human human nature as it as it
unfolds in the moment that's we're right
the picture I picture the butterfly is
from the well it's gonna bug me but my
house is cleaner than it has been since
I no clean for an hour or what I first
mode bought the morning hello Matt nice
to see you
see this is very like I actually know
both abuse we can have like an actual
conversation when rant when strangers
aren't chatting I'm like I don't even
which is what yeah these these hours are
supposed to become more of is how do we
interact you know how do we interact in
a way that works for me
but not really because the way that
works for me and doesn't take my
interviews actually gonna be a more
powerful way for this project
whatever this project is to show up in
the world and just sitting with that
that I don't I don't want to be
broadcasting to the ether it takes my
energy it doesn't give it back to me it
takes more energy than it gives unlike
my conversation with Raymond's unlike
having the car having the idea cafes and
the like the IDI cafe it's funny because
I'm still like I'm almost ready for that
to be off my plate I'm really enjoying
the five questions right now yes that
but every time I schedule one I'm like
whatever if no one shows up no one shows
up we won't have it and then like Eric
and Shiloh show up and we have it and
I'm like that was awesome I'm so glad
you did it I don't necessarily feel that
way about these hours like I'm like did
it check that box off but it doesn't
feel like I'm enjoying it and the world
isn't
and that's okay because it's getting
towards there I do feel like the
solution Racing's without even though no
one want you actually less people watch
the solution it's basically because
they're participated in them but they're
enjoyable to be part of and that's the
difference between like broadcasting be
central is what we're creating is it for
broadcast right the together tech board
meetings the roundtables aren't for
although they are transparently public
you can watch them if you want they're
not there to be watched right they're
not there for people to sit through the
ten hours a week of i spending
conversation they're there so that to
hopefully inspire other people to be
part of conversation to do the d central
right I don't want five of us to come
together into a solution raise e and the
rest of the world to listen and invoke
what we came up with hello yeah actually
I'll sign up for that more I want them
to participate in solution raising I
want I want hundreds thousands of people
participating and we get the best
solution and we vote how much one is is
going to be the most powerful and and
create it I also I put together on
Sundays I put together the list of all
of the videos that are scheduled in
advance and there's about five or six of
them there's seven this week there's a
TA cafe solution raising the coaching
that I do on Fridays the two together
tech ones and then I have a sixth one
another solution raising on mapping gave
me this week so there's six of them and
then the morning ones two of which I
just talked it was five other morning
ones so eleven until it's eleven
broadcasts at least that's my
conversation with Raymond not the point
oh the in doing that it took like two
hours yesterday but I did the blurbs
first of the next Sunday's it'll be a
lot faster I'm putting it on the NAP
tool but that's like the closest I've
come like these these things in the
morning although they're hard and they
take more energy out of me I'm still
doing them because I know that I'm
getting something and there's something
about what is unfolding the universe
that is happening through me to be these
that I'm just gonna surrender it do them
until I'm told not to but there's my
point another piece of that there's
another piece of that this you've gotten
to be either
yes they creating something for broad
for not for broadcast when all of social
media and game is designed for broadcast
it's both people don't even know they're
looking for not broadcast I'm not
looking to be a YouTube star I'm looking
to like get a community right how
conversations create the social media
that actually changes the world and
other people are doing that so I don't
actually need to do that but that we
need that don't you definitely need
social media that is designed for real
conversation and real decision-making
and things that that we that are
actually generative and figuring out
this snaps together
agreeing that out I was like what did
the good thing last night
it took two hours and every other week
it'll take less and less because I did
the blurbs already some of which won't
be there next this is the last week I'm
doing coaching on Friday and I think I'm
gonna post in one of the teal Swann
pages to find someone to actually coach
on camera because it's it's kind of cool
it's called brain walk solutions
I enjoy it every time I do it get like a
mineral and a plants and animal then you
get to decode with those things mean the
answer question and if no one's here my
question is going to be how do we make
this this our more powerful like just
shut up and do it as with the universe
console he says it's not your job left
of it watched Elizabeth Gilbert on
Russell Brandt yesterday morning before
I came on and her like arguing with her
guides and being like if you wanted me
to be a better writer you should have
given me better writing talents yes
exactly awesome at I'd love you joined
in on the live straightens at some point
I'm which is also I totally acknowledge
because of Mike electic gothic mix of
like Wednesdays we do solution Tracy
it's Friday at you life coaching Sundays
I tell a random story for an hour about
myself like there isn't really besides
me a theme that runs through and so if
someone comes on a Monday and they comes
on a Friday they're completely different
and at the same time yeah yours should
be too or not depends if you're a
polymath or not like you have many
interests or one interest because thread
and go with it
pick a YouTube topic a channel
like yeah a theme a theme to your
YouTube channel and stick with it
yeah really totally want to do that it's
working just by the way it is kind of it
could work better but as its unfolding
it's working the best way it's supposed
to and that I also need to realize when
to get off of these which I have been
the last few days I've gotten off around
now or 40-minute mark because if no
one's not here with me and I just am
like let's just continue talking for an
hour that is it becomes my therapy
session for an hour
what's arising in my subconscious but it
is I guess I that is what these hours
are and I don't need to be an hour it's
just me showcasing my journey and that
is in the last 24 hours with me doing
next to nothing both the Kyle sees his
brother thing the polymath talking to
Raymond Shiloh showing up for this part
like there's just all these little
things that happen that add together to
be like wow that was really profound 24
hours cool cool last like Kevin coming
out against Kyle starting acknowledging
my pot addiction and which I acknowledge
constantly but knowing that okay the
clean house and smoking pot thing seems
to be working and it's seen I'm like
that's not getting rid of pot and it's
smoking it even earlier in the day but
because it's cleaning while doing it my
house is cleaner then I have less of an
urge to smoke the box but it works in a
weird way where I'm not figuring it out
I'm just allowing it to be and
acknowledging that oh one of the reasons
I was having trouble not smoking pot
today it was because in between these
hours and now that I know that that has
less power in my life over me like it's
not like I now need to cut these out or
not do that now but I'm aware about it
it's less likely for that to happen I'm
like oh I can just meditate for half an
hour after this which I'm totally not
gonna do I smell pot to clean my house
but I could I could just spend a day and
and I'm very close to be near the end of
my addiction cycle of needing to cut it
out completely and once my house is
clean actually my house is clean I don't
know if I get there we're gonna see it's
like a whole other facet of my addiction
in my life that I'm figuring out is it's
interesting and if I'm in it and I'm not
judging it and I know I'll get a lot out
of it
whereas if I'm judging it it's pretty
easy to be judgmental oh so once you've
on at 10 o'clock in the morning and
clean till 11:00 yeah it's also not even
close to the worst thing that happens in
the world and that is like there's so
much in life that we pretend as
important and isn't like what we wear
what we look like isn't actually
important yet it's deeply important
right it's how you get your jobs it's
how you get your friends and your
partnership and it doesn't actually
impact who you are if you fashion is
important to you it's important to you
it's not discounting anything but it's
needing everyone to look presentable all
the time it's like it's not really
important is it really important people
for shaving their legs right now her
friends are like do I need to shave my
legs like you never needed to shave your
legs that was never a thing you need to
do you like if you feel your butt right
now people at home with nobody you mean
them even if they're not on zoom' there
are people who are realizing like my
kids sometimes how important fashion is
to them they want to be trust out to the
nines there's like a periscope person I
follow on periscope who's a drag queen
and he gets ready to go to his brunches
on Sundays and as far as I know he's
still getting ready to go even though
he's not going because he's like this is
I enjoy putting on the makeup I enjoy
getting ready in the outfit he will
still be becoming it her right like that
is still part of who he is because even
if without the show it's his deepest
calling to be to be her and drag queens
are confusing their points but having me
like I'm other people I already knew
fashion wasn't a big thing for me
because I've been at home by myself for
so long that I'm like I'm only got to
get out of my pajamas to go visit you
how high of a level do we need we need
you to be has an importance of my life
for me to feel the need to dress up in
any way and anyway there's people who
are staying at home for we're like oh I
don't have to wear makeup I don't wear a
bra can we not do that when we return
can we like stop wearing makeup and stop
rainberge yes yes you can just stop just
don't do it anymore
it's that easy and the more of us do
that the more there's nothing wrong with
wearing makeup everyone should be
allowed to wear makeup my seven-year-old
this allows for me
just somewhat ironic cuz I was like I
was looking for reasons not to let her
and nothing worked
besides society's expectations that
seven-year old stone like that was my
reasoning for her not needing to do it
it was like but she said that you can't
let seven-year-old to her makeup that's
not I'm like why cuz I'm putting that on
her because Society says seven-year-olds
kind if she wants to put makeup on her
face especially when her mother doesn't
and I had to go up and buy it because I
don't have it it's not just mimicking me
okay yeah that's that so there's days
she puts her she puts a dress on and
puts her hair up and puts makeup on
while we're staying at home and her
stays where she's like not out of the
pajamas all day both fell in in the same
human being I have no point want to get
dressed up oh here like a shower I like
to shower my shower was broken this week
and that showed me how important showers
are and I knew that because I get I get
can I get stoned one of the things I do
is have a shower it's like where I have
epiphanies and when I have an epiphany
what I then do I'm without that stuff
it's hard to cut that out and still have
them the next step it's like oh what do
I do now what do I do
yeah I mean I haven't heard abroad like
basically years when I realized they
didn't do anything and it was just I had
more back pain with them than without I
was like done but society still is not
okay with it society looks like I'm
trying to I don't know make a point like
no my point is that I don't need to burn
her bra that's the point that's the
whole point if he doesn't I don't all
right this we have the same of science-y
and and like I shaved my legs but I want
them shaved I look Louis women with a
fully hairy legs and be like right cuz I
have a body and a mammal and it has hair
on it and then there's other times where
I'm like I just clean my sheets I want
smooth legs it has nothing to do with
anyone else but this time alone like one
of the things I like to ask is would you
do this on a deserted island right like
what would your profession be on a
deserted island do you what kind of
human being are you when you're alone
right that is not everyone has to show
up in the world like that but if you you
at least need to know you show up
differently when you're alone than with
you when you're with other people and
what that costs you cuz that's what I
had to learn is how much masking to
society cost me precious
energy that I don't have enough of and
so when as I learn how I'm asking in
stock masking or accept it I know I
laugh is masking and I giggle and I
laugh at everything
I can't unmask that I can't turn that
off so there's no it just happens if I
try to then that's a new mask they put
on top of the old mask but I know it's
an ask like I know that it's both
there's a truth there and then there's
also like I do when I'm uncomfortable
when I'm anxious and it's just
everything's hilarious all at the time
at fifteen different layers that I can't
explain so it's like a truth and also a
wonder what life would be like if I
wasn't doing that I don't know but
there's other things with masking that
I'm like oh I was only doing that
because I thought I was supposed to like
one of it's not really masking might be
even more under funny but um worried
about every everything you say and every
thing you do every verb you do what
impact that has on other people and how
they're perceiving it and what that
means about them what that means about
me and how do can I it's like that's way
too much energy to put into every
interactions like if I go out of the
house and I wear this what are they
going to think and then if I say this
what are they gonna think and then they
are gonna say this and I'm gonna think
it's like that's way too much energy so
now although it's not what society I'm
like if I truly offend you tell me I'm
not going to assume I'm gonna offend you
and in so doing I'm gonna offend you
because I'm no longer going to allow
myself to think about the 15 things that
could offend you and and worry about
your emotional needs and whether you're
being looked after before I say a thing
I'm just gonna say a thing and if it
really was offensive you're gonna need
to tell me cuz why is it on me not to be
offensive and not on you to not tell me
that I'm being offensive and in and it's
part of personality to constantly think
about the 15 different interactions and
whether this is gonna hurt you so I can
only let it go so much but in letting it
go is like oh okay I don't need to be
constantly vigilant I'm not responsible
for everybody's emotions all of the time
even when I have even when what I did is
the thing that hurt them it's actually
not on me am i living for my highest
calling am I am i trying to do my best I
might show up shitty sometimes
that in and of itself is also needed and
important we can't all be perfect all
the time and so how do we show up when
we run less than perfect selves and how
do we interact each other in that way
and how do we love it and it is coming
together which is I think my I'm getting
this yes right now that part of my
reason for starting possibility the
times I'm making going live is that's
what I wanted to give the world is hope
like I'm a realist I know all the
that's wrong with the planet it's my
special interest if I am a polymath it's
my polymath I know the environmental
costs I know the social costs I know
that like there's a lot of going on
that's wrong I've also talked about it
since I was a small child because my
special interest into the annoyance of
all of my friends and family like why
aren't you recycling okay
why are you by Nike why are you
boycotting them why aren't you now that
I've matured I can see that Nike wasn't
really the problem it's four of the
economic system
are there any sneakers that you can buy
that are ethical the finding from that
place of realism not pessimism and
optimism I can see the beauty on this
planet and the evil and I know that we
can feed the beauty and sense and truly
shine light on and and minimize the evil
and in so doing we create a better world
and because I have access to that world
in my head it's like I want to offer
that to the world because the world is
seriously lacking and hope right now
they're seriously lack it's like pretend
like the sky I shouldn't be disparaging
of other youtubers but he's super
popular and I think I don't like his
content every time something comes up on
my feet I'm like this is the biggest
 it's like every every video he
put a lot of stock into and they have
millions this is Damian I don't know
he's full own um I know his face right
but I can't it's it's always like some
feel-good ease story that isn't really
feel goodie it's like he was mean to her
and didn't know she was his boss okay
the problem is that you're mean to her
not that she's rich and comes back later
to just on you like like and that's
every story it's like the ugly duckling
story which is a horrible story it's
like no the duckling was never ugly like
it's you just didn't know it was a swan
right it's this is not anyway
j-jane and something or others I think
the guys name there's a really popular
channel because it's feel good to be I'm
like this doesn't feel good though none
of these stories are great all of these
stories are like a weird moral that you
know right the beginning because he's
told you in the thing like there's one
where someone actually comes and sees
him at a talk and there is this large
woman that he sits on the aisle and puts
a seat next to her and nobody sits with
her and nobody sits with her and finally
this woman comes and it's the only seat
left and she sits there and she's a
bitch to her and then it's hurtin she's
only there cuz she finds and here's this
guy gives out money in her in his
sessions and then she's being a bitch to
this to this larger woman and this guy
behind her is like oh I will switch
seats with you so he switches seats with
her and they're both sitting there and
then it turns out that they did they
give $10,000 away and it's of course the
seat right there so the woman's like
wait that was my see you not entitled to
that and he's like I asked this woman to
come and be here as a larger woman so
because we knew no one would sit next to
her and they'd be the person who sat
next to her was gonna get $10,000 that's
just a shitty lesson all around it's
like that you found someone who's large
and then side of someone next door
knowing no one was gonna sit next to her
shitty that you then pay that person for
being a tiny bit of a good human being
even $10,000 so then everyone else is
gonna want to do that next time they're
at your place but not out of actually
wanting to sit next to that person and
realizing they're an important
contributing member of society but
because they think maybe I look at the
10,000 maybe there was 10,000 here again
it's like it's not a really good lesson
it's not this that you I don't know like
it's just it's I feel bad for the woman
having been asked to sit there like it's
not a it just not feel good not really
it's like they try to make it feel good
that's not my point let me talk about
this person that we have I don't
remember my point was besides just being
annoyed that he has flowers why does the
other million people watching this
shitty shitty content and why do I keep
watching it as well look at the he
does well there's a lot of like his
there's ones that come out of Asia all
the time and they're got subtitles and
stuff on them and they also were pretty
bad you bought someone a cake when you
were a little kid they came back we're
really rich later and helped you out
it's like that's
the reason to help someone it's like
what seems GN so and that stop that
someone else from the Kyle sees group
I'm gonna just even say oh whatever
I'll find him is he's on scan millions
of followers but that mean - oh that
that that's not hope to me hope isn't
that's like fake pretend spirituality
positivity just invoke spirit and then
and then life will become by a happy
it's like actually life is this way you
can't just ignore the slavery happens
and there's this inequality wealth which
is a part of my dua sisters folly notice
she's like they just don't mention that
I have more money than other people just
don't mention I'm entitled to everything
I have I'm like but really why don't you
get the money and there I was cleaning
and somebody who works four times as
hard doesn't like how hard do you really
work you're constantly busy how
effective are you I'm the opposite I'm
like I only do this founder time but I'm
very effective and I'm not touching any
of the other stuff that I'm not
effective that she's yeah sure I'll take
on ten thousand people and then figure
out how do you after and there's both
needed we need everything but game a
only works for a very select group of
people game B I think has to work for
the vast majority of people meaning we
have to honor all of the different
spectrums and variants inability all the
different abilities including there's
gonna be some people who are poly ops
they're really good at many things and
we need them when you people are really
good at one thing and we also need the
people who are the opposite of that who
are shitty at everything you're really
gonna get those people and her shitty at
the vast majority of things but good at
one thing like we need the diversity of
us you want to come together and that
hope the hope of what happens when we
come together what we can actually
create together is what I'm hoping to
give during these hours and yet I
definitely follow into those and give
you like the negative side which is
enough there's enough of that in the
world but also then there's the positive
is like ignore the negative and the
positive will happen but I then feel I
have to no no then explain to me how
being grateful in life makes slavery go
away
it doesn't it only makes slavery go away
if you're conscious of it and are
grateful like because if I'm grateful
for what I have then I can pay a little
more for it and have it not be my
slavery if I'm aware both options exist
but having that hope is what I want to
give to the world
I'd like what we can truly make when we
come together and act in any kind of
anti rivalries way and that was the
great conversation with Freeman this
morning about interest and transparency
and needing the anti virus like Oni it
is a society when were being rabble
remember not being without making it
wrong to rival risk like yes exactly
let's do that because if we can focus
our rivalry in a way that benefits all
of us and we can focus our anti rivalry
our ability to realize the more benefit
people have the more benefit the more
they can benefit us right if we are
helping people not be living in lack of
resources not living in poverty you're
not living in lack of like being lonely
and not having connection if we can
offer people oslo's pyramid of needs
hopefully all the way up then we get
their best self we get all of the
ingenuity they put into the into the
pile because we're all living off the
ingenuity and then we get to live at a
higher state and we get to give it back
and if it's optional if people get to
choose whether their ingenuity goes into
that that that pool then we create an
amazing pool of ingenuity and it starts
to prove itself as people come together
and say yes I want to give for the
common good even if I'm also giving for
my own good elsewhere as that grows it
proves itself it shows that oh and
people feel like they're not going to
starve to death they're able to show up
and invent things able to show up and
create and then we get that creation so
that's what we're doing with the
solution raising is showcasing what
could be possible at ten thousand people
in a hundred thousand dollars and then
we're working through the process to
figure out okay great how can we find
ten thousand people and how can we
actually work through creating something
with ten thousand people in a way that's
meaningful to a random 10,000 people
right how many of those 10,000 want to
be involved in what level and how can we
get them involved in that level and how
can we
and how can we make this process
enjoyable for the people that are
involved and have the outcome the
product the system be something that is
powerful and that is what we can create
together that we're never going to be
able to create in this current
competitive system where if you win I
lose and if you win and you're even
wanting me to win I'm not going to trust
you because of this whole win-lose thing
that's everywhere else and how do I know
you're actually in it for win-win it's
by coming together showing our cards and
say it like we're what can we play here
it's not going to be winner loser what
game can we create that is a cooperative
game how can we create with 10,000
people because 10,000 people creating
something that is social media that
actually helps us eat better live better
connect more is gonna have a much higher
impact than any any so glad you're back
I'm about to jump off confort we're on
for the hour but hey if you want to come
on on camera and have a conversation
about why you think I'm a bottom down
for that you have a minute to jump on
the description in the aduke Joe that
finding that offering that hope is what
these hours were supposed to be about
and I don't think I am doing that I'm
doing the best that I can and yet
there's something else here something
else that could be happening during
these hours that involves not at being
broadcast not it being soapbox broadcast
other people that it is interactive and
it is us creating it together and what
that looks like and I'm surrendering to
that I don't know but I'm going to
continually show up for these hours and
continually to live in that space of
this is happening for a reason until I'm
told not to do it and then I'll let it
go fully I was almost there when I got
the Epiphany and there's something
that's gonna happen here and I don't
know what it is and that is what I want
it to be though I want it to be to give
the world hope to see that if you watch
the solution raisins if people come
together they can create actual tangible
solutions that we could create right now
it's not about constantly looking for
what's wrong and broke in and hoping
someone else fixes it
how can you actually empower ourselves
to fix it how can we make sure even
without a job we're taking care
how could we make sure that whatever it
is in the world that's causing us this
negative emotion that how much of it is
under our control and how much can we
can we solve it together and then
solving it get together and thatís one
of the questions I don't quite know I'm
just going to end to end it here cuz cuz
you know get into a nut longer that I
have time for but I'm gonna ask a
question in game be probably talking
about it tomorrow all right