hello and welcome to the question and
answer it's a great pleasure to be here
again as usual we're going to tackle
questions first from patreon supporters
and then some questions that have been
tweeted and if we have a chance on some
remaining questions that are live so
let's get right to it because these
questions are always very good questions
and I want to try and get as many in as
possible because I think they're usually
beneficial for a wide variety of might
number of people well the first question
there's one second
we're going to start typing with your PC
yeah
I could say something here I'm good you
guys hear me if somebody please respond
we're just think there might be some
audio problems
thank you guys appreciate it we just had
a bit of a glitch there okay so thank
you very much it's great pleasure to see
you all
let's let's begin so the first question
is from Sergey Mac Makar Ken and he's a
patron and the question is could you
provide a definition of some example on
some examples of what it's propositional
perspectival and participatory knowledge
I'll also throw in the fourth procedural
I think I guess then this review goes on
to say I think I understand what our
first two but want to make sure in case
you have done that already in one of
your first videos on the me crisis that
affected me to it I started watching the
meeting crisis Series somewhere in the
middle so I might have missed something
that's fine I should mention that I was
just being interviewed by Ali from rebel
wisdom this morning and the whole video
is basically about the four kinds of
knowing and that's going to come out at
some point but let's let's address this
question right now so this is a taxonomy
and of course taxon these are true or
false they're they're effective or not
how well do they explicate how well do
they integrate how what would the afford
explanation an integrated set of
phenomena in a systematic and useful
manner so then what thereat the form of
our knowing that we're all familiar with
and I call it knowing because I want to
emphasize the process the cognitive
process as opposed to the resulting
product so we're very familiar with with
propositional knowing this is the
knowing you have by believing that some
proposition is the case like I believe
that a cat is a mammal and that could be
true or false
and so what I acquire when I am applying
propositional knowledge is I acquire
presumably well-justified sets of
beliefs
and I get a conviction from that I could
get convinced about it so I get
conviction about the truth of my beliefs
and that's done nationally and
systematically we call that a theory I'm
using theory the way it's used in
science not the way it's used in
everyday discourse and so the sense of
realness that goes with propositional
knowledge is that sense of conviction in
the truth of the proposition for the
first philosophers who spilled a lot of
ink I'm trying to figure out what that
is and I'm not going to go into that all
I need now is to get clear what the
referent is I'm not trying to offer a
theory of what truth is or some such
thing
next is procedural knowing this is
knowing how to do something this is
knowing how to catch a ball how to ride
a bike how to walk to the street on the
street to the corner store and so the
these are things that are not a matter
of belief now of course you're you're
exercising beliefs while you're doing
these things we're making an analytic
distinction here I'm not claiming that
it's ever the case that is one kind of
knowingness of operation this is an
analytic taxonomy but in addition to all
your beliefs you have to know how to
catch a ball which is very different
from all the beliefs you might have
about Falls and all the beliefs you
might even have a ball catching that's
actually know how to board innate and
move your mind and body in such a way
that you catch a ball and so what
results from that is not a theory
getting a sense of empowerment you're
getting a sense of power the sense of
being connected to reality isn't a
conviction in the truth of a proposition
its it is the sense that your skill is
empowering you in an efficacious manner
with respect to the world and Allah and
it is the thing our culture has really
emphasized and perhaps fetishized
propositional knowing perhaps because a
lot of the professional knows our
academics and theoretical knowledge is
what they spend their time on I'm guilty
of such a sin as well but most of your
cognitive agency is actually carried by
your procedural knowing knowing how to
get out of it move around and move
objects and interact with the world
that's like what's actually turning out
to be
now very hard to give to artificial
intelligence so that's your procedural
knowledge what's your perspective on
knowing well if you perspectival knowing
is the knowing that's not had by like
having some beliefs or skills it's by
having a particular state of
consciousness and so this is knowing
what it's like to be sober this is
knowing what it's like to be here now in
a particular way so when I'm sober
another way of an object by nine days
it's more adverbial I know how I know
what how it's what it's like to be here
now in this particular way so it gives
you your sense of here nowness it's your
salience landscaping how how what how
things are being foregrounded a salient
background and the less salient the
things that are foregrounded are
constantly differing and shifting
shifting and how they're saying it to
you so this is knowing what it's like to
be here now in a particular state of
mind and we wrap that all into this
somewhat nebulous word it's obviously a
metaphor of a perspective what
perspective gives you with the salience
landscape and what perspective of
knowing gives you it gives you your
situational awareness it gives you a
sense of how you are here now so that
you can learn and apply your skills so
participatory knowing participatory
knowing is the knowing in which your
knowledge of yourself and the knowledge
of the and the knowing of the knowing of
yourself and the knowing of the object
of your knowing are deeply intermeshed
at a very foundational level so a good
way to think of participatory knowing is
to think about sort of Co determining
co-inhabitants so how are you inhabit in
your mind and body such that you have a
particular self so you know a
perspective of knowing is done with
states of consciousness and procedural
knowing is done with skills and
propositional knowing is there the
sentence is more participatory knowing
is done with the structure of yourself
so how are you inhabiting your mind body
and how is that affording you inhabiting
the world so that
you get a particular structure of agency
and a particular structure a way in
which the world is setting itself
disclosing itself to you as an arena is
what I should say so what you get with
participatory exponential move if you
can be in the hacking mode in which the
way the agency you're assuming is the
agency of a consumer who is trying to
control and they're relating to the
world in terms of categorical identity
and they're trying to solve problems in
order to get control of concern things
but you may be in the meeting mode
you're not trying to solve satisfy your
common needs you might be in the being
mode in which you're trying to sell
sighs my being needs needs that are met
through going undergoing developmental
transformation you need to be honest you
need to be maturity to be in love and in
that case you're not treating the world
in sort of an ayat' categorical fashion
you tend to enter into AI thou
relationships where you're trying to not
control and manipulate but to make
meaning and and to create meaning
structures and so the participatory
knowing goes deep into the way in which
your your organism your your
psychological biological organism and
the environment are fitted together
course biologically in kind of a mesh
and then culturally with the world is
shaped and you are shaped so they fitted
so they fit together and that fitted
together this in which you like are
inhabiting your mind body in a certain
way and then you inhabiting the world in
a certain way they are Co structuring
each other and filled eternity CH other
and so this is of course what you feel
is lacking when you experience culture
shock or when you may experience a kind
of loneliness is you're you're far from
home sir well participate Norman gives
you that fundamental attunement let me
try and give you now as I did with the
other ones some concrete examples but
the problem with participation one
knowing is because it's so primordial
the examples tend to be sort of very
philosophical because we're going into
the deep connection between how you
have at the body and the kind of
constraints on your ontology now this is
an example from toads book on on
embodiment very important book both body
and world so it has to do with the
philosopher David Hume the famous
sceptic and what toads points out is if
you look if you look behind Humes
epistemological arguments well yes you
have to pay attention to the perspective
on rule and ultimately the participatory
knowing that he's engaging it so Hume is
relating to the world as if he was as if
he was static and on moving and just
observing so what would the world be
like if I don't move and I'm just a
spectator if I'm an unmoving
non-interacting spectator well the thing
is if you inhabit your body in that
purely sedentary frozen fashion like you
do not get a sense of your continuity
through time and space you do not get a
sense of causation you do not get a
sense of the interpenetration of the
past into the present in the future so
what you find is Humes ontology is so
constrained by his participatory knowing
that his salience landscape gets shaped
such that you get all the famous human
conclusions right that he can't find
agency he can't find causation you can't
really find time it's phase etc and so
what this shows is the way you are
inhabiting your mind body your habitus
need the effects you're on to us the way
in which being can be structured for you
so the participatory knowing is in that
sense very deep it sets off the agent
Sorina relationship that then right it
sets up the constraints that constrain
the perspective of knowing so that you
then get what's going on in the person
you get the existential mode right at
the participatory level which then
constrains the salience landscaping
which and then that that salience
landscaping can strange your situational
awareness which constraints which skills
you can learn and the set of skills you
can apply are ultimately determining
what kind of objects and what kinds of
things your
or beliefs around with your
propositional knowing and so what's
really important about this for the
meeting crisis is part of what I think
goes on in the meeting crisis is the
fact that we have over identified no aim
with with propositional knowledge and
we've over identified realness with
truth and we forgotten that we also want
we also we have a normativity on us of
realness as power we have a normative
that's for procedural knowing we have a
normativity on us of realness as
presence which is what we're seeking for
in our virtual emulations of reality
which is the normativity of realness
within our prospectus online and then we
have a normativity of existential mode
attunement which is the kind of the way
in which real Miskin fronts us with when
we are talking about participatory
knowing that's why when you're far from
home and the agent arena relationship
isn't showing all the other things are
sort of you sort of hear em if you have
believes and then your skills and
there's a sense in which it doesn't feel
real it doesn't feel right something
something is missing because what's
missing is that more fundamental
attunement because we have over focused
on propositional knowledge and reduced
everything to propositional knowing and
reduce all realness to truth and we
never really actually pursue truth I'm
sorry
we always pursue relevant truth because
of the combinatorial explosive nature of
reality but because of week we have
fetishized
this upper level it has tended to
disconnect us from the procedural
perspective another participatory the
embodied aspects of our knowing that
connect us to the grounding of our
agency and connect us to the fundamental
grammar for the disclosure of the world
and that's why the four kinds of knowing
are deeply relevant to understanding the
meaning process so I hope that was
helpful and like I say there is going to
be a more extensive discussion that I
did with Ali from noble wisdom about
this coming out so and he's also
preparing a film and an essay about
these kinds of knowing so there's a lot
of stuff that's going to be coming
about this if you have extra resources
beyond just the question I just gave so
next this is from an anonymous patron
and I should say forget all the way
let's do this right now I want to again
express my gratitude for all the patrons
for their support both the financial
support and many people you know you
know I get into fantastic conversation
with the patrons and that that's also a
kind of support because some of those
discussions are so encouraging and so
enlightening so thank you all of you
very much the question is in the future
with a scientific will you be able to
incorporate thoughts consciousness of
respect level knowledge are there things
about being that will forever be beyond
our grasp well those are two questions
it's interesting that they're put
together because they are it's not it's
not a mistake to put them together at a
cultural offer does but let's do the
first one it depends what you mean by
thoughts if you mean by thoughts both
things analogous to statements of belief
in drawing our relevant implications I
think that's something we're getting
very close to being able to do you mean
skills with the advent of you know
networks and deep learning we're getting
something that is also capable of
implementing a lot of skills so if you
give you give you include in thinking
what's happening with you when you're
catching a ball then those two I think
are already sort of coming to fruition
right now the perspect I will know and
that has to do of course with the
central issue of of consciousness pin
because as I explained there they're
woven together so this comes down to the
deeper question about whether or not I
think there will be a naturalistic
explanation of consciousness and here's
what we have to slow down because only
consciousness is the holy grail of
partner science trying to explain it
it's the hardest thing I do I have
argued in this
argued elsewhere and I'm going to be at
a conference next to September the urban
Abbey with paul van der clay and
jonathan pazzo and this is going to be
the topic the topic of the conference is
consciousness and conscience um what are
you talking about this I do think a
naturalistic explanation of
consciousness is possible I'm I might
laid out an argument on that it's a
large manuscript I don't have published
that bits and pieces of it circulated
and I'm also presented bits and pieces
at various conferences and I teach a
course regularly on neuro scientific and
part of scientific theories of
consciousness so do I think so yes I do
think so because I do think that I can't
give it I give it here because it's not
an easy argument so I'm just going to
gesture towards it I do think that if we
can explain relevance realization and we
can explain complex recursive dynamic
relevance realization and
an involving connectedness to the world
so that it makes sense to talk about
that and then we can talk about how all
of that can be relevant to something
like what's going on in working memory
both an online and an offline global
work space that's doing entire order of
the curse of relevance realization
because that's what working memory seems
to be doing and that's the what
consciousness seems to be for we can get
a long way towards explaining the
function of consciousness and then once
you have the idea of salient landscaping
and this for stuff double milling you
can get a lot of the features of
consciousness you can get the sense of
here Ness the sense of nowness the sense
of how things are centered on you
because of other things are relevant to
you in this highly complex textured
manner so consciousness is basically
this highly texturized salience
landscape it's doing here in this
nowness it's a sexualizing everything so
things are appearing to you under a
particular way of presentation like this
is presenting itself to me as a cup
because that's how it's a specialized as
relevant to me and so consciousness is a
lot of the phenomenal aspects of
consciousness the hereness the noun is
the togetherness a lot of the features
that go into
subjectivity
and a sense of centeredness and a sense
of ongoingness a lot of the central
features of consciousness I think will
will be capable of being given a
naturalist explanation error I have a
lot of respect for people who would
disagree with me on that because right
now there is a lot of philosophical
degree but from a lot of people that I
respect about all of this consciousness
is very very hard like they said so I am
answering the question as it was asked
I'm answering the question as to what I
have what do I believe in terms of what
I have argued for what I do think
there's argument in evidence for now I
want to pass to the second question
which I don't think is identical to the
first but I can see why it gets promoted
by the first do I think that there's
anything you know the that's always
going to be beyond or explanation yes I
mean there's a there's a sense in which
that's and I'm not attributing anything
to the patron there's a sense of which
that that has to be the case because of
the combinatorial explosive nature of
reality and the fact that we're finite
beings there's always going to be huge
aspects that mentioned patterns
relations between things that are beyond
our Ken that does not license anything
right so the problem that I have with
that is what I'm sorry the problem I
have with how some people respond to
that is they then take that as a license
for a particular metaphysics so they say
well we're even rent of it therefore we
conclude that it is X or it is Y which
is just to deny the basis of the
argument which is you're ignorant which
means ignorance means you can't draw any
conclusions about it so to the degree to
which reality is combinatorial explosive
of beyond us
we shouldn't draw any conclusions about
it the proper attitude in that sense is
to is to to to acknowledge want to
acknowledge I think with unappropriate
humility on one's ignorance so is there
that's one way of answering the question
are there things that are in principle
unknowable to us not so
now we're shifting from for a
quantitative palmitoyl explosive
although that's also sort of qualitative
too as I mentioned this we're talking
about different kinds of patterns but
just for to try and get more clear now
we're talking qualitatively other kinds
of things you can't know so this is a
different question this is a question
not of our finitude which of course
limits us really limits us in powerful
ways but now we're turning to the
question of it's called epistemic
boundedness epidemic boundedness is a
particular and important species of
affinity so for example I know a cat I
love this cat and this cat is really
smart he's a really smart cat highly
intelligent and we he can do things that
there's no move around the world and
solve problems and deceive me in any you
know still affectionate manner I really
love this cat precisely because this is
intelligent so he's clearly intelligent
better than any robot we way beyond what
any robot is capable right now because
he's intelligent you does that mean he
could generate a theory that explains
his intelligence no all right it would
be utterly miraculous if he somehow was
able to generate a theory that explains
his intelligence what am I trying to
show you that the possession of a
property does not guarantee the ability
to explain it but by no means many
creatures have very sophisticated
intelligence of chimps will far beyond
that of this beloved cat but but I also
I would be absolutely dumbfounded if
somehow a chimp using perhaps sign
language was able to give a an
explanation of intelligence that turned
out to be plausibly true that that right
that that is a highly highly improbable
event so the chip while being highly
intelligent is epistemic we bamboo they
aren't capable of explaining
intelligence it might be
consciousness might be an example of
this there's a connection between the
first and the second question
consciousness or aspects of the world
might be the kinds of things that
although we are highly intelligent our
our cognition is not set up so that it
has the ability to explain them there
might be certain aspects of the way our
cognition evolved it's highly plausible
that render us epistemic be bounded so
that there are certain kinds of things
no matter how much information we were
gathering about them for which we could
walk from to any explanatory conclusion
I think it is humoristic to a very great
degree to conclude that all other
creatures on the planet are not
aesthetically bounded but we are somehow
privileged notice even at how limited it
is because we aren't we've knowledge
that children are epistemic we bounded
we acknowledge that there are many
things they aren't capable of knowing
until they have matured and so what
we're basically saying is even though
the really smart human beings that our
children are epistemic we found it but
not us adults I find that that's that's
that's special pleading and therefore
technically it requires an independent
piece of information as to why we have
this even highly intelligent even highly
intelligent human organism is
acknowledged to be epistemic we've got
it
so I think it's likely that not only are
we quantitatively but limited by the
finitary predicament and the fact of the
earliest published article so I think
that it's quite possible that we're
epistemically founded in a qualitative
manner not just quantitatively and
therefore what do we draw about that
well the point is again we're where we
are economically bounded we are ignorant
and there in the earth we should be
silent we should be sonic then say oh
because you've acknowledged that for
some ignorance I now have evidence I now
can claim that Zeus exists or some such
metaphysics I think is I think it's just
an invalid argument and and it it's not
to be
fair because you're requiring some
people to not be heuristic and respect
the fact of epistemic darkness within
when you claim that you have some secret
doorway through it which is just to deny
that the stomach valve in this actually
exists so I'll try to answer that
question very comprehensively what does
this mean for me as a scientist it means
the following that I do my best to you
try and advance knowledge I'm always a
fallibilist
I'm always a fallible list and I as I've
argued in the series I don't believe we
should pursue certainty right I think
that misrepresents our status and it
misrepresents on how politician works I
do wonder about how you would show
epistemic boundedness methodologically
because usually you can only show a
limit if you could not transcend it
and I also wonder how you would
distinguish between biological epistemic
doggedness the kind of epistemic
groundedness that might happen because
of the way my brain evolved and
cultural-historical that was going to
groundedness that i might be epistemic
lis bounded for my whole life because of
my cultural historical circumstance by
the way that does not license relatives
relativism precisely because as I said
all that license is is ignorant and
that's the only thing you should talk
about so I hope that was helpful I find
that topic very interesting
thought-provoking it's the kind of thing
that can wake up at 3:00 a.m. but
hopefully you can fall back asleep or
Floria all right so let's go to the next
question do you plan on writing a book
this is from my patron thank you Mike
you plan on writing a book that
summarizes a serie of you fill your book
zombies and Western cultures already
serve that function I do not feel that
zombies in Western culture serves that
function zombies is the first of four
books that are coming out in sequence a
Christopher Master Pietro and I are
doing a lot of work on the second book
which is called unsheltered which will
further develop the genealogy that was
laid out in the in the series and go
over in more
literary and argumentative fashion
that's going to be followed up by by two
more books you should also know that
Daniel Craig and Madeline Remiel and I
are working right now we've taken many
of the episodes from the series and also
some money to kind of talk so you've
transcribed them we're putting them into
a book and we're also extending and
adding to it from recent more recent
work Daniel is writing some stuff
Madeline's doing some work and this is a
book that's also coming out next year
it's it's called the cognitive continuum
from insight to enlightenment some of
you should know that there is going to
be an IndieGoGo campaign I'm not getting
any money from this I'm going to say
that right now clearly completely I'm
committing myself to that the point of
the IndieGoGo campaign is to raise money
to help pay for Daniel and Madeline to
do all of the extensive work they're
doing on putting the book together doing
the transcription they've done a lot of
all into your work but it's getting to
the point there's a lot more work that
needs to be done and so we're trying to
do this so that we can raise some funds
for them for that the campaign will be
launched in January there'll be some
short videos about it there's an
extensive video between Daniel and I
talking about the book and some of the
main themes in it so that's that's
coming out I'm currently working with
Chris also revising a book I've written
and I've used informally but it's it's
the cultivation the practice of
meditation in compensation and the
cultivation of wisdom so it's basically
a book version of the courses I teach on
meditation and contemplation there are
ads of it extra stuff into that about
some other wisdom practices so that's
also coming out so there's going to be
quite a bit that is going to cover off
the content I also intend to take the
next series after Socrates the pursue
wisdom through authentic dialogue and
I'm going to have that transcribed and
I'm going to release that whole series
as a book once that series is done just
from beginning to have so that
well that's all coming so I hope that
answers your question mark so we've got
anonymous question and this is the
question what are your holiday plans
that's a great there it's an issue
question I can't I enjoy Christmas time
much more than I enjoy Christmas Day I
don't know that's true they don't
dislike Christmas Day or something like
that gets to Jack be like Christmas Day
because I was after the three spirits
right but I like this season a lot
I like the archetypal elements of the
darkening of the world the way it loves
you against the slightly rough edges of
your own mortality well at the same time
your head is lifted upwards by all the
lights and all the attempts people make
not only to have physical light to bring
but to bring a lightness to the demeanor
in the spirit and how that enlivens my
personal relationships so I spend I plan
to spend a lot of time with the people I
love not finding on going anywhere this
year last couple years I saw for my
wonderful partner where she and I we
went to Cuba and I had just an amazing
time yeah I spent New Year's Eve last
year in Cuba which was like that was
that was a lot of fun but this year I
think it's going to be much quieter one
and so I just I just I just want to
spend a lot of time with the people I
really love it's really important to be
able to linger with people and to savor
like savor those moments of cherishment
them nothing is it's not towards the end
it just it's just the state of being
with people and feeling that deep that
the kind of connection and love and so
those are my plans
I hope you all however you choose to
celebrate this time of the year I hope
you all have very wonderful holidays
next there is a question from Mac Gaea a
patron aside from the courage to be and
the psyche a sacrament are there any
additional books or commentaries on Paul
Tillich that you would recommend yes
so I recommend also two books by Tillich
the dynamics of faith which gives his
theory of symbolism which I will tell
you I'm talking about not in the episode
that he's released today but the episode
that was released gonna be released next
week also beyond morality because that's
a his excellent discussion of the docket
which some of you know has had a deep
influence on me John Daly has a second
book I'm trying to remember what it was
I'm reading it or the came out actor
psyche of Sakhalin it has Tillich and
Jung in the title
I can't remem I think it's recovering
the sacred or something I'm not sure but
it's a John Buehrle book and it's about
Tillich and young in the title and is an
excellent book so psyche a sacrament
really introduces it's a good great book
it introduces billy's argument about the
deep the deep similarities the deep
consonants between Union television I
will explore in being upcoming episodes
but the more recent book really really
really really that's a good job of
taking it very deeply and also
critically in the good sense of the word
criticizing aspects of feel like
criticizing aspects of young I think
it's just a really a really good book so
that's that's what I would recommend so
next question by Mac again he was a
patron and again Thank You Mac I I would
call correctly I've heard you mention
him bogotá's the master his emissary and
passing are smelly enough with his work
to evaluate his argument to still have
mean anything from his work that he find
insightful so I haven't read the master
his emissary I've seen presentations of
it I read or follow-up essay and you'll
see why it's not that I'm trying to
slight in the dopest at all I would love
to have an extended discussion I think
that would be really really interesting
but what I do is he wrote a follow-up
essay
how the main thesis of the master in the
emissary impacts on well the lack of a
better phrase impacts on the meeting
crisis how it's a tribute or towards the
meaning part so that's the part of his
work that I'm very familiar with and I
think it's very consonant with what I
was arguing earlier I think I would yeah
I mean I was familiar with the
neuroscience that Madoka's place has
worked on for quite a while because I
teach courses on problem solving an
insight that have to do in part with
some of this hemisphere differentiation
in hemispheric functionality which again
you always have to take sort of a large
grain of salt because we're talking
about sort of statistically normal
location or function but there are
individuals who have hemispherectomy z--
and have what our left and right
functions within the remaining
hemispheres so you have to be a little
bit it's more a functional thing than an
anatomical thing and the way I
understand it which is similar but I
think different from the dullest is and
is in terms of the kinds of
problem-solving so I think a functional
analysis the left hemisphere is
basically for dealing with well-defined
problems and because the world of mind
they have a large degree of familiarity
for us where's the right hemisphere is
about dealing with real defined problems
and therefore they often have three of
unpredicted novelty for us and so the
left hemisphere is you may expect for
familiarity and for well-defined
problems it looks with very bright very
fine-grained step-by-step intervention
because that's like gonna make your way
through a well-defined problem it looks
for clarity and certainty because that's
again the standards you should hold
yourself to when you're doing with all
the problem whereas when you're doing so
it's very feature lis oriented very
narrow frame of attention which it works
according to a high standard of clarity
even pursuing certainty on at least in a
psychological sense not a Cartesian
sense
the right hemisphere of course included
with all the fun problems it's going to
go to the result it's not going to be
worried it's gonna be very ambiguity
tolerant it's not gonna be that worried
about absolute clarity or certainty it's
not gonna do things step in step by step
it's going to try and get you to react
overall so you can you know think about
search or well-defined problem sort of
you know searching in an area for your
lost keys or something like that that
you drop in the glass you're very
familiar with the glass you know how to
look you could brighten you used to do
this step-by-step search well but then
while you're doing that a huge evil
sweeps in from the left and is about to
hit you in the head with its clogs then
you're going to relax at the fish stall
you're not going to go oh I got to make
sure what kind of predator it is and I'm
going to do this carefully ah
predator if you're gonna dodge and move
all at once right what's interesting is
this seems to and this is something if
this doesn't talk about but central to
my work but what seems to happen in an
inside problem if this goes back to work
ongoing work by Cooney on sand demon
moment is that you start a problem and
you're it's mostly in the left
hemisphere and you're trying to solve it
in a step-by-step manner up to nine dot
problem it's not working and then you
get a sudden shift into the right
hemisphere where you're opening up the
space you're loosing the constraint you
going mortgage salt and then you find a
different alternative problem
formulation and you bring it back into
the left hemisphere by the way metaphor
seems to trigger the same kind of
shifting which tends to support the
argument I make but there's deep
connections between metaphor and insight
and therefore we should understand
symbols in terms of that kind of thing
all that being said I think I can say
something to the effect that when
Madoka's talks about left hemispheric
dominance I will translate that into
saying that's preponderance a dominance
for preferring well-defined problems
that are handled in a inferential
propositional manner and it feeds back
into the point I made about the
dominance of propositional knowing to
the exclusion of the kind of knowing
that is mark it's not just in the right
now
spirit it's also found in but his fun
phenomenally liked hemisphere but and
that what we need are we need to not
only emphasize inference we need to
counterbalance that with with practices
that bring out insight that being said I
would want to refine on what's going on
is it's not just a left-right thing
that's too simplistic because if we
understand it in terms of functionality
and problem solving it's also a front
back thing it's also you have all your
frontal lobes that are good for all of
this sort of working memory manipulation
here explicit being in conversation with
your cerebellum at the base of your
style the cerebellar cortex loop is
turning out to be radically important
for understanding procedural respect
level and I think ultimately for
understanding aspects of consciousness
and certainly for understanding
participatory network one of the things
we need to explain is why why did the
cerebellum expand the way it did in
evolution why is it when you're sitting
absolutely still and unmoving in
meditation the cerebellum is firing like
crazy it's not just left right it's also
front back it's cerebellum to cortex
it's also out in it's also the cortex
with other aspects of the brain and not
only that it's brain body because you're
nervous your your brain is part of the
nervous system and as I've already
emphasized your bio economy has a huge
impact on your cognitive functioning so
I would want to extend the left-right
the front back out in and brain body and
then finally body world so that would be
my way are saying we need to build
beyond on what McGilchrist has said if
we want to incorporate as much of the
cognitive science that is relevant to
the topic of the meeting crisis now as I
said I preface this by saying that's the
aspect of his work that I'm interested
in I'm sure he had other projects that
he was trying to do and he you know and
everybody has to focus on a particular
thesis and it well I'm responding to the
question that was asked I am NOT saying
that McGill
this book is you know should be ignored
because it doesn't address all these
issues I'm saying how I think we need to
go beyond the argument that was made
there okay so we have an announcement
thank you to patreon subscribers and
everyone watching right now your support
is crucial to continuing to produce
these videos and support the science
they're doing to find solutions to the
meaning crisis and we really do depend
on that and as I keep saying I'm not
drawing any kind of income from that
support it is getting channeled into
making more videos and doing more
experiments that's where it goes right
so as I mentioned and I'm doing a lot
about this and some of you can I I'm so
happy the people I'm getting to me to
the people I'm getting can work with
just did another one we've done this is
our second one we did you know a
four-way between thighs and saw Jordan
Hall Christopher master Pietro and
myself and it's again it's all about
this project of trying to understand the
cyber technology of dialectic and trying
to understand the process within
collective intelligence distributed
cognition of the Ilocos it and so I
bring that up because what's happening
right now is just so much I'm putting a
lot of work in but I'm getting so much
help and insight and feedback and it's
just plain fun to working on after
Socrates the next series the one I
mentioned earlier so we've got the I'm
working on the follow-up which is you
know after Socrates the cultivation of
the pursuit of wisdom through authentic
dialogue so it's after Socrates in both
senses the word in that we're trying to
emulate and come after him in that sense
but also after Socrates historically so
I'm trying to first of all look right at
the ancient practice of dialectic that
seems to have started around Socrates
what was going on there what are the
dimensions what is it doing because it
seems to be what Jordan Hall was asking
for it seems to be a meta site of
technology that basically accesses and
accentuates the power of collective
intelligence and bootstraps it up into
collective rationality then therefore
acts as a place acts as a way in
we can curate that perhaps generate the
ecology of psycho technologies that's
certainly what dialectic was doing in
the ancient world I want to get a very
clear understanding of that and then and
there's a lot of great work that's come
out on that and then put that into you
put that into dialogue with all these
practices and many of which I've been
doing participant observation with the
help of Peter Lambert my really valued
partner a good friend and all of this
we've been doing circling practices
we've done the inside dialogue we did
empathy circling just trying to learn
and of course the ongoing rich dialogue
I'm having with Dyson stock who is just
an amazing a source of insight and
wisdom he created circling and created
and philosophically profound way he's
just also a fantastic friend so I'm
doing all of that because the second
half of the series is going to be once
we get an understanding of what ancient
dialectic was going to use I didn't
discuss all these merging practices so
they think it gets something like a
second technology for the emerging
ecology of practices that is already
happening right now so I want everybody
to be aware of that okay we're going to
do some live questions from the chat
please identify yourself as a patron
subscriber you're seeing priority in the
question so we have Andrea integrity and
Mackenzie Lemon oh hi Mackenzie it's
good to hear from you and the question
there is was there ever a specific
moment where you realize you needed to
deep a new commitment to living wisely
or has this always been pursued that
interested you that's a fantastic
question specific moment and it's hard
maybe a specific period so as I
mentioned when I was in high school I
sort of because of the work as I left a
fundamentalist Christian upbringing
which is like leaving alcoholism and I
I'm sorry that sounds like it's harsh to
people who pursue that I'm speaking from
my personal experience in the sense that
like it was harmful and traumatizing but
nevertheless it needs a craving in you
and so I fell into a kind of personal
meaning crisis existential crisis and
that was developed by encountering some
science fiction that introduced me to
the philosophies and pathologies I'm
tired of the Christian framework and
that has a huge impact on me and then I
read I read stigmata by Hermann Hesse
and that was like all these these sort
of Buddhist and Hindu mythology's can
actually be directed towards the pursuit
of wisdom and the overcoming of a sense
of alienation because that's of course
what's it heart is famously about the
inner journey that has to talked about
you know the locust said it's actually
the only true journey I'm not sure he
quite that romantic but I I appreciated
that very very deeply about the same
time I read also read their fifth
business by lover to Davies which
introduced me great Canadian literature
to young and then I got a sense of the
depth of the unconscious and that it
could that there's all there's aspects
to our cognition that are stopped
organizing and they can be the source of
growth and insight but that was sort of
like this scattered existentially
inchoate for me and then I read Plato in
first university rather the public and
about Socrates and then it crystallized
not into a dead crystal not like the
cold beauty of a diamond but like the
Living beauty of a fire right it came
together for me it caught fire and that
this the unexamined life is not worth
living right Socrates died for that the
unexamined life is not worth living and
that went very deep and it correlated
all that together and it set into motion
for me
and that's when it began from you know
Plato is sacred for me I constantly
return back to that and as I grow and
learn to to which I have right I get a
deeper understanding not just sets of
beliefs but a deeper understanding
through all the kinds of knowing of why
the unexamined life is not worth living
so I guess that would be the Kairos for
me there's all these important
precursors but the encounter with
Socrates and the that the the the wake
up the clarion call that the unexamined
life is not worth living is what really
saying to me Andre I tell you the
another question could you be to
describe your own personal journey in
your daily meditative and contemplative
practice habits yeah so I have a bunch
of practices that I do every morning I
do a whole bunch of a set of warm-up
practices and also practices for helping
to ameliorate the venires that I have in
my left ear and then I I do some Tai Chi
I do usually I do I go there fast form
of the gym I do a weapons forum or a
sword form I use a wooden sword by the
way I don't try and hurt anybody and
then I do a slow form a modified version
of the Beijing form I do that very
deeply I use the supplement that with
some Chi cung some standing and reading
practices also what's called jeomjeom
some standing practices holding position
and then I sit I do practices that are
again supposed to just get me sort of
deeply into my body within a sitting
posture it basically has to do is sort
of holding your breath and rotating
various parts of your body to try and
really interior eyes and open up your
intro section and get sort of the the
the central nervous system peripheral
nervous system communication flowing I
do all that and then I go into
a form of meditation that is taking me
very deeply in oh and right and then
I've been a contemplative practice it
takes me out and then I do a practice
that Praja that sort of synthesizes it's
more like stereoscopic fusion the way
the left in the right visual field give
you depth where so I'm getting the the
the deepest of the internal movements of
meditation inward the deepest of the
outward movements in contemplation but
I'm getting them simultaneously at depth
that's proj not and then within that you
move towards you're not meditating you
you you become sort of aware of your
awareness and then aware of the self
presencing of your awareness and then
you move to right to the the self
presencing of the self presencing and
then there's no difference between sort
of how reality is self presencing to you
and how your own fundamental awareness
is self present present presencing
itself to you you you get this this deep
place of Prajnaparamita dynamical
intelligence into the depths of your
perspective of knowing and right into
the place where it's interfacing with
your participatory knowing the
fundamental sense of identity the
fundamental way in which your habitus
and your autos are Co determining and Co
structuring each other and then I end
with a gratitude practice the practice
flow is basically something like this on
I thank the self persistence of the
physical or I do not make it I am bridge
from it to trust and participate in it
so I think I'm grateful for the
self-organization of the vital because I
do not make it I emerged from it to
trust and participate in it I'm grateful
for the self presencing are the
intelligible you not make it emerge from
it to trust and participate in it I'm
grateful for the spiritual lack of a
better adjective my grateful for this
the self transcendence of the spiritual
I do not make it
emerge from it to trust and participate
in it and so what that does is you get
this all you get this comprehensive
permeation of gratitude which which
resonates with that state of Praja and
then that sets me ready for the day and
so that's what I do
and what that was helpful to you what I
also do in the morning before I
undertake those practices so that's one
set of practices I also record any
dreams I had the night before because
I'm trying to maintain as open a line of
communication between conscious and
unconscious mind I also will read about
a particular cognitive bias but remind
myself that I need to look for
self-deception
I need to look for ways in which I'm
self-centered ways in which I've
self-important and ways in which apps on
a self-righteous and try to actively
notice my cognitive bias notice those
four forms are four dimensions of
selfishness if you want to put it that
way and then what I do is I go through
the day and I try to notice them I try
to actively counteract them and at the
end of the day I journal about when I
was able to notice what I might have
failed to notice and the time but I can
now know this retrospectively because of
effects and behavior I also try to
notice areas where I was successful
where there was where it looked like I
was being more present I was being more
connected
there would be more insightful being
more flowy being rational and then
that's how I am okay so that's the sort
of set of practices Oh
Shekhar oh my after after I do the
gratitude I should have mentioned I do
lectio divina I read I read from a
passage from the enlightened mind by
Stephen Mitchell which is prose and then
and then I do let go Davina on it
lectio Divina and then I read a passage
from the enlightened part which is
poetry
I do Alexio Davina on that so that's
after I do the gratitude I then do the
Lexi Adina I forgot that's really
important to me by the way and what's
really interesting for me is how the
let's see Oh Davina which we brings me
back into propositions
resonates with all this non-propositions
or stuff like you do at the point she
Asian and the contemplation practices
and then it's also really interesting to
see how the poetry and the pros the like
in the let Co Divina not only how each
one resonates with me but also how they
resonate with each other and how that
that resonance between them also deepens
the resonance with me and I find that a
very powerful practice
okay so we got Steven last month patron
and Chad can you explicate how
inexhaustible Ness can function as a
constraint relevance it seems
contradictory that something internet
can function as limited yes I think
that's right if I said it functions as a
constraint that is I think technically
incorrect what I should be saying to be
more precise is that our cognition has
to have constitutive constraints
constraints that actually constitute in
structural functional organization in
response to inexhaustible mystery in a
response to the fact that reality is
combinatorially explosive so that's what
I should have said and you're right to
catch me on a kind of sloppiness
in presentation of how I mentioned that
the much the correct way I think of
saying it is the inexhaustible Ness of
reality which we will encounter as comp
the combinatorial explosive nature of
our problem-solving very broadly
construed our adaptive attempts to deal
with reality demands that there are
constitutive constraints so that we
avoid the combinatorial explosion and
that avoiding right when it's not
adaptively and all the ways I described
in my series that's the process that
gives us relevance realization so
everyone once again as always I I feel
like we're just beginning I could do
this for more because it's so
interesting to get it to answering
people's questions it's so helpful to me
because I can see where I've gone wrong
and sometimes I can also see perhaps
where it's not right and the relative
balance between them and how to how to
improve and also how to be more helpful
to the people that are following my work
and one more time I want to
thank you all for joining me in this Q&A
and I want again take this opportunity
to thank all the patrons for the support
once again I want to thank amar for the
untiring and excellent work he does he's
here right now helping me as always I
couldn't do it without him
and I want to wish you all the happiest
of holidays and I hope you find some
things during the holidays that are
particularly relevant to you take care
good bye