and a Pollock just sir told us why the
story of Daniel Christian wall is
important but I should also tell you
that he is an international consultant
and educator specializing in
biologically inspired whole systems
design and transformative innovation in
his exciting keynote Daniel will share
his vision for a healthier tourism his
deep understanding of natural systems
and ways in which humans can work with
them to generate thriving communities as
well as robust better performing
economies ladies and gentlemen
Christian wall
[Music]
[Music]
good morning I feel really grateful for
this opportunity so thank you for
inviting me and thank you for everybody
to everybody for coming this is a really
important topic how are we going to
travel to tomorrow and Anna said I'm
gonna start with the big picture so I'm
really gonna start with the big picture
here because sometimes it helps to
remember that we're all living in one
planet and that this planet is traveling
at a hundred and seven thousand
kilometers an hour around our Sun and
our Sun is spiraling within the Milky
Way which you can see this is the Milky
Way at the speed of eight hundred and
twenty eight thousand kilometers an hour
so we're travelers and we're traveling
fast but also to get I'm starting with
this slide to get because travel to
tomorrow is about tourism's roll in
place and that idea of place is fractal
in dimension which means it starts in
your local community it starts in this
church it starts in Bregan it starts in
the region of flanders but it also is
the place that we inhabit which is this
wonderful living planet and the
uniqueness of this place really when we
would do well to reflect on because just
in our galaxy our Milky Way galaxy there
are 200 billion stars each one of them
might have multiple planetary systems
around it and there are a hundred
billion galaxies in the universe and
somehow in this one tiny little blue dot
in space that we're zooming around the
universe the conditions have been such
that life could evolve over 3.8 billion
years and Mars is just in the right
position to shelter us from meteorites
hitting us and to bend the solar winds
in a way that life can evolve on this
planet and here this this little blue
line is the atmosphere that has actually
been formed by a life over billions of
years
so life forms like ours could evolve so
really were all passengers on living
spaceship earth and what each and
everyone does all of you me every day
does or doesn't do effects everything a
friend of mine professor for systems
science at the University of houses
everything is an intervention we're
constantly changing the future and how
we travel to tomorrow will affect where
we will arrive and this man saw this
many years ago he wrote a book in 1969
its 50th anniversary this year called an
operation manual for spaceship earth and
when he speaks about and the survival of
humanity depends on the integrity of the
individual that means we all have to
really understand our own importance and
agency in this and act within the
integrity and acting with integrity is
about ethics and there's another
wonderful quote by a pioneer of
conservation Aldo Leopold who said the
thing is right if it protects the
vitality and the integrity of the biotic
community it is wrong if it does
otherwise if we keep that sentence in
mind as we work on tourism and divide
the design tourism initiatives we've
already stepping into a new way of
thinking so coming home to where I live
I live on this little island and you can
see the planet at night from the
International Space Station
which created conditions to life
lighting up the night sky for one form
of life us but we've neglected that we
deeply depend on all other forms of life
as well and we've pumped co2 and
greenhouse gases into this atmosphere
and we're beginning to see the
consequences of that
so homing in on the place that I live in
bringing it closer to tourism the place
I live is the place where all inclusive
mass tourism was invented the island of
Majorca in 2018 two new documentaries
came out that talk about the phenomenon
of over tourism we have thirteen point
eight million international tourists
visit the island every year 5.2 million
Spanish tourists to answer that palma
Airport and the summers there is one of
the busiest airports in Europe with 29
million passengers coming through it and
this regional economy is directly
dependent like about 30 percent of the
people work directly in tourism and 44
percent of the regional GDP is from
tourism but if you look at all the
supplying industries it's really 85
percent of the economy is addicted to
tourism and of course over tourism has
left the population seeing numbers grow
seeing income from tourism grow but
inequality has grown as well and people
haven't actually been sharing in the
riches that this tourism in enterprise
has generated so there's a big backlash
and maybe regions like Flanders where I
think tourism is about 5% of the GDP GDP
being and completely an adequate measure
of success anyway but I won't go into
that it's slightly different I'm gonna
talk from my experience about a place
where over tourism is already happening
but as I'm gonna sit my profession
is really directly related to tourism as
a scientist I've worked for a number of
years looking at existential threats to
humanity and on Ryoka it happens happen
so that we have the International pre
warning stations to monitor the night
skies and avoid collisions with
asteroids if we could ever avoid them to
pre warn us that we might have an
asteroid coming in because that is one
of the existential threats to humanity
and there's relatively little we can do
about it
but the one that I want to talk in more
detail about is climate change and the
collapse of ecosystems because it is
something that we're now beginning to
see everywhere on the planet
and any of you who read the news should
be aware of this by now so great atone
work a 16 year old girl from Sweden who
happens to be blessed with a condition
called Asperger's which means that she
doesn't care about what the context of
an issue is and whether some people say
you can't change the economy it just
runs as it does she just looks at what
she's being told and says wait a minute
don't you listen to the scientists if we
don't change rapidly within the next
three to eleven years we might lose all
our opportunity to change and respond to
this existential threat to humanity and
this graph over here is actually from a
presentation by Professor John
Babbington who in 2009 was the chief
scientist of the UK and I was working
with him and others on a project that
was published by UK for site called the
International dimension of climate
change impact and what we were looking
at we divided the world into 17 regions
looked at the IPCC data and looked at
how climate change by 2030 and 2050
would potentially impact these regions
and what impact that would then have on
the UK
not a clear science very complex but
what I want to draw your attention to is
this slide which was already shocking in
2009 but now that 2030 is a lot closer
where we see that the increasing demand
for food water and energy all affect
each other you need water to run power
stations but also they're all affected
by climate change and they all affect
climate change and so this creates a
wicked problem cluster where everything
feeds onto itself and so in only 10 11
years time we will hit what John Bagley
baring called
a perfect storm um already ten years ago
and now is the time to respond to that
so I'm gonna get off climate change in a
minute just very briefly to really
hammer at home these are the fires in
Brazil
this is methane bubbling up in lakes and
Canada as the permafrost is melting this
is Greenland without snow cover this
summer burning because as the methane
comes up from the ground turf and
forests start burning the Arctic is on
fire the Amazon is on fire these are
images of Siberia where giant methane
bubbles are coming out of the ground
methane is a much more powerful
greenhouse gas than co2 this is also an
image from this summer where the group
the sea ice around Greenland is melting
to the point that these sled dogs are
walking in melting water on the ice
underneath and this image is just
talking about the fact that for many
millions of years and particularly the
last 250 years since we've been spewing
out lots of greenhouse gases the oceans
have been the giant buffer they have
absorbed this year too but this has
caused an process of ocean acidification
and once that gets to a certain point
then instead of absorbing co2 the oceans
start releasing co2
and combining all these trigger points
together means that we're very close to
a point where we will not be able to
reverse cataclysmic climate change in
the end of life on Earth as we know it
we have a window of opportunity that
depending on who you listen to this is
the International Panel on Climate
Change last year said we have 12 years
left
12 years feels like an alarming enough
the UN secretary-general himself
Antonio Guterres said three years at
maximum and he said that last year so
again this has been a process that has
gone on for a long time humanity went
into planetary overshoot in the 1970s in
early 1970 when I was born and since
then because we've kept destroying the
ecosystems and degrading the environment
the average number of hectares per
person and of course our numbers have
been growing rapidly as well has been
going down ever since and so every year
we as a species by July 29th 2019 we
already used up all the resources
provided by life on this planet that we
if we wanted to be wise should have made
last all the year so from july 2019
speaking into the capital rather than
living off the interest and Belgium
already got to that point in April on
April 6 and Spain where I live on May 28
and you can see that so many of the
industrialized nations but also the
industrialized Xing nations are already
in overshoot and obviously this can't
continue
the Stockholm resilience center has
created this framework of planetary
boundaries 9 boundaries that we need to
stay within in order to create a safe
operating operating space for Humanity
and we've already surpassed four of them
and two of them we haven't even looked
at in detail yet
we don't know whether we should surpass
them and then in 2012 Kate ray worth
while she was working for Oxfam for the
UN summit in Rio the Rio +20 summit
created this idea that it's not just
about planetary boundaries in order to
stay within planetary boundaries we need
to create the socio-economic foundations
for people in place to be able to thrive
so she came up with this idea of donut
economics the donut really just meaning
that you have the ecological ceiling and
the social foundations and this kind of
ring is the sweet spot and to give it a
name she called it a donut
so tourism is one of the industries that
has caused this impact humanity's impact
on the globe it follows the classic
exponential curve and I know this is a
contentious subject people really like
growth because that's what we've been
taught but any life form as Ana briefly
mentioned has this initial exponential
growth and then it starts to level out
you stop growing at some point in terms
of size and started to grow in quality
you learned you became wiser that's what
we now have to do as a species we have
to learn how to make that curve and if
we don't then life we'll find ways to
teach us otherwise so what is this
concept of our of regeneration and very
briefly kind of oversimplifying it you
could say we have conventional practice
which is basically business as usual
staying within legal limits Green says
we do a few things make things a little
greener and congratula says let
ourselves for it which is a step
sustainable in this context is really
saying we're not adding any more damage
to the system but because as I've shown
we have added so much
damage to the system that's no longer
enough we need to start to restore and
regenerate the systems the communities
and the ecosystems we live in again for
you in the back you won't even be able
to read this and I said it already these
slides will be made available so don't
get stuck on the slides you can read
them afterwards but this particular
resource which I highly recommend you
look up on the internet is a paper that
Fritjof Capra and Hazel Henderson wrote
about the concept of qualitative growth
about how we can actually also as
economies grow the number of healthy
ecosystems bro the quality of our soils
grow the social cohesion of our
communities and create a kind of growth
that is actually positive and get away
from like this lists a whole number of
opportunities where tourism can get
involved in doing this shift and this
lists some of the reasons why tourism as
usual is not an option anymore in many
ways tourism because it is one of those
industries that touches everything by
providing the opportunity to live a
daily normal life rhythm in a place
where we don't live when we go there and
visit it you touch housing you touch
transport energy water all sorts of
consumer products and tourism industries
therefore have a massive opportunity to
influence the local economy and become
agents of re-energizing the
regionalization and real localization of
production and consumption of creating
new opportunities for innovation in a
region of diversifying the local economy
and actually becoming stakeholders in
local renewable energy production why
not risk manage your tourism empire by
investing in a local renewable energy's
cooperative and helping to use some of
the money that comes in from tourism to
build renew
capacity and you can do the same with
organic farming you can do the same with
the local production of detergents
cleaning products all those kind of
things that a tourism business needs to
operate so we are in this process of
this this framework again if you're in
the business of having to manage
transformation and change this little
booklet by a colleague of mine from the
international futures forum called three
horizons a patenting of hope is very
informative and it basically speaks
about how we go from a business as usual
that is no longer fit for purpose while
considering what is useful of this
business and we do want in the tomorrow
we arrive at and create this new viable
future using rather than a collapsing
rebuilt scenario a bridge which is this
important tourism and transition and I
think that does it Flanders is really
pioneering in asking these deeper
questions not about how do we tweak
tourism a little bit and make it more
effective or more efficient but how do
we transform tourism in a way that it
actually becomes an agents or agent and
catalyst of positive change in place and
in region and there are three types of
changes that you could say happen on
four different levels of scale
individual working group the affected
community and the wider culture we
operate in and the kind of change we now
need is transformative change which is
really a completely it's it's the change
from the caterpillar to the butterfly it
and in so much of our innovation these
days when we talk about transformation
and is unfortunately as colleague of
mine Laura Bateson has wonderfully
putted about creating caterpillars with
wings rather than butterflies and that's
the kind of
adaptive change that just uses the
building blocks we already have the
elements already have and makes them
function differently rather than
fundamentally transforming the business
from within and also the kind of just
adjustment which is what managers tend
to do is just we would change a few
building blocks and move them around but
both of these adaption and adjustment
might be needed in the transition but we
have to be very careful to keep the
larger horizon of actually saying can
tourism become a way that we build
climate resilience in our place and in
our region that we prepare for a very
difficult three decades that we don't
know whether we're going to make it
through that eye of the needle but
tourism could have a role in preparing
us for it and tourism could also have it
to some extent one of the negative
impacts globally tourism has been the
thin end of the wedge of neoliberal
economic globalization it has come in to
communities that were illiterate and
didn't have electricity and build fancy
tourism resorts there and now the
opportunity would be to basically redeem
maybe being in a church and we can use
that kind of language we tourism has an
opportunity to redeem itself for his
past sins and actually become an agent
of positive change and I think this
conference and the travel to tomorrow
project is the beginning of that
conversation and I'm deeply grateful to
Peter for having started that
conversation living in a place where my
future and my daughter's future deeply
depend on working with tourism because
85 percent of the Moroccan economy is
dependent on it so basically in 20 years
of working on the question how can we
redesign the human presence an impact on
in a way that life and humanity has a
future I spent a long time working at
the scale of local communities and I
deeply believed that the only way to
create global changes to work with your
local neighborhood and your little
community I lived in an eco village that
was experimenting with all these ideas
and I still believe that local
communities are where action happens and
transformation happens but really in
terms of whole systems design it is the
region's the scale of bioregions Yuma
you can call it or in economic terms
it's the measure economics it's not the
micro economics of communities and
businesses it's not the macro economics
of Nations and the planet but it is the
local regional economies that we can
influence critically and these
resilience building and adaptation
pathways that involve restoring the
health of our local ecosystems restoring
the soil managing the water in wise ways
and creating regionally focused
biomaterials economies that are circular
using renewable energy all of this is
what what we need to do to redesign our
impact on earth and whether you're with
the alarmists who say it's already too
late and climate change will get the
best and worst of us
or you go with the people who say we
still have a chance but we need to act
now the pathway to making it through the
eye of the needle or the pathway to
preparing for the horrors of climate
change that are coming is the same it is
bringing our capacity to meet human
needs at the local and regional level
closer to home again and tourism can
play a role in that this report came out
two days ago
it's from the global center for
adaptation to climate change and climate
resilience
and what I like about it is was a lot
that I like about it in the some of the
language is still locked within the
growth paradigm but it shows in this
little graphic how caring for the region
and the ecosystem of the region has
multiple benefits that builds climate
resilience and and so taking this
regional approach so just to look from
the mountains to the sea working on both
Water Management soil management and the
way that cities draw resources from the
region is inviting a regional approach
to build climate resilience ok some of
you have seen this tree before it's the
lime tree that is the image central to
visit Flanders and again all of this
detail you in the back won't even be
able to read it this this spells out in
more detail what this regenerative
approach can do for tourism and how the
two are connected and I'm ok just
looking at my time here so I won't go
into this in detail also because I have
so much to share and so little time to
share it in I've started a series of
blogs on my blog and medium I've already
published two of them there will be
another tool so and you'll get the links
for that so all this the the detail that
I can't share with you will be on you
know the slide decks or in these blogs
just briefly to make it real and give
you some examples what have I done
to practice what I'm preaching in this
church here these are some projects that
have been involved in in my or in the
last eight years we've created a website
and a little guide that has reanimated
ancient pilgrimage routes to a monastery
up a sanctuary up in the mountains of
Majorca and this one was
in existence it was one of those ger
long-distance hiking trikes 300gr 221
but the other ones had kind of been
forgotten and so we created a map and a
story behind them and invited people to
become to make that shift that one of my
mentors so beautifully put it what we as
humanity have to do is we have to stop
being tourists and we have to start
being pilgrims on earth
tourists can ask from a place what can
displace gift to me a pilgrim comes with
respect comes with the wanting to learn
with one thing to share with one thing
to tread lightly in the place he or she
travels I've also worked I mentioned
detergents earlier I worked with a
Belgian company ecco vert and forum for
the future and a satellite startup
company in Oxford to look into using
Majorca as a test field for this idea of
regional biomaterial circular economies
and we investigated whether we could use
municipal waste streams and forestry
waste streams to create the chemicals
that would then be needed to make soaps
and floor cleaning products and
detergents for laundry and so on so we
could wash the linen of 500,000 tourist
beds on Majorca and in the process we
learned a lot and connected lots of
local industries together I've also
worked with the tourism cluster in
innovation in tourism and gave them a
whole list of where tourism could help
the transition towards a sustainable
Majorca or regenerative island Majorca I
helped to create two documents or three
documentaries on like this one basically
tells different stories of resilience
initiatives and change initiatives on
the island and the more recent one
focuses on the issue of marine plastics
and and phasing out single-use plastics
I've given talks on circular economy
helped to start the fourth sector
network which is a network that uses the
techniques and agility of the private
sector to address the issues that the
public said to shook me addressing that
isn't addressing but uses the values of
the civil society sector and brings all
of that together and it's it's an
emerging field a lot of people when you
ask them which effect that are you
working can't quite place themselves and
that means they're probably working in
this fourth sector area
I've also as an educator designed a set
of flashcards that help local
communities have conversations around
how to implement the SDGs
in place and they've been taken up by
UNESCO and translated into seven
languages by now and we ran workshops
and are still running workshops on
Majorca to engage local communities and
the tourism industry in how to implement
the SDGs so yeah we're really traveling
at high speed towards a tomorrow that if
you look at the science
it looks pretty alarming we do have an
opportunity to turn this around it's not
too late but we really need to act now
and tourism because it has this amazing
fractal dimension just like place has a
fractal dimension it touches everything
it is a local a global local industry
and it touches all the sectors so the
opportunity when we shift into asking
what can tourism give back to the world
is vast and when anna pollock shared
with me a paper that you wrote in 1995
where she identified that tourism can be
a healing business and a business of
renewal and the force for transformation
I thought what an honor to be working
with an elder who had the foresight so
many years ago so I'm really pleased to
have been invited here and just at the
I'm giving you some initiatives very
specific like this is on Majorca
somebody running opportunities for
tourists to come and make local honey or
to help people rebuild the stone walls
of Majorca to really engage tourists
with typically specific mayor York and
resilience building activities and this
organization has been around for a long
time giving people an opportunity to
really engage with people in place in a
completely different way much more
travel as a pilgrim rather than a
tourist the whole idea of regenerative
tourism has already taken off in Central
and South America it's just something
very new still in the conversation in
Europe and this little initiative is
looking at how will we travel in the
future where we go back to marine
transport where we will use solar and
wind power again to move us from A to B
and we we just the absolute take-home
message for what I would like to share
with you is to stop thinking about what
what we have to do to change tourism a
little bit and start thinking about what
can I do as a tourism professional to
make tourism the agents of
transformation the the catalyst of
transformation so my children and my
children's children can have a future
and I think it's perfectly placed to be
that agent it's turning a problem into a
solution and that's what we have to do
as humanity if we want to have a chance
for a better tomorrow so thank you very
much
I I see I see I have another minute and
20 seconds and I actually did have
another slide very briefly this is an
initiative that I'm working on to give
you a forward-looking opportunity it's
it's we're currently putting together a
wonderful team of people and caterers
and Janine Benyus have already started
work on with the local with cities all
around the world within the c40 s
network to create a methodology to
engage people in place at the city level
to explore what thriving would look like
and the power of questions of how what
does it mean for people to thrive in
this place what does it mean for this
place to thrive how do we respect the
rights of all people and how do we
respect the health of the whole planet
these are the four questions that guide
the process that will help people do
this regional transformation and my hope
is that we're piloting
the evolution of this methodology on
majorca which will mean that tourism
will be central to the conversation and
there will be a lot of learning from it
so stay tuned this is hopefully going to
happen I don't know yet thank you very
much again
thank you so much mr. wall I hope you
have time to answer absolutely possible
questions loudly it isn't yet one you
can ask some questions now so feel free
to ask please raise your hand and a
microphone will be in front of you in
just a few seconds there's already a
lady over there and there's somebody
over here can you put up your hand again
yeah coming with a microphone good good
morning thank you very much for your
inspiring conversation here
I'm very interesting we working actually
region the Netherlands where there's a
market to open there's a lot of focus on
Amsterdam but the original held along
for example is now looking for a
direction and we noticed that the first
started actually again to introduce it
to in a traditional tourism approach
focused on growth so how would you
seduce all these policy people there to
say but it's not busy yet in our region
why should we start in with a different
direction now mm-hmm it's a very
interesting question because basically I
don't know sometimes it helps to create
analogies so for example the Chinese
realize that there was no way that they
could potentially build up a chi
industry that would make cars as good as
German or French cars quick enough so
what they decided is let's leapfrog
internal combustion engines completely
and become experiment make mistakes
start with the electric car now and
there are 50,000 electric taxis in
Shenzhen alone so giving them that kind
of idea of saying if we're slow in
developing as a tourist destination what
we shouldn't do is to try to run behind
the others and do what they've done we
have a huge opportunity to rien
and what tourism could look like in this
place and become a model for a new way
of working and but it's just yeah it's
uphill battle anybody else I'm also
always really happy for critical
reflections so don't feel like for
anything I said really didn't sit with
you at all please tell me okay the
microphone is coming presentation thank
you
I think I'm interested in in link to the
previous question actually at the policy
level of dynamic consultants you go to
work in a new destination and they look
at the World Economic Forum indicators
of what makes a destination good and
then they try to meet those indicators
how do you go about changing those sorts
of frameworks that drive national
governments they drive aid agencies to
reflect regenerative tourism where do
you start to actually put those
frameworks into a regenerative context
what what I would do is what we've done
is humanity to give us a lot of detailed
knowledge about a lot of things is
separate all the disciplines and become
expert in narrower and narrower fields
and in a way that education system has
predisposed us to a blind-spot of not
understanding the whole system and how
it interacts and that's what has
separated us from nature and that's it
meant that we used mechanistic metaphors
instead of living systems metaphors and
so on so to come to your question what I
would do is I would look at other
frameworks that policymakers have
committed to an hour publicly committing
to so the SDGs you can have a nuanced
opinion about how good they are and
whether the targets underneath are the
right targets and so on but they're 17
goals of which I would only question one
which is goal number eight continued
economic growth and good work like if if
they just put in the world
qualitative growth and good work I'd be
happy with it but if they keep it like
it is it is the spanner in the works
that will make all the other sixteen not
implementable because our current
economic growth addiction is what's
driving the destruction of the planet
but starting with the SDGs
and speaking to policy regulators and
saying well how do how does your
commitment to implementing the SDGs
at a global forum square with your
policy regulations of tourism where
could you make policies that would
enable tourists the tourist industry to
actually implement the SDGs at the local
and regional scale
and if you if you look into the detail
energy production water headed food
procurement local procurement of food
and and connect all the other policies
that they're talking about true tourism
then I think you have a beginning of a
leverage point does that make sense
there's one in red question of the way
down red yeah thank you very much for
your inspiring presentation and my
question was a little bit related to
what mr. Holland Rhys also said that one
of the cornerstones to have this
qualitative growth may be no growth may
be is the attitude of the tourists now
we are a little bit in a contradiction
there that we see that a lot of people
want to be sustainable and act
sustainable unless they are on holidays
and it has to do with tourism so where
do you start
what is your suggestion on that issue
well I I'm not too sure because I just I
took the slide out in order to make the
presentation shorter but some of you
might know that Prince Harry was
involved in launching this Travel list
initiative just last week I think and
when I followed the media on that I saw
a bunch of statistics that they've
offered in terms of large questionnaires
that went around and asked tourists and
all the indication was that somewhere
between 60 and 70 percent of tourists
given the choice would prefer to travel
in a way that does impact the
environment less and they're actually
interested in tourism the money that
they leave in a destination benefiting
the destination and that these large
tourism empires don't become the
middlemen and siphon off the wealth of
tourism in a way that it doesn't
actually hit the local community so I'm
not sure of course that it is a paradox
that we all I mean I came came here by
airplane and tourism as a whole travel
and tourism contributes about 5% of the
greenhouse gas image
would that humanity is emitting to
exasperate the climate change problem
so we definitely need to change the way
we travel but I think the willingness of
the consumer is actually starting to
change quite drastically and and
initiatives like this riders for future
school strike is going to make the
parents of these children more even more
aware that there now is a really urgent
issue around avoiding cataclysmic
runaway climate change and I think it's
it's really important to prepare for the
changes that we will have demanded from
us as an industry from the consumer now
it's true it's too late to wait even
five years time government policies
starting to regulate the fact that
kerosene is still not taxed the minute
we internalize the externalities the
costs socially in ecological costs of
tourism and travel the the economics of
tourism will change drastically and I
think that's where we need to what we
need to prepare for now and so certainly
on a destination like Majorca where I
live it's impossible that we'll have 18
million tourists arrive in ten years
time we I don't think we will and so we
need to even in that industry shift
towards a qualitative offer that has
less tourists that might stay for longer
that engage in a different way
tourism has the opportunity to become
part of reinventing education imagine
that that's a transformative idea where
tourism isn't just about consuming a
nice experience but sharing your
expertise in Europe and taking learning
in one place back to your home home
place tourism has a role in reinventing
geriatric care and how we deal with
elderly like all these infrastructures
that might
soon not be needed in those numbers
could convert themselves into being
places where people who are elderly can
spend three or four months in a
sheltered living type environment in the
European South while the North is too
cold and so we really need to think out
of the box I think to do that we all
would reach a destination management
scheme which allows us to be
regenerative in the existing tourism
destinations however tourism demand is
growing faster it's still faster and
we're still faster what are we going to
do about that we'll new destinations
emerge they will probably do the same
and transfer be transformative but
nevertheless they will have you know
people moving around with no technology
to adapt what is the core problem then
it's the tourism demand we are looking
for a solution in the place which is of
course very necessary but it doesn't
catch the basic problem and the basic
problem could be a too many people
trying to move too much around this
globe and be not being able to do it in
a sustainable way we never raised that
question should we as a sector push
further and you know lobby towards new
technology could it be soft with
technology would we really need to be
more tourists more and more times a year
or do we have to say I might do better
without being no tourists this year how
would we manage that
destination market is how do we dare to
ask that question just an open idea yeah
that's a very important questions and I
guess there's there's a the way we
measure success and the way we talk
about the future is always a little bit
of a double-edged sword
I mentioned that GDP is a very
inadequate measure of success and a lot
of conversations that we need to change
our economic measure of success to
include all the externalities because at
current rates natural disasters are
positive for GDP growth and so on and
similarly I think all those predictions
of tourism demand its rapid at the
moment but um because tourism doesn't
live in that bubble it is part of the
global system which increasingly is
coming closer together because of all
the the walls were running into now and
I think that those those predictions
might not pan out the way that we now
believe and so preparing as I just said
for a contraction in numbers from
international tourists but maybe an
expansion of numbers from more regional
to tourists is wise and looking at
enabling different ways of travelling
that have less environmental impact is
wise there's a whole range of
initiatives on nautical engineering and
and new types of sailboats but again it
would also mean that this whole culture
shifting the culture from the kind of
two or three-day holiday break fly is
somewhere on Ryanair to a culture that
might just mean going on holiday months
a year for a longer period of time in a
much deeper way learning more deeply in
the place maybe even work is changing as
well so so people could in a more
flexible way stay in the destination
longer but work from the destination
and and creating the tourism
infrastructures that would enable that
would play into that so yeah people in
Europe so it might apply to us in the
ideal world but we have Chinese running
around we have Indians running around
they're catching up very fast on an
economic scale so they have money to
spend can we say no you can't come can
you as an old continent say towards the
newcomers no you can't do the same error
that we did maybe they want to do that
and how who are we to say maybe you
should find a new way to travel to the
new customers because we only look to to
the European and North American people
but you never get into the mind of the
other tourists of tomorrow how are we
going to cope that is it ethically
acceptable to change their behavior or
asking them to change their future
behavior I don't know this I think we
should more ask such questions on the
long term yeah I mean the Chinese
government is promoting an initiative
that is asking the question what would
an ecological civilization look like and
what role can China have in leading the
world in creating such an ecological
civilization it might just be a big
marketing trick in a lot of the trends
and such but the awareness is growing
everywhere and again it's this sometimes
it's very hard to imagine how quickly
paradigms do shift when they finally
shift and and so since China and India
and the frontline of climate change they
will feel climate change hitting them
hard much sooner and it is an unfair
fact of history that we the northern
nations Europe in Belgium in the Congo
and so on there was the first large wave
of colonialization then was
second wave of neoliberal economics
doing a new extraction and abuse off the
global south and now on top of it the
nations that are responsible for most of
the emissions of greenhouse gases are
the ones that less affected than the
ones that have already been hit twice by
us and and to address that global issue
and that inequality issue is is massive
it goes much beyond tourism and and we
need to address it but again bringing it
back to that little girl with Asperger's
like when when it because one of the
things that condition does is it creates
a single focus and kind of blocks out
the fuzz around it and the issue of
having to respond to this planetary
emergency is now such that we don't have
an option not to respond and to say
about but you cannot economists won't go
along with it or governments won't they
will they'll have to or else we'll
suffer the consequences greatly thank
you so much
mr. wall I have one more personal
question thank you how does your ideal
vacation look like oh that's an
interesting question lots of time to
reconnect to what I would call the the
big power socket which is spending time
in nature wild nature as much as
possible em pruning back to basics so I
I love hiking holidays camping holidays
in a place where also feel that if I
have to travel far to go there that what
I do there is giving back to the local
community so it's engaging with the
local community I have a you know people
talk a lot about work-life balance I
think that's a misconception you're
already setting yourself up for burnout
if you because it somehow feels like
when you add work you're not living and
so for me they
I'm in the blissful situation that I
don't really know where my work starts
and where my life ends and I would do
the same thing with tourism I would
actually go to places only if I can also
set up an opportunity to contribute to
the place by giving talks or workshops
or engaging local people thank you very
much mr. wall thank you so much