[Music]
all right everybody it is Jack Murphy
here Jack might be live and I am with
dr. David lay here in Albuquerque New
Mexico at the Press Club he's been
gracious enough to host me here on his
private members-only Club at the top of
the hill overlooking beautiful
Albuquerque New Mexico surrounded by the
mountains and the cool crisp desert air
and today we are talking about David's
book called ethical porn for dicks a
man's guide to responsible viewing
pleasure
David is an expert in the field of sex
addiction and behavioral sciences as
well as you know pornography and viewing
the viewing habits watch lots of forms
lots of porn and David's actually a very
interesting guy besides this aspect of
his professional career he is a black
belt in Brazilian jiu-jitsu and that's
what I want to start off talking about
because my background is in combat
sports as well I'm more of a Muay Thai
guy but I've definitely rolled quite a
bit I was under the the family tree of
team lloyd irvin over there on the east
coast which you know Lloyd has sort of a
Haiti reputation at this point in some
respect but he turns out some real true
killers there's no question about it and
I love rolling and getting on the mat so
let's talk about that David thanks for
having me and you know tell me how did
you how did you get into jujitsu well I
was a wrestler back in the day you know
wrestled in high school and before that
I thought about wrestling in college and
didn't and I got better I got better
money for grades so you know did that
and let my knees take a rest and
probably like I don't know 13 14 years
ago my son had taken a summer class like
summer camp kind of doing jujitsu with
Gracie Baja and I always take hit I was
taking him to it and I said whoa dude
this looks like fun man then he and and
I said you know would it be okay if I if
I tried this and he goes yeah that's
cool man so it was the best thing he and
I ever did I mean I think that I think
there's some
then really healthy like Daddy gorilla
stuff yeah choking out your son oh my
god that's incredible I had no idea that
it was about father-son things yeah that
was out started and man this is the kind
of thing that my guys need to hear I
mean this is this is how you form a real
good relationship son teach him the
physicality of combat sports yeah and
that's one of the things I say when do
we get to be you know aggressive in this
kind of healthy sort of you know
accepted way there's not a lot of places
of that you know I wrote this article in
Psychology Today about you know the
psychology of Brazilian Jujitsu and that
was one of the things I talked about you
know just just some of the reasons why
this you know kind of feels addictive I
think addictive
you know languages is bullshit who take
you too far but we'll get to that yeah
but but you know for for he and I you
know to be able to be physical with each
other and roll around and then for me to
be able to dominate him and and show you
know this is how you do that and this is
how you do it safely it gave him a
tremendous amount of respect for me and
then you know he he became a guitarist
and a musician and you know started
chasing girls and he had better things
to do and I just kept doing it and how
long did he stick with it um he got to
blue belt so I want to say he did it
probably four or five years maybe and
you know that's the great thing about
you Jitsu is that you do not get handed
know about man that is no it is no strip
mall Taekwon yeah I've been here for six
months and I got a black belt yeah I
mean that's right and and and you know
and I just kept doing it and and and the
neat thing is that Albuquerque is like
this we know this hub mecca yeah world
famous yeah I mean we you know because
of the altitude we're a mile high and
then we've got we got Jackson wink here
and you know they've got yeah they've
got a stellar you know school and and
Rick Jackson yeah Greg Jackson and and
Winkeljohn and
and who are some of the guys that
they've trained oh I mean well they got
Holly Holm they're you know she she took
down Ronda Rousey we all saw that and
you know John Jones who's you know God
has got his complicated complicated life
and you know Diego Sanchez I roll with
him a lot and you know cowboy Cerrone I
roll with him a lot he's in he's in he's
got a fight actually this weekend and
he's kind of at odds with with Jackson
wink right now they've got some kind of
bad blood going but but this is a place
where people come from all over the
country all over the world to just come
and train even right get ready
you know pre-fight hands etc yeah and
and so the neat thing is I mean I'm you
know I'm a Gracie Baja grappling guy I
mean III do not take hits very well I
don't want I don't want to do likes
drinking I don't want to be hit in the
face I don't want to be kicked in the
face I don't want to be spit in the face
man but but I'll choke you out and and
and so Gracie Bob you know Gracie bajas
very traditional Brazilian jiu-jitsu
under Carlos and all that and and my
lineage is very very direct and and you
know I got my black belt under under
when did you earn that you know it's
probably been probably been too year two
to three years ago now oh man
congratulations and yeah it's okay what
twelve years probably like 11 yeah 1011
I think something like that you know I I
mean I swear to God I mean I I didn't
think I was ever gonna get beyond but
brown belt but but I didn't really give
a show because I loved it so much I just
I just kept doing it and her birthday
Alan Carr is um his name's chiusa the
world champ you know multiple times you
know light heavyweight and I trained
under him and and the neat thing and
he's one of John Jones as coaches and
and then I trained under Hafele afraid
those bharata whom the bharata Plata is
named after him I don't know if you know
that move and and he's wanted you know
Holly Holmes's you know coaches and so
it's you know it we have this
relationship with Jackson where
you know once a month we all get
together and have a noogie you know just
kind of you know grapple fast and and
it's cool because all these all these
just monsters from I mean like Chechnya
I mean I've rolled with let you know a
couple of nights ago is rolling with
this guy from Mongolia I mean these
these you know just MMA bruisers who
come in right world champions yeah world
champion grapplers yeah I mean I can't
yeah I can't tell you how many times
I've rolled with somebody and then
afterwards I'm like who was a guy now
look in love I'm like oh shit did you
did you and I imagine the answer is yes
but did you have you done like combo
competitions and such you know um yeah I
did the whole competition tournament
circuit back when I was a kid and and I
and I just hate losing late like like
nobody's business and and the thing is
that you know to be a good competitor to
be a good tournament kind of guy you got
to walk in with this with this
confidence you know I know I'm gonna
fuck everybody here up and ain't nobody
couldn't take me down and the thing is
I'm a psychologist I mean I know I know
how you know yeah I know I know empty
that confidence is so I I can't walk in
to a tournament without thinking you
know damn if I if I mess up this round
and I you know I lose by two points I'm
out 300 bucks for this tournament and
all this this is really worth it and the
thing is I do it you know I do it for
the stress management because when you
got when you got a 200-pound guy trying
to choke you you can't think about
budget you can't think about human
resources you can't think about you
can't think about anything but survival
and that is the one of the only things
that has ever gotten my head out of my
ass and and and it's one of the
healthiest things in my life and and I I
love it I love it for that and and it's
great for my ego I mean I you know I'm
40
I'm 45 or 46 he does not even look a day
over 35 I've got a knife I got an
upgrade for both of us and I'm younger
than you yeah
and you know and I'm this I'm this kind
of a little older dude and you know your
listeners can't see but I've got one
hand I was born with one hand and and
and so these you know the these fighters
come in from all over the world we get
on the mat together and they're like
yeah who's this guy with one hand and
then I choke the shit out of them and I
use my arm to just beat him up and
jujitsu is his got so much to do with
grip right yeah I grip around the collar
grip on the guy grip on the the sleeve
yeah that I mean I can't even imagine
what it's like not being able to grab
with both hands well see you see that's
the funny thing so the rule ah the rule
in jujitsu is that you can't put fingers
inside the sleeve right okay well my arm
ain't got no fingers on it baby
and so I can put my arm inside your
sleeve and I can get a grip like you've
never seen so its advantage yeah and and
you know I hope nobody listening here is
gonna come fuck me up with this but most
guys who roll with me the first time
they roll with me they think my arms a
disability and then the second time they
roll with me they think damn this isn't
fair you know you've got an advantage
got it yeah got it so one thing that I
always you know I work with a bunch of
guys that are looking to try to find
their way in life and trying to you know
whether it's coming out of a bad
marriage whether it's breaking up with a
girlfriend maybe they never even had a
girlfriend maybe they trying to figure
out how to make more money you know
really all comes down to like getting
get in their mind right yeah and you
know the first thing that I always tell
guys it's like look you gotta get you
got to get your ass in the gym right
seems pretty simple but not everybody's
doing it and then I especially recommend
like combat sports like find find a gym
and and I tell you I tell them I'm like
look they have whole programs where the
concept is you know get fit without
getting hit right like you can go and
you're not gonna get beat up and you're
not gonna you're not gonna be hassled
and you're gonna find a community so
what I always try and I hope you're
gonna back me up on this what I always
tried to what I always tried to explain
to guys is that when I first when I
first picked up the phone to call the
local MMA gym to be like you know just
inquire I was shitting my pants nervous
cuz I had this idea everybody there was
gonna be some sort of badass killer and
they were all gonna be like arrogant as
fuck and they were all gonna wanna you
know just like bully you around and be
all full of ego and everything but I
found the exact opposite to be true and
I found that there was a real absence of
ego for the most part and I was
wondering if that's been a for your
experience and if you can talk to sort
of the camaraderie the community and
sort of the whole experience of the
brotherhood and sisterhood but you know
the community of a combat sports you
know community I travel a lot for
business you know and I take my gear
with me and I've never walked into a
school where I wasn't absolutely
welcomed
you know and you know I sometimes I
think maybe I should travel with a
purple belt instead of a black belt you
know and and maybe I wouldn't have such
a target on my back so everybody said oh
is that a real black belt you get that
on eBay you know but you know I will
disagree slightly Jack and I'll say that
you know sometimes folks with ego you
know they do walk in and and the thing
is that they get humbled pretty quick
right you know and and you know and my
professor you know one time he told me
that he's a David you know you're one of
my you're one of my snipers and I'm like
what and he said yeah you know when
folks come in you're one of the guys I
send Adam so that they so that they
learn real quick we got a solid school
here I mean do you know come on
they forgot if an old dude with one hand
can tap you out whoa you got some stuff
to learn yeah no doubt and I have worked
my way up through the ranks and my more
type Club and I became sort of that same
guy and it was also also because you
know being ring experienced and being
you know have a ton of matt time i also
know how to calibrate - right so you
yeah you can feel the guy out and if he
needs if he needs a little lesson you
give him a little lesson if you need to
bring him along you bring him along and
man I always always relish that boy it
was so much fun I and that is the that
is some of that kind of camaraderie I
mean again you know there's not a lot of
places in the world today right now
especially in the states where you know
guys can be you know aggressive with
each other and challenge each other push
each other to the limit and then walk
off the mat and this is your best friend
I mean you know this that this guy that
you were just you are just trying to
choke into unconsciousness is talking to
you about how awesome that was right I
mean literally III the I choked is one
guy out and
and and and he you know he passed out
and and I you know crapped my pants I
thought it broke his brain and and then
and then he five minutes later he was
telling me wow that was one of the most
amazing experiences in my life don't
there's not a lot of places for that and
one of the things I you know one of the
things I like about you know about
combat sports about you know martial
arts and jujitsu and and everything is
just that it's one it's one of the
places where you know being masculine
being aggressive being dominant you know
is is allowed and encouraged and safe
and positive and positive right yeah and
these are all reasons why I recommend
guys get their ass down to do some sort
of more type but you did and you can you
can do I will admit more Thai is more of
a young man's game I mean just the
recovery the recovery time cardio holy
crap ricardio the cardio is on is on a
whole nother level you can be doing
crossfit every day and like going to try
to do like five rounds more thai and
it's like a whole different experience
but the recovery time of you know just
getting bashed I mean more ties like a
war of attrition in many ways yeah but
you know there are guys you can roll
well into your 40s and 50s hell they
even have like the senior circuits they
know there ain't no senior circuit for
Muay Thai yeah yeah that's when I'll
start competing you know when I'm like
63 and there's only like three of his
left yeah I did and ask me anything on
Twitter the other day and somebody asked
me what is what was the worst fight you
were ever in in your life and I'll tell
you a street fight or sanctioned ring
fight nope it was training sessions with
my own sparring partners and because
those guys put it to me like nobody ever
they pushed me to limit it like nobody
ever I've never been challenged
physically as I have been in a fight
camp and training camp that I ever was
in the ring I never lost in the ring but
you know I was just amateur and on the
street nothing I mean I had my arm broke
right in front of him
my face I still have seven pins on a
plate in my forearm and dude
but I took him into the emergency room
and we're just we're still brothers
right like you know being pushed being
pushed to your limits and even past them
in some cases by someone that you
respect is a is an experience that you
don't find very many places and it
builds confidence build strength and
builds resilience and it builds a
community where as you said and this is
another key element to it where you can
really develop your sense of math your
masculine identity you can develop your
sense of dominance you can understand
see you can understand that hierarchies
aren't necessarily a bad thing and that
we all fit into a place in the hierarchy
and you know what it's okay yeah it's
okay you know one of the things like I
talked about and I think you know I even
talked about this in therapy you know
I'm a psychologist know therapists and I
still see less patients and you know one
of the things I really learned in
jiu-jitsu was being in a bad place and
being in a position where you're weak is
survivable and you know I think I think
so many of us go through life and we we
try to avoid you know ever being in a
position where we're not dominant where
were vulnerable and what I learned from
jiu-jitsu was and from martial arts and
being in these was that I could be in
that position and survive and be safe
right I could put my I learned the
confidence to where I could put myself
in a position where I was very at risk
and yet I had the self belief and the
skills to survive that and get out and
maybe come out even better and well
definitely another that's an essential
life skill absolutely well yeah I agree
jack but I don't think I'm not sure
people are learning that and I mean I
that's right oh my god it's the exact
opposite narco
yeah I mean you know we yeah I mean we
put people in these positions where you
know once you identify yourself as a
victim you know then then you're
protected from from kind of ever having
to you know push yourself and God I
think that's deep self-sabotage
yeah well it's happening all across
college campuses there's you know recent
book out called the coddling of the
American mind where the whole thing is
set up right now to protect people from
ever experiencing any sort of any sort
of negativity any sort of stress
anything that is gonna trigger or remind
them of some stressful situation that
they had before and it's been
institutionalized and you know in my in
my discussion that you guys heard last
week with Jeffrey Miller we talked
extensively about the effect of you know
policy government policy in colleges and
and people the way that were we're
trying to find bulldozer parenting we're
trying to find every which way to
eliminate stress in people's lives yeah
and we're at the end of the day that's
actually making us weaker and less
resilient and again another reason why
I'm totally get your ass down to the gym
and I'll tell you honestly I found
through yoga a very similar experience
of putting yourself in a stressful
physical situation be a you know a bend
or a twist or some sort of position
that's uncomfortable that's pushing your
body to the limit where you have to then
hold it and then you learn how to
breathe through it yeah and you learn
how to breathe through the stress and
I've actually found that yoga translates
really well to jujitsu and I know a lot
of guys that roll that do yoga and find
this same connection very well because
of the way you have to calm your mind
right cuz man you can be in jujitsu you
could be all stacked up and twist it up
and you have to take a deep breath and
exhale and like really just clear your
mind and just something that we need to
be able to do all the time yes sit there
sit there yeah sit there and live
through it and see what's on the end I
mean I I wrote this piece on psychology
today yeah I write a lot
and it was on not just a meathead over
here yeah oh yeah I guess I don't know I
don't know I don't know about that but
it roses basically you know on
victimhood culture and it's it's
interesting I wrote this piece a few
years ago and it was apparently pretty
significant because it I mean it's just
this freakin blog post and it's been
cited now in academic journals like I
don't know 15 times yeah it's just you
know off the cuff but but I talked in it
about you know yeah we've we've kind of
created this situation where the the
only kind of safe thing if you're
accused of being you know an abuser or
monster or whatever the only safe thing
is to say well I'm a victim - mm-hmm you
know you know and you see this all the
time with you know well you know this
guy was abusing people and then he comes
out and says well it's because I was
abused you know and and we've got this
just you know my victimhood Trump's your
victimhood Trump's your victimhood and
it just goes on and on and on and I you
know as a therapist I mean you know when
I work with people you know who've
suffered traumas and and victim a
experiences and everything else the job
is learning how to define your life
differently the job is learning how to
say that experience happened to me but
is not me
and again I mean I think I think that's
one of the things that we learned kind
of you know in life and jujitsu and and
whatever is is you know I I can survive
this and unfortunately that's the that's
one of the messages in all this kind of
victim culture that that I really worry
about because when we tell people that
your identity is as a victim that
becomes all that they are it becomes a
currency as well yeah because your
currency in life and then and then there
becomes a competition yeah whether
purposeful or not it
tends to happen where people people find
their place in a status hierarchy based
on their relative victimhood and I
really a few years ago I started
learning about this and and especially
Jonathan he hates article in the
Atlantic in 2015 called the coddling
American mind and where he talks about
the transition America has made from an
honor culture to a victim culture and I
you know my first instinct was to say
that this is this is bullshit this isn't
really happening but like every data
point that I get every experience that I
have every anecdote that I have every
expert that I talk to is just confirming
it all along the way and it's really
starting to scare me because that's not
gonna build the backbone of a strong
nation and it's not gonna build a
backbone of a great country and I'm very
concerned about what's gonna happen when
these people matriculate into
professional world and into their 30s
and 40s and we're seeing we're seeing
the sea change already in our in our
professional institutions where when
they hire recent graduates that
graduates aren't changing anymore the
institutions are changing to accommodate
the recent graduates yeah you know I me
and this might be a place where we kind
of disagree I think that good people are
more resilient than we give them credit
for and and I think that you know the
thing that gives me hope is that as much
as we try and you know fill all these
kids heads with you know with all this
just kind of unrealistic bullshit
they'll come back around you know the
baby boomers today in the 70s they were
free loved hippies and then you know
things flipped and they became you know
Reaganomics you know it was that movie
Wall Street with Michael Douglas you
know readers yeah there you go and and
Gordon Gekko right and we are
overly arrogant with a degree to which
our you know our psychology and our
social engineering can change people
because the research at this point is
pretty damn clear that you know who
people are is a majority biological it's
not stuff that you're gonna change
sooner you're not links later no and and
I think anybody who is is is is really
just kind of full in themselves and
denying the data you know I mean I
Mirai tabat sexuality we'll talk about
that but you know my one of the things
have run into it's just fascinating is
all of these people who are you know
swingers or in open relationships or
polyamorous or na monogamous or whatever
and and then they find out their parents
were to me just didn't tell them yeah I
didn't tell them and um you know that
the genetics the genetics is huge and so
you know honestly jacket that it that's
one of the few kind of things that hope
that I'm clinging to right now and screw
you if you try and take it away from me
that as you'll choke me out I'm not
taking your what six-four six-four been
a no black bone jiu-jitsu was done it
was designed for the other guy to beat
the big guy yeah wow this yeah one of
the one of the one of the highlights of
my career is you know multiple times
chat tapping out this dude who's six
foot eight you know 300 something pounds
yeah well I'll take his word for it
yeah but we we can't change people as
much as we really kind of think that we
can and so I think that you know we got
this blip right now and and and a lot of
ways I think it's good I mean I think
the more we can move to you know kind of
a non-judgmental non shaming kind of
approaches the better especially around
issues like around gender and sexuality
but I but I also kind of think that you
know people are people in humans or
humans and this stuff is gonna
the wave is gonna crest and and then
people are gonna come out of it that's
interesting I've often wondered to what
extent there's gonna be variability and
behaviors versus variability in our
communication about those behaviors and
I think that you really nailed it there
when you said that you know maybe our
parents behaviors were just a little bit
more you know well well hidden and
there's definitely a trend these days to
be much more public about your sexuality
about your gender ideas about how you're
living your life your private life in
the bedroom and whatnot and you know in
the circles that I run in I'm definitely
probably the most sex positive guy
that's out there writing in my sort of
sphere on the internet and I've
definitely been I think that's how we
met right it may it may have been but I
don't I don't remember exactly to be
honest but you know we definitely cross
paths on Twitter and talking about
sexuality and and masculinity and it's
it's been an experience for me to be in
this world that's like sort of a
combination of like traditional mindsets
but also like pick up and game and red
pill philosophies and like and like how
people are squaring all those things and
and squaring like notions of you know
guys you know seeking out multiple
partners and women seeking the best
partner and like how we're squaring that
with modern relationships and you know I
think to the extent that we can talk
about things more openly and more
honestly I think it's better for
everybody and we'll have everybody to
sort of make their own choices and you
know my conversation with Jeffrey Miller
was very much on the same vein in terms
of sort of being an accepting of
people's lifestyle choices but you know
also then you know being highly critical
of people who are critical of people's
lifestyle choices at the same time
whether it's you know coming from the
right or the left or whatnot you know
I've always been somebody that believes
and live and let live and as long as
whatever you're doing is in harming Mir
and
one else and I don't really give a shit
what you do right and you know I think
that there's there's some of that that's
really really missing today
and that's actually a pretty good
transition into what I wanted to talk
about today with you beyond the combat
sport stuff which we really really have
in common tonight and again I just want
to hammer home for guys that like when
you're really trying to get your life
together and you're really trying to
find a way to build your inner strength
and your confidence and again I always
stress this element of building
community you know there's no better way
in my mind then going out and joining a
gym getting your ass in shape getting
your ass kicked a couple times
eventually finding some new white belt
fishes that you can eat up and stomp and
then finding your way up the hierarchy
and making great friends along the way
so I will constantly be pitching that
but in my sort of men's community online
there is a tendency for people to say
that pornography and masturbation are
detrimental to man's personal
development both personally and then in
their relationships and there's even
this is November something or other it's
Election Day that we're doing this I'm
missing out on the midterm run down
where we are using this as a way to
avoid Washington right well you know
David David and I are definitely on the
on the other side of the aisle from each
other but either either way we're both
sort of avoiding the election stuff
right now but the there the people have
been talking about November being a
nofap November hey no no no masturbation
November and as apparently they really
want prostate cancer yeah we're gonna
get we're gonna get to that help the
health benefits of jerking off for sure
but and then there's also guys that will
say that you're viewing pornography is
like and and cuckold position in which
you're observing another man have sex
with the woman of your fantasy and and
somehow that's an inferior position for
you to be in and again you know of the
guys that I roll with and run with I'm
definitely
to be the most x+ and Lefty of this and
so that's why I'm very interested in
talking to you about your experience in
your research and in your your clinical
studies and in your clinical work
because I love all the guys that I run
with okay I respect them a tremendous
amount but you know a lot of us a lot of
them are shooting from the hip on these
kind of things and this is this is an
issue that affects every single male
yeah and it's taps really deeply into
who we are as humans as animals as
sexual beings it really um has a big
impact on your self-image and so for me
it's really really important to get this
message out to my community well
whatever your message is going to be you
know I'm not I'm not trying to preempt
you here by any means but you know I am
familiar familiar with your work so why
don't you sort of take me through your
your academic background and then a
lead-in to how you came to write this
book that you did and then we can talk
about the findings and your experiences
yeah so you know a psychologist last
name ley I didn't have much options but
to work with sex right you know actually
I started working with sex offenders and
it's hard work and that was that was
your first clinical experiences well sex
yeah yeah we're working with sexual sex
offenders pedophiles and and and rapists
and violence so what you would like what
go in to where they were incarcerated or
deal the above yeah welcome with him
incarcerated working with him outpatient
working with him pre adjudication and
everything else and you know and but the
interesting thing was that I mean the
reason I was able to work with those
guys was because I went at them with
kind of a non-judgmental approach
they're human I'm human let's figure out
and and the more we removed kind of the
shame and stigma the more they were able
to be healthy and safe and
you know that's one of the things that's
very clear the more we stigmatize and
shame and isolate you know people like
pedophiles the worse they get right well
let's let's let's not you know associate
this conversation that we're trying to
have here with like normal normal normal
male healthy behavior with with what's
clearly technically deviant behavior
right so we're not talking about deviant
behavior we're talking about a twenty
five year old guy who who is at home on
a Friday night he's jerking off and see
that's the thing that guy got referred
to me because ninety five percent of
therapists in the United States have no
training in sexuality no training is
mind-boggling no training that's where
all sexual beings yeah I mean you know
Kinsey said it best at a definition of a
nymphomaniac or a sex addict or deviant
is anybody who has more sex or different
sex and then the therapist and and and
the problem is that you know most
therapists at this one is is a largely
female driven field and you know they
they get no training in sexuality and so
they judge you know your sexuality if
you if you endorse it or identified in
therapy they judge it based on whether
they would do it or not right and
they're not men so they wouldn't yeah
and so and so you know they they're not
aware of their bias and and the
difference in female and male attitudes
and so very normal you know kind of
sexual behaviors were getting referred
to me as as kind of deviant and I'm
going to give me an example oh Jesus I
mean this one you know 18 year old guy
came to me a couple years ago and he
said yeah I'm a sex addict I'm addicted
to masturbation and and the kid you know
he kids unwilling to shower because he
was he was afraid to be alone alone with
his own naked body those were his words
and and so I asked the dude you know hey
how often you jerking off and he goes
once a week get the fuck out of here and
I'm like you know yeah the guy's
addicted but here's the thing he grew up
in a highly conservative highly
religious family where any sex other
than heterosexual monogamy
was sinful and unhealthy but now the
guys away at college and so he's making
his own life and he's figuring out his
own how he wants to be but he had no
framework he had no background to
understand it and so those are the folks
that come to me and those are the folks
that I'm really worried about those
those are the ones I want to help
because we've got this really
fascinating situation right now where
you know we've got generations of kids
who were taught absence only education
and then they were given access to the
Internet with all the goddamn sex you
want and then when they when they
struggle with it when they're like holy
crap this feels amazing I want to keep
dealing to this all day long then
they're told they're a pervert and
there's something wrong with them
know who's telling them that you think
yeah and that interesting so you know
sex addiction and porn addiction are
diagnosed predominantly by religiously
based therapists and you know what we
have right now is this we have this this
this kind of sea change this battle
between changing sexual values and
conservative largely morally driven
folks who want to preserve very
restrictive constrictive sexual
attitudes you know that that only you
know heterosexual monogamy for instance
is is acceptable sexuality and they're
seeing the world change you know the the
sexual values are changing almost on a
daily basis and and they're really
concerned about that and so they're
they're they're doubling down and
they're doubling down largely you know
around pornography because what
pornography does is pornography offers
an outlet largely to men but to
increasing numbers of women to enjoy or
pursue sexual experiences that they
don't have to invest in the degree to
which you used to have to invest in
order to acquire sex Gil Dean's is you
know she's this hyper feminist rabid
anti-porn person but
she and I in a battle often but when I
think she said one time was that she
said you know sex workers are the scabs
of feminism no ma'am and I think it's a
really powerful thing because a scab is
somebody who undercuts the price right
right and so what she's saying is that
this is an economic issue right you used
to
don't break the the price of pussy the
price of pussy the price of milk right
don't don't give away the milk for free
because nobody will buy the cow right
because because female sexuality is a
cartel that's right and pornography and
internet pornography puts high speed you
know milk in the bedroom mm-hmm
it does so what I'm hearing from you
though is you're saying that religious
based conservative therapists are
referring once a week jerk off kids to
you or sex addiction but we're also
saying that radical left feminists are
saying you can't have pornography Buster
because pornography decreases the price
of pussy that's right and it's not
interesting there's this there's this
frickin bizarre marriage between
feminism and hyper right moral religious
groups over the issue of pornography and
so then I you know I want to understand
dude were they so scared of you know why
are they why are they fighting over this
and you know we see some interesting
stuff you know people who people who
watch pornography become less afraid of
sexuality and they become more accepting
of diverse sexuality and in some cases
they become less religious and so you
know these you know Utah right now is is
kind of the the hotbed of a lot of this
and I was I was brought out to Utah to
give a talk on pornography there's very
large group of Mormons and I did the
talk completely coated butter underneath
my clothes
not as a kinky thing because but because
I was told that that was the best way to
get tar and feathers off right so but
the thing that they told me was you know
we don't have a language to talk about
this the way you do David they they you
know I talk about ethical pornography I
talk about
responsible sexuality I talk about you
know being a man and being aware of your
sexual needs accepting them and then
negotiating them from the place of
honesty is opposed to shame right and
they don't have that language they're
taught to hide and suppress their
thoughts of sexuality and the the really
interesting thing is the more and
research out of Israel just recently it
really demonstrated this the more we
attempt to suppress thoughts of
sexuality the stronger they get I think
I think we see that you know it's it was
always the guys that were the most
proselytizing and one thing about
sexuality well yeah I mean you mentioned
you know cuckolding and so you know my
first book is it's called insatiable
wives and it's about you know female
sexuality and and cuckolding and
hotwives and just recently last I guess
last year you know I published research
actually with with you know Dan Savage
who's the you know the the liberal left
you know you know you know nightmare and
he's a good friend of mine and and also
Justin Lee Miller's psychologist and and
we we looked at we looked at cuckolding
and CNN covered it and and CNN's you
know covered was well you know the these
psychologists are saying you know
healthy people who engage in cuckolding
it can be a healthy behavior well the
right-wing media went nuts and they I
mean Breitbart and Fox and and I mean
Tucker Carlson's on video ranting about
what a lunatic I am and and you know and
and and and I'm I didn't know he was
going on I was getting attacked on
Twitter about it and I said you know all
you all your right-wing folks were just
you know obsessed with callin everybody
Cox don't you understand that we realize
that's your secret fantasy and so that
went nuts and well you know it's funny
the word came into prominence in 2015
because it was a derisive way to revert
to a rhino
book in name only right it was somebody
who was willing to forsake their
commitments for the pleasure the simple
pleasure of like corporate money or
whatever whatever else so that term cop
became really really really nuclear hot
in 2015-2016 and in fact it got played
into a term called the conservative
right it's okay and so the whole Trump
Marga phenomenon actually was was a push
back against the cock sir motives and it
was like that was that was part of the
rhetoric as a way to get rid of those
guys but I want to I want to go back to
something that you were talking about
earlier which was that pornography
brings a sexual experience to two people
without the labor or effort previously
required now I think that this is
actually the crux of the argument with
since sort of my community against
pornography in that if you're a guy that
doesn't have a satisfying female
relationship and you're heterosexual if
you don't have a female relationship
you're not satisfied with you know how
frequently you're getting laid or having
a loved and committing intimate
relationship that it takes practice and
it takes effort and it takes getting out
in there in the field and and winning or
losing and trial and error and
masturbating to pornography is though is
a way to it's like a short circuit it's
like a it's like a shortcut to that
release the pleasure of the release
which is in the end not nearly as
fulfilling as a long-term intimate
sexual relationship and I think that
what people will say is that to feel the
build-up and the urge and sort of the
testosterone and
the hormones sort of willing you forward
into a sexual experiences of is a
valuable wave to ride and that
masturbating to pornography in
particular sort of takes away some of
the drive for you to become a better man
and for you to get out there and to
actually make real world experiences
happen for yourself yeah so it's all
complete and utter bullshit
tell me why so tell me how you really
yeah so first I'm gonna say something
that probably just gonna piss you and
your listeners off do it do it you know
if you identify as a porn addict you are
assuming a victim identity and you are
making yourself
porns bitch you are saying that you are
such a weak individual that pornography
has just taken you over and you can't do
anything about it and now you must be
protected from it oh you poor thing III
don't understand the apocrypha how can
you be against you know you know victim
culture in the in the community in our
country and then say oh but we must be
protected from the dangers of
pornography screw you sorry I love it
give it no this is honest to god David
this is exactly why I wanted to have
this conversation with you cuz cuz you
are a guy you are a masculine dude you
are jujitsu black belt you're a tough
guy you're a father you're a husband you
got kids you am a grandfather
grandfather you run a multi-billion
dollar organization you're an executive
director you're a prominent thought
leader in your field and so this is not
some fuckin sjw therapists guilt shaming
year this is not some fuckin woman that
doesn't understand anything about what
it's like to be a man and you're gonna
give these guys a straight dope which is
exactly why I'm here
so you know people who watch pornography
and particularly men and first let me
just praise you jack I mean you did
something in minute ago
you recognize how significant it is you
mentioned horde masturbation and you
know I just want to shoot myself in the
head every time there's a conversation
about the dangers of pornography without
discussing the fact that 90% of porn use
involves masturbation
so most modern anti-porn arguments are
just recycled anti masturbation
arguments from the 1900s and 1800 you
know Kellogg's Corn Flakes was invented
as an anti masturbation food because
Kellogg you know and all these crazy
doctors of the day believe that you know
jerking off made you weak it made you
less of a man and made you immoral and
all these other things masturbation and
you know sex frequency and orgasm
frequency increases testosterone it does
not decrease it did you say that one
more time please yeah it increases you
have and the more sex you have the
higher your testosterone not the lower
now is there a difference between an
ejaculation with a woman versus a solo
ejaculation in terms of your hormone
hormonal response in terms of my
hormonal experience we need to bring my
wife into that conversation
there ain't a lick of science that would
support that now I think I would love to
see research that examines what you know
whether the brain chemistry or the brain
electronics brain electrical responses
look different when you're masturbating
to pornography versus when you're
masturbating to fantasy versus when
you're masturbating with a beautiful
girl sitting in front again right
exactly
I would love to die I'd be a subject for
that research I can give you all three
times if you'd like give me 10 minutes
but but but no research exists and so
what there is is lots and lots of
hypotheticals lots and lots of you know
that you know there's these you know
they're they all these self-declared
experts online who are the pseudoscience
snake oil salesmen that are telling you
that you know masturbating to
pornography changes your brain and that
porn porn changes your brain
and what there is you know what there
may be is a learning effect because what
happens when we watch porn and when
masturbates porn is that kind of as you
said it's easy you don't have to work at
it you don't have to focus on your
partner's needs you don't have to manage
your needs you know the internet is easy
to turn on just push the button you not
to buy it dinner and you know it's the
Internet has orgasms very very easily
real life is a little more complicated
than that but here's the thing
porn is fantasy just the same way as you
know the Marvel superhero movies are our
fantasy we watch fantasy as a way to
escape from some of the challenges and
the work the reality is the problem
right now is that we have all these
people who were never taught what
reality is and then they're learning
about sex from pornography without any
understanding that this is fantasy and
so you know like I see lots of guys who
you know they they watch porn and
important lots of guys come on girls
faces and everybody loves it and then
the guy comes on a girl's face and she's
like what the fuck are you doing so I
told these dudes don't come on the girls
face unless you can be a gentleman while
you do it what's that mean well it means
that you have to have some respect for
yourself and for her you have to have
talked about it with her you have to
have some idea of whether she wants you
to ejaculate don't surprise a girl with
that don't don't surprise her and we're
not talking about that again we're not
we're not talking about this kind of
inherent sort of self-acceptance I mean
I you know I'm giving a talk in New York
City this weekend about masculinity and
as his big conference a little is a
little challenging more nervous about it
but you know what I'm talking about is
sexual integrity and that social
integrity integrity in general and being
a gentleman I mean are we even allowed
to talk about being a gentleman these
days because you know there's almost
this assumption
if you're a gentleman they're chauvinist
pig you're sexist oh my god you're a
racist and you know and and I want to go
back to that I want to talk about what
it is to accept yourself and speak from
a place of confidence and honesty and an
assertiveness well you know one of my
first big essays and it's fact it's
still my most popular essay every single
day was called for ways to be more
dominant and in wasn't one of the
examples that I give is when you go to a
restaurant with a woman before the
waiter comes talk to her ask her what
she wants and then when the waiter comes
you just tell the waiter what she just
told you now you look pretty smooth
because you're like I'll have Bob a
blonde lady we'll have you know she'll
have the chicken salad but but you asked
you you ordered for her but you asked
her first right and when it comes time
to come on a girl's face you know you
can do it but you know you talked about
it earlier and she's like yeah you know
I'd kind of like you to maybe do that
you're like oh well I can do that so
that like you can you can be a gentleman
you can be assertive you can be dominant
you can be in charge but you can also be
respectful about it and I think that
that's a that's a really good point now
oh I wanted to I wanted to circle back
to something we were just talking about
which was sort of what the experience
like is actually masturbating to
pornography in relationships in the real
world and I was thinking about actually
combat sports experience because tell me
about your naked no I'm thinking about
visualization right I'm thinking about
the benefits of positively imagining
yourself in a situation and like what
impact does that have on you
physiologically and biology or
biologically speaking and like it you
know it puts you in a position where
you're more comfortable you know if you
can visualize yourself in a situation
you know what what impact does that have
on you and is there like a similarity to
like fantasy versus viewing things with
your eyes and again like you said with
like masturbating next
buddy sit you know somebody's sitting
next to you you know I think that we get
all these things conflated and so in
your mind like when you're when you're
visualizing this fantasy whether it's
with your eyes closed or whether with
your eyes open is there a difference is
there is there some somehow that's like
affecting your brain in some different
way I mean to me that sounds crazy yeah
Jack it's crazy
um I so one of the things that that is
possibly going on here and and you know
I'm enough of a scientist and a
psychologist to say you know anything is
possible and and here's what I think
could be going on but I'm willing to
change my opinion based on data yeah and
and that's where that's where you need
to be skeptical if you're talking to
somebody or listening to somebody who is
telling you that they know by god they
know they are 100 percent certain that
this is what's happening you need to run
like a run like a chicken because they
they are trying to sell you shit and
because you know nothing in this stuff
is certain everything is developing
there's so much we don't know so one of
the things that might be going on is
that you know pornography offers the
ability to masturbate to sexual fantasy
made external you know if pornography is
nothing more nothing less than our
sexual fantasies made visible on video
and now would you I think somebody might
argue that it's actually working the
other way in that the the variety of
pornographer graphic material is
actually influencing people's fantasies
what's probably leading to is actually
diminishing of fantasies is that because
you know you don't have to fantasize you
don't have to work in your own brain to
get turned on you just turn on the porn
now the question is what if there was no
porn you know all of a sudden if the
internet ended you know if you were all
of a sudden stuck on a deserted island
and you had all the coconut oil you want
to porn
you know and you've been jerking off you
know I know a guy who has never I know
many guys actually who have never
masturbated in their entire lives
without pornography this one dude he's
an artist and if he couldn't find
pornography he would draw a picture of
naked woman and then jerk off to it
which is brilliant and creative now if
that guy was stuck on a deserted island
you know would he be able to create
fantasies in his own mind again I
believe in the resiliency of people and
I think at a time he probably would
right so what what maybe is happening
right now is that pornography is leading
to people kind of diminishing their own
creative sexual fantasies and they're
just kind of adopting or accepting the
sexual fantasies that are present in
pornography but we but we kind of don't
know yeah and while we don't know I
think we we need to be very very
cautious now one of the other things is
that you know there is this there's this
myth there's this there's this kind of
you know modern sort of approach that oh
my god oh my god you know the
pornography today the pornography online
is is harder core and more dangerous and
it's more it's more available and
everything else than ever before in
history
but you know Iola straighted my book
ethical burnford exile astray did it
with what I call petrol porn and they're
naughty erotic dirty petroglyphs from
around the goddamn planet some of them
you know we're here in Albuquerque and
we got all these petroglyphs just about
five miles from here could you just
define quickly at a petroglyph is from
yes so it's a petroglyphs are these are
these rock carvings you know and Native
Americans chiseled them into the end of
the end of these rocks and they tell
stories and a lot of them are dirty as
hell and and that the interesting thing
is I mean around the planet there are
these cave drawings and rock carvings
that they contain everything that modern
pointing contains added one of the
pictures they didn't include in the book
because it was too dirty is a 2000 year
old picture of a money shot of a guy
jerking often and is ejaculate flying
and you know that's 2,000 years old
right so all this stuff has been around
forever I mean I you know in terms of my
porn you know the kind of porn I watch I
like you know I like amateur porn and I
like really old porn I like porn from
the early 1900's which is some of the
dirty Samantha you're gonna say seven
seventy that's when I grew up man with
all the with all the pubic area I love
it well I think that that an argument
that people make is that pornography is
like you know compelling women to behave
in ways that they wouldn't ordinarily
behave I think that obviously based on
these spectrograph and based on you know
just what I know about women's sexuality
through my greater than statistically
relevant sample size is that that that's
absolutely fucking horseshit so well so
I'll say two things there you know first
the interesting thing about the history
of pornography is that it was
historically only accessible to wealthy
men and so that's where that's where
things start changing now is that the
Internet
the Internet has democratized access to
information about sexuality and sexual
material to people who did not use to
have access to it women and poor people
and and I think that's really powerful
and I also think that's one of the
reasons why when you look at most of the
bodies who are actively resisting you
know pornography and identifying it as a
scourge they are largely these
conservative wealthy institutions who
want you to be afraid of sex and they
don't want you to have information or
access to it right and so they know the
other thing is that a you know women are
accessing you know erotic material and
pornography online more than ever before
and what is what I find really really
interesting is that you know when women
access pornography they do so in a
little bit of a different way than men
their predominant sex
simulated rape porn at three times the
rate that men are and so when you're
sure yes so so when you know anti-porn
activists and such are saying that oh my
god you know we we need to get rid of
you know pourings is causing them in to
rape well actually it appears to be an
outlet for women who have that fantasy
and don't have access to it in their
life right well you know again going
back to some of my older writing I mean
I certainly addressed this issue the
women having rape fantasies and you know
anybody that's making an argument that
the availability of pornography is
leading to a prevalence and rape has not
looked at the charts and the mobile top
of each other rates of rates of sexual
violence go down with access to
pornography pornography is good for
society feminists feminists should want
more porn and in fact men who watch more
pornography become more egalitarian they
become more feminist so I don't know
jack maybe maybe one of the reasons
you're all you're all right fellas don't
know all right no I'll trace it
David's using that in the 24th 2014
version I'm old yes he's not using that
in the 2018 version so so it may be one
of the reasons that people don't want
you know guys watching that porn is
because it makes it more feminist it
makes them more it makes them more
accepting of female sexual empowerment
well I think ironically what we've
pointed out is that people men who are
anti porn are working to increase the
price of pussy yeah right because
they're rien hansung the cartel effect
and I think that feminists have a
problem with sex workers in the same way
and they have a problem with pornography
in the same way because sadly there's a
there's a notion among women that their
currency is sexuality yeah and so that
that's what makes them valuable and
therefore they have to restrict access
to it and so I experienced that
personally in my own marriage therapy
ten years ago or more I'm in Marin
County you know a couples therapy and a
60 year old woman who's trying to advise
me and my wife
whoo my wife wasn't fucking me we
weren't having any sex at all and the
therapist is like well I really want you
to examine your feelings that you're
having when you masturbate to
pornography and she she clarified and
her search she pointed it out as
infidelity and my ex-wife just couldn't
believe it I was looking at pornography
and I was turning off and it was just
the worst thing that could possibly be
happened and every time that I jerked
off to pornography like four times a
week
it was a huge grave injustice place to
burn her and of course all that is
complete until the horseshit
but what it was was that it did nuded
the power that she had by withholding
sex from me
and ironically when we've got guys now
who are trying to advise other guys and
what they're saying is don't don't jerk
off and don't look at porn what they
what they're saying is is that like
they're sort of elevating which is sort
of contrary to the whole ethos they're
elevating there's access to sex to a
higher level rather than sort of
spreading it around a little bit yeah
you know the research actually research
around all this and I get in trouble
because I talk about the research a lot
but I think that's the way we please
well that's the way we get to pull
ourselves out of you know pull our head
out of our ass and look at the way the
world is as opposed to the way we think
it is you know so a guy named Regnerus
he's a University of Austin I think
Texas at Austin and any published
research last year showing that men and
women who are married used masturbation
differently that men used masturbation
to compensate for not having enough sex
when a man is sexually unsatisfied he
masturbates more frequently as sex with
his wife goes down but when his yeah but
when he's satisfied he continues to
masturbate and the frequency of
masturbation has no relationship
statistically to the frequency of sex
but women as women have more sex
masturbation goes up women use sex used
masturbation as a way to complement
sexuality so the way I talk about it is
that you know the female sexuality
female libido is kind of an engine
as sex within a marriage gets the engine
going they use masturbation to keep the
engine revving yeah so I think again we
need to we need to we need to stop
looking at kind of this sort of blank
slate
everybody's equal everybody's the same
kind of approach and recognize people
are different genders are different
people approach sexuality and marriage
differently and now let's stop shaming
everybody for being different and let's
understand what those differences mean
masturbation is one of the things that
really teaches is a lot about that stuff
well I've found in my personal
experience that there's virtually no
correlation to me for masturbation
versus sex sexual frequency with my
partner or partners even if I'm having
sex twice and three times a day
sometimes I'll slip one in you know it
just kind of it's just kind of like a
thing and and but then also I can go you
know a couple of weeks without it so
I've personally seen no correlation in
my life you know and I see guys who come
to me and you know they're I don't know
if you want to call them in cells or
they're there guys who were concerned
there you're addicted to masturbation or
pornography or whatever and and and I
feel for those guys and and what I find
across the board is that these these
tend to be guys with higher levels of
anxiety struggles and higher levels of
kind of social struggles and as they
they they actually get some benefits
sometimes from buying into these kind of
online you know kind of cult beliefs
around pornography and masturbation
because when they when they stop
masturbating to pornography and they
kind of take charge of their life and
that I think is is the one benefit of
all of this but it's accidental is that
by these by these cults kind of saying
you know you've got to stop fapping and
you've got to stop looking at porn it's
changing your brain what it's doing is
it's forcing these young men to think
about their sexuality and how they want
to make their sexuality part of their
life and it forces the young men to now
think about what kind of life do I want
and now what am I willing to do to get
that that I think is huge and
and I think is one of the things that I
really want to encourage more because I
think that we're not teaching people to
think that kind of way to think you know
it sounds like I'm sorry you know
liberal kind of self actualize is self
actualizing kind of stuff but but the
more you as a man decide this is the
life I want and and this is what I want
and now I need to look at what I'm doing
and how what I'm doing might get in the
way of that because if you decide well
you know every night I'm jerking off for
a couple of hours to porn but I don't
have a girlfriend well I'll give up the
porn now I got to get out of the house
now I got to go out to the bar now I got
to start meeting people and talking to
people that's what changes your life and
it's that it's that commitment it's that
action it's that it's that you know it's
that assertive dominant I'm gonna I'm
gonna be the man I want to be that's a
beautiful thing pornography is not a
goddamn thing to do with it okay so that
your whipsawing me around a little bit
there days so yeah I agree that it's the
decision-making process to get out there
and do something with your life and I
think that a lot of guys would say I can
think of a few guys right now who or who
if they were sitting here what they
would say is that masturbation and
pornography are an obstacle to the
self-actualization that you're talking
about do you do you see you see that
relationship or is the decision the
proactive decision to improve your life
independent you know masturbation or
pornography is absolutely no different
than spending five hours watching
television got it or playing video games
or playing video games yeah I mean
that's ultimately Jack I mean that
that's the thing is that we treat
sexuality as though it is this you know
inherently uh kind of special behavior
and thing in life and I'm sorry but it
it's no diff
than any other human behavior it has the
value that we give to it but it it's not
inherently special in the way that we
treat it and so the psychology of it the
behavior of it is just like all other
human behaviors you know that I mean you
know when you say it's like all the
human behaviors but my first thought is
like okay well it's like eating or
sleeping or taking a shit or whatever
but there's not a hormonal release or
after taking a shit there's a hormone or
release you know I mean if we've got
time I'll tell you about some of the
best shit Sam I know that's true a kid
change your mood quite a bit yeah that's
right but you know I think that that's
one of the things and look I wanted to
say that like you these conversations
are meant to explore these subjects and
like nope myself and and no guests that
I have on on the podcast is gonna come
out here with a hammer and beat you over
the head with things this is about
exploring the disconnection and
exploring ideas exploring the data and
so you know if we're gonna get you know
we're gonna come to the conclusion here
and you know I'm not even sure what the
conclusion is after this it's like you
know it's it's normal it's a normal
bodily activity it's a normal thing that
David what percentage of men masturbate
in the world 99% and 1% lie right
exactly so there's there's nothing about
it that should be shameful or inherently
negative there's there's nothing about
pornography that is physiologically
damaging biologically damaging it's not
necessarily the the cause of the
causation of a negative relationship
it's not it's not the thing that's
standing in your way what's standing in
your way is your own mindset is my frame
yeah and you know sexualities and is is
the most complicated and healthy human
behavior that exists people who have sex
more live longer guys who have more
orgasms live longer
the you know the right number of orgasms
a month to prevent or reduce the risk of
prostate cancer is 23 23 per 30 days 23
per 30 days ago so yeah you know my
prostate is gonna live you know for
whatever three or four hundred years
meant for um but the thing is that
sexuality we haven't really found all
the effective ways to kind of integrate
it and and to talk about it in these
kind of healthy ways to have to accept
it as part of ourselves you know let me
let me tell you a little story I mean
the my most recent book it actually came
out of this unique experience with Katie
Couric
so which book is this yes as ethical
porn for lawyers so you know so I and I
do a lot of media been on all kinds of
TV shows and everything else and so
Katie Couric you know had me on her TV
show her talk show before it went under
and and and she wanted to talk about
pornography and and and on the show and
your your listeners can can watch this
it's on YouTube sharing my pain one of
the most painful experiences of my life
and and and Katie is a self-identified
prude a very very very devout Catholic
and and as I talked about these things
and I said you know look you know access
to pornography reduces rates of sexual
violence no you know kids brains aren't
being changed by for Nog Ruffino
pornography doesn't cause erectile
dysfunction anxiety causes erectile
dysfunction and yes all of these issues
and and she literally like hid herself
in the head on the video you can see it
and first she accused me working for
porn I don't work for forum maybe I
would get oh my god but and there's a
genre for you yeah right
and and but she said you know dr. Leigh
if you talk about research one more time
and and I you know I don't think it got
him you know a that's what I'm here for
it that's my gig right but I realized in
that experience and so I left the show I
went back to the hotel bar I was like
wow that did not go well and the
bartender's two guys were like Jewish
you know what's wrong with you and I
told them and they're like well we
watched porn and then we sat and had
this conversation while they kept giving
me bourbon and so the conversation got
ready loose and but they they talked
about then their kind of experiences
with porn and their experiences of
talking about pornography with people in
general and and and how how shamed they
felt so I realized you know that's the
that's the thing that's missing and so
you know so I wrote this book and I
wrote the book like you know like I was
having beer with the dude as opposed to
I'm some psychologist and you know and I
talked about all these issues we talked
about today how you can you know examine
yourself and understand yourself how you
can look at what pornography means to
you and what it doesn't mean to you what
it what it means that you're
masturbating to this or what it doesn't
mean
talked about you know what would it be
like to talk to your girlfriend about
the porn you watch and and and what
you'd like to you know how you'd like to
share it with her all these things
because I realized that I was screwing
up when I was out there talking about
the research and you know I'm a geeky
academic guy with a black belt but but
when I talk about the research kind of
lose people and so let's talk about this
like in the real world I said that's why
I love you doing the show Jack because
it's it's it's reaching out to those
guys and and you know and all those guys
out there that are just just hungry and
scared they're scared of their own
sexuality they're scared of how good
pornography or masturbation feels
they're scared you know of getting
accused of being a rape
if they if they go have sex with
somebody there they're accused of just
being bad at asking a girl out or being
bad at sex and and pornography is easy
and it's okay for it to be easy now the
invitation that I have for you is is
what do you want your life to be what
kind of you know what kind of man do you
want to be and think when you're not
turned on about what what you want
sexuality to be in your life one of the
questions I asked lots of guys is who's
your sexual role model how did you how
did you learn how to be a sexual being
how did you learn how to integrate your
sexuality does anybody have an answer
for that you know you're not gonna like
this answer dude but gay men have an
answer to that question more than
straight men know it makes perfect sense
for him because gay men have had to
think about right you know their
sexuality and what would it would be
like for them to be out about their
sexuality they've had to think about
what was their sexuality means to them
most straight men don't Wow
so I've never I've never once even
considered that question yeah your
sexual role model yeah John Holmes is
not an acceptable answer alright yeah
that's interesting I recently gave it a
talk at this thing called the 21
convention and this is a convention
that's been growing now for over I think
ten years and it was in Florida and
there was 300 men there and they all
paid to come down and listen to a whole
panel of speakers give speeches over
like three or four days and it was an
incredible experience this was 300 men
dedicated to improving their selves from
fashion Fitness health wealth sexuality
relationships fashion yeah a fashion
fashion ya know like everything every I
don't mean to I'm not yeah I'm sitting
here in my Union yeah yeah between the
two of us I'm definitely the fashion
expert here but you know it was every
element of of just being a good dude
today and the the talk I gave was Sam on
the front and the back end
talk about making the heart of the
comeback but in the middle I talked
about my development as a sexual person
and the development of my sexual
identity and because when I came out of
my my blue pill sexless whore horrific
marriage I had no sexual identity not
and I don't mean in terms of like gender
I mean just like like the first time a
woman complimented my dick at like 33 I
was like you know god no I had never had
like a penis identity as it were because
I never got that feedback from from my
ex-wife because it was terrible
but I came to talk about like I set a
goal for myself I wanted to be Hamid
objectified okay for my body and I
wanted to become like a true sexual
creature and so I set out I set out to
do that like I set a goal of like
achieving the sexual identity and along
the way I learned that I needed to also
develop a framework for operating in
this new sexual identity and that's when
I discovered this the Michael vagary toe
and Braun harvey model for sexual health
which I've written about a number of
times and as you asked me that question
who's your sexual role model maybe I'm
going a little bit of a limb here but
like I feel like I can provide a little
bit of that for guys because I've I've
become self actualized in my own
sexuality and I've also developed a
strong support structure around it and a
clear I call a moral framework even
though it's supposed to be non
prescriptive in non judgmental I call a
I put a framework for my behavior to
determine whether it's healthy and and
in doing so I've been able to create the
life that I always always dreamed up
didn't even think was possible yeah
and to do that you have to overcome the
shame yeah and and and that you know I
had to do that in the middle of the
process that's right
all of my books all of my therapy all of
my writing is is about the damage that
sexual shamed
and unfortunately most of the online
hucksters that are selling in a year
brain on porn or nofap they're shaming
you for your sexuality right and the
thing is that that shame makes it worse
and that shame is actually what does the
damage and we can't we can't you know be
you know a sexual being we can't be a
sexual gentleman we can't be a man of
honor without overcoming that sexual
shame and accepting who we are maybe
you're a guy who you know really enjoys
dominating and kind of you know being
aggressive with a woman and if that's
the case well yeah you you can you can
choose to be an unethical you know you
know sex offender over you can choose to
identify that in yourself and then
figure out how to do that ethically
which would require you finding a woman
who's into that right and they're out
there goes and they're out there and but
nobody no nobody says that
right everybody says oh my god you you
you you you have those thoughts you're
an awful awful awful person you should
be ashamed of yourself
right well you mentioned Justin Lee
Miller justin limo yeah I cited a study
that he did in one of my articles that
said you know something like sixty plus
percent of all women have fantasies of
being dominated whether it's being
choked or tied up or having their hair
pulled or whatever yeah it's it's in
there multiple studies on this Justin
was a good friend of mine he also has an
interesting he's got a great book called
you know tell me what you want about
sexual fantasies and one things he talks
about it is the different fantasies that
Democrats versus Republicans have and
and you know a recent piece about this
it would kind of went viral and and
Republicans tend to have fantasies about
kind of infidelity and Democrats tend to
have fantasies about power play which
you know when you look at what it is
that's taboo what it is that they are
identifying as exciting because you're
not supposed to do it you know
the Republicans you know I highlighting
and idealizing monogamy and then when
they're masturbating or sexually
fantasizing they're thinking about
violating that Democrats who are
highlighting egalitarian and and kumbaya
and everybody's equal and then they're
fantasizing about dominating each other
because it's that it's that thing that
you're not supposed to do that really
turns us on yeah one of the things I
wrote they got me in the most trouble of
all was titled do feminists have rape
fantasies and and in there I wrote that
even the most ardent of emesis feminist
has fantasies of being dominated in bed
yeah I mean you know I gave this I give
this talk years ago to you know a group
of it was a it was a conference around
prevention of sexual violence and I gave
a talk about healthy sexuality and and I
included in it this one you know kind of
piece about you know women who have rape
fantasies and feel really guilty and
ashamed about it and I was scared
absolutely shitless I I thought I was
going to get castrated I thought I was
going to get tomatoes thrown at me the
woman right before my talk had been a
woman talking about her experience as a
rape victim and and that here's the
thing she came up to me after my talk
and she gave me a hug she said she said
oh my god
you know I've had those fantasies all
along and I've never been able to tell
anybody about it because I was scared
there was something wrong with me Wow
yeah well I mean they have to people
have to shame that out of existence and
interestingly on the Republican fantasy
side in a conversation I had with
Jeffrey Miller he pointed out that a
traditional conservative relationship a
monogamous relationship already has a
consensual Power Exchange in it in that
the man is the leader and the woman is
the follower and I had never really
thought of it that way and so when you
say that it mean you know that the
sexual fantasies
on a Republican site don't involve that
power exchange it's partially because
they're already living a consensual
power that's interesting I thought about
that that's clever
yeah so it's all very fascinating the
way that our fantasies bubble up it's
always about the forbidden right it's
always about the tip it's always about I
see you got me saying to do instead of
taboo now and it's always about that
thing that thing that you can't have and
you know pornography allows us to tap
into that and and in my opinion gives us
a healthy outlet until until you can
until you can you know in order to have
the the open fulfilling sexual
relationship and a lot of people have
you have to have developed an inner
confidence and inner strength to be
honest enough so that you can reject her
sorry be prepared to be rejected right
like you have to accept the fact that
you may say no and she may think it's
really weird and you may lose that
relationship you know but you have to
find a place where you can find that
confidence first being in that
vulnerable place and surviving it right
exactly she just had to bring it all
back right together yeah so another
reason to get out there and they hit the
mat so that you can also then find the
confidence in the strength to take the
risk in your intimate relationships in
order to really find the thing that you
want well listen David I really really
really appreciate your time this has
just been a fantastic talk I think that
we could go on for you know so much
longer there's a million topics that we
could cover but I just want to wrap up
by talking about how you are you're a
therapist right you do talk therapy with
people you practice you have a clinical
practice there's no shame for men in
seeking seeking talk therapy as one of
the earliest things that I wrote about
titled like how talk therapy made me a
better man and how you know there are
times in our lives where talk therapy is
going to be highly beneficial and it's
something that
an empowered Auto regulating independent
masculine male in America today can seek
out therapy and find useful utility in
it and a benefit to their life however
you have to find the right guy well you
have to find the right therapist and the
right therapist might be a woman right
they say the right the right person
again therapy field is largely is
largely dominated by women but many of
these women are you know they're down
with guys being guys and they're they're
interested in supporting it what I tell
everybody male or female is you know
when you go see a therapist you know
you're you're testing them out and you
know if they hate you with shame if they
hit you a judgment you know if you don't
feel like you can be open with them it's
okay go find another therapist right
it doesn't mean therapy is not right for
you it just means this person isn't a
good match for you the only way you
benefit from therapy is by finding
somebody that you can now be vulnerable
with haha and and and and survive and
learn from that experience right well
again thank you very much for modeling
that exact kind of behavior for people
out there thank you for your time you
know awesome to hear about your
experience on the mat especially the way
that you develop that relationship with
your son and that physicality and this
has just been a really helpful
conversation for guys and it's dr. David
lay and hit the book is ethical porn for
dicks and now how can how can people
find you online yeah twitter is easy
it's gonna you know way at dr. David lay
alright perfect thank you very much and
hopefully we'll have a chance to talk
again soon man thanks dude I appreciate
it
[Music]