[Music]
the old appeals to racial sexual and
religious chauvinism to rabid
nationalist fervor are beginning not to
work
who I am and whether I'm good or bad or
achieving or not all that's learned
along the way just arrived we can change
it anytime you want only the choice no
effort no work no job no savings of
money to realize it I had the game wrong
the game was to find out what I already
was
[Music]
we were seeing
a very important it is to bring about in
the human mind the radical revolution
the crisis is a crisis in consciousness
[Music]
the crisis that cannot anymore accept
the old norms the old patterns the
ancient traditions and
considering what the world is now with
all the misery conflict destructive
brutality aggression and so on man is
still as you war is still brutal violent
aggressive acquisitive competitive that
is built a society along these lines
[Music]
Hey
[Music]
[Music]
you
[Music]
society today is composed of a series of
institutions from political institutions
legal institutions religious
institutions to institutions of social
class familial values and occupational
specialization it is obvious the
profound influence these traditionalized
structures have in shaping our
understandings and perspectives yets of
all the social institutions we are born
into directed by and conditioned upon
there seems to be no system is taken for
granted and misunderstood as the
monetary system taking on nearly
religious proportions the established
monetary institution exists as one of
the most unquestioned forms of faith
there is how money is created the
policies by which it is governed and how
it truly affects society are
unregistered interests of the great
majority of the population
in a world where 1% of the population
owns 40% of the planets wealth in a
world where 34000 children die every
single day from poverty and preventable
diseases and where 50% of the world's
population lives on less than $2 a day
one thing is clear
something is very wrong and whether we
are aware of it or not the lifeblood of
all of our established institutions and
thus society itself is money therefore
understanding this institution of
monetary policy is critical to
understanding why our lives are the way
they are unfortunately economics is
often viewed with confusion and boredom
endless streams of financial jargon
coupled with intimidating mathematics
quickly deters people from attempts at
understanding however in fact is the
complexity associated with the financial
system is a mere mask designed to
conceal one of them are socially
paralyzing structures humanity has ever
endure
you
number of years ago the central bank of
the United States the Federal Reserve
produced a document entitled modern
money mechanics this publication
detailed the institutionalized practice
of money creation as utilized by the
Federal Reserve and the web of global
commercial banks it supports on the
opening page the document states its
objective the purpose of this booklet is
to describe the basic process of money
creation in a fractional reserve banking
system it then proceeds to describe this
fractional reserve process through
various banking terminology a
translation of which goes something like
this the United States government
decides it needs some money so it calls
up the Federal Reserve and requests say
10 billion dollars the Fed replies
saying sure we'll buy ten billion in
government bonds from you so the
government takes some pieces of paper
paints some official looking designs on
them and calls them Treasury bonds then
it puts a value on these bonds to the
sum of 10 billion dollars and send them
over to the Fed in turn the people at
the Fed draw up a bunch of impressive
pieces of paper themselves only this
time calling them Federal Reserve notes
also designating a value of ten billion
dollars to the said the Fed then takes
these notes and trades them for the
bonds once this exchange is complete the
government then takes the ten billion in
Federal Reserve notes and deposits it
into a bank account and upon this
deposit paper notes officially become
legal tender money adding ten billion to
the US money supply and there it is ten
billion and new money has been created
of course this example is a
generalization for in reality this
transaction would occur electronically
with no paper used at all in fact only
3% of the US money supply exists in
physical currency the other 97 percent
essentially exists in computers alone
now government bonds are by design
instruments of debt and when the Fed
purchases these bonds with money it
essentially created out of thin air the
government is actually promising to pay
back
that money to the Fed in other words the
money was created out of debt this mind
numbing paradox of how money or value
can be created out of debt or a
liability will become more clear as we
further this exercise so the exchange
has been made and now ten billion
dollars sits in a commercial bank
account here is where it gets really
interesting for is based on the
fractional reserve practice that ten
billion dollar deposit instantly becomes
part of the bank's reserves just as all
deposits do and regarding reserve
requirements as stated in modern money
mechanics a bank must maintain legally
required reserves equal to a prescribed
percentage of its deposits it then
quantifies this by stating under current
regulations the reserve requirement
against most transaction accounts is ten
percent this means that with a ten
billion dollar deposit ten percent or 1
billion is held as the required reserve
while the other nine billion is
considered an excessive Reserve and can
be used as the basis for new loans now
it is logical to assume that this nine
billion is literally coming out of the
existing ten billion dollar deposit
however this is actually not the case
what really happens is that the nine
billion is simply created out of thin
air
on top of the existing ten billion
dollar deposit this is how the money
supply is expanded as stated in modern
money mechanics of course they the banks
do not really pay out loans from the
money they receive as deposits if they
did this no additional money would be
created what they do when they make
loans is to accept promissory notes loan
contracts in exchange for credits money
the borrower's transaction accounts in
other words the nine billion can be
created out of nothing simply because
there is a demand for such a loan and
that there is a ten billion dollar
deposit to satisfy the reserve
requirements
now let's assume that somebody walks
into this bank and borrows the newly
available of nine billion dollars they
will then most likely take that money
and deposit it into their own bank
account the process then repeats for
that deposit becomes part of the bank's
reserves ten percent is isolated and in
turn 90 percent of the nine billion or
8.1 billion is now availlable as newly
created money for more loans and of
course that 8.1 can be loaned out and
redeposited creating an additional 7.2
billion to 6.5 billion to 5.9 billion
etc this deposit money creation loan
cycle can technically go on to infinity
the average mathematical result is that
about 90 billion dollars can be created
on top of the original 10 billion in
other words for every deposit that ever
occurs in the banking system about nine
times that amount can be created out of
thin air
money jitters ask the obliging Bank of
America for a jar of soothing instant
money mo n ey in the form of a
convenient personal loan so now that we
understand how money is created by this
fractional reserve banking system a
logical yet illusive question might come
to mind what is actually giving this
newly created money value the answer the
money that already exists the new money
essentially steals value from the
existing money supply
for the total pool of money is being
increased irrespective to demand for
goods and services and as supply and
demand finds equilibrium prices rise
diminishing the purchasing power of each
individual dollar this is generally
referred to as inflation and inflation
is essentially a hidden tax on the
public what is the advice that you
generally get and that is inflate the
currency they don't say debase the
currency they don't say devalue the
currency they don't say cheat the people
who are saved they say lower the
interest rates the real deception is
when we distort the value of money when
we create money out of thin air we have
no savings yet there's so-called capital
so my question boils down to this how in
the world can we expect to solve the
problems of inflation that is the
increase in the supply money with more
inflation of course it can't the
fractional reserve system of monetary
expansion is inherently inflationary for
the act of expanding the money supply
without there being a proportional
expansion of goods and services in the
economy will always debase a currency in
fact a quick glance at the historical
values of the u.s. dollar versus the
money supply reflects this point
definitively for the inverse
relationship is obvious one dollar in
1913 required $21.60 in 2007 to match
value that is a 96% devaluation since
the Federal Reserve came into existence
[Music]
now if this reality of inherent and
perpetual inflation seems absurd and
economically self-defeating hold that
thought for absurdity is an
understatement in regard to how our
financial system really operates for in
our financial system money is debt and
debt is money here is a chart of the US
money supply from 1950 to 2006
here's a chart of the u.s. national debt
for the same period how interesting it
is that the trends are virtually the
same for the more money there is the
more debt there is the more debt there
is the more money there is to put it a
different way every single dollar in
your wallet is owed to somebody by
somebody for remember the only way the
money can come into existence is from
loans therefore if everyone in the
country were able to pay off all debts
including the government there would not
be one dollar in circulation
[Music]
in fact the last time in American
history the national debt was completely
paid off was in 1835 after President
Andrew Jackson shut down the central
bank that preceded with Federal Reserve
in fact Jackson's entire political
platform essentially revolved around his
commitment to shut down the central bank
stating at one point the bold efforts
the present Bank has made to control the
government are but premonitions of the
fate that awaits the American people
should they be deluded into a
perpetuation of this institution or the
establishment of another like it
unfortunately his message was
short-lived and the international
bankers succeeded to install another
central bank in 1913 the Federal Reserve
and as long as this institution exists
perpetual debt is guaranteed now so far
we have discussed the reality that money
is created out of debt through loans
these loans are based on a banks
reserves and reserves are derived from
deposits and through this fractional
reserve system any one deposit can
create 9 times its original value in
turn two basing the existing money
supply raising prices in society and
since all this money is created out of
debt and circulated randomly through
commerce people become detached from
their original debt and a disequilibrium
exists where people are forced to
compete for labor in order to pull
enough money out of the money supply to
cover their costs of living as
dysfunctional and backwards as all of
this might seem there is still one thing
we have omitted from this equation and
it is this element of the structure
which reveals the truly fraudulent
nature of the system itself
the application of interest when the
government borrows money from the Fed or
when a person borrows money from a bank
it almost always has to be paid back
with a crude interest
in other words almost every single
dollar that exists must be eventually
returned to a bank with interest paid as
well but if all money is borrowed from
the central bank and is expanded by
commercial banks through loans only what
would be referred to as the principal is
being created in the money supply so
then where is the money to cover all of
the interest that is charged nowhere it
doesn't exist the ramifications of this
are staggering for the amount of money
owed back to the banks will always
exceed the amount of money that is
available in circulation this is why
inflation is a constant in the economy
for new money is always needed to help
cover the perpetual deficit built into
the system caused by the need to pay the
interest what this also means is that
mathematically defaults and bankruptcy
are literally built into the system and
there will always be poor pockets of
society that get the short end of the
stick an analogy would be a game of
musical chairs for once the music stops
somebody is left out to dry and that's
the point
it invariably transfers true wealth from
the individual to the banks for if you
are unable to pay for your mortgage they
will take your property this is
particularly enraging when you realize
that not only is such a default
inevitable due to the fractional reserve
practice but also because of the fact
that the money that the bank loaned to
you didn't even legally exist
in the first place in 1969 there was a
Minnesota Court case involving a man
named Jerome Daly who was challenging
the foreclosure of his home by the bank
which provided the loan to purchase it
his argument was that the mortgage
contract required both parties being he
and the bank each put up a legitimate
form of property for the exchange in
legal language this is called
consideration
mr. Daly explained that the money was in
fact not the property of the bank for it
was created out of nothing as soon as
the loan agreement was signed remember
what modern money mechanics stated about
loans what do they do when they make
loans is to accept promissory notes in
exchange for credits reserves are
unchanged by the loan transactions but
deposit credits constitute new additions
to the total deposits of the banking
system in other words the money doesn't
come out of their existing assets the
bank is simply inventing it putting up
nothing of its own except for
theoretical liability on paper as the
court case progressed the bank's
president mr. Morgan took the stand and
in the judges personal memorandum he
recalled that the plaintiff thanks
president admitted that in combination
with the Federal Reserve Bank did create
the money and credit upon its books by
bookkeeping entry the money and credit
first came into existence when they
created it mr. Morgan admitted that no
United States law or statute existed
which gave him the right to do this a
lawful consideration must exist and be
tendered to support the note the jury
found that there was no lawful
consideration and I agreeing he also
poetically added only God can create
something of value out of nothing and
upon this revelation the court rejected
the bank's claim for foreclosure and
Daly kept his home the implications of
this Court decision are immense for
every time you borrow money from a bank
whether it is a mortgage loan or a
credit card charge the money given to
you is not only counterfeit it is an
illegitimate form of consideration and
hence voids the contract to repay for
the bank never had the money as property
to begin with unfortunately such legal
realizations are suppressed and ignored
and the game of Perpetual wealth
transfer and perpetual debt continues
and this brings us to the ultimate
question
why during the American Civil War
President Lincoln bypassed the high
interest loans offered by the European
banks and decided to do what the
Founding Fathers advocated which was to
create an independent and inherently
debt-free currency it was called the
greenback shortly after this measure was
taken an internal document circulated
between private British and American
banking interests stated slavery is but
the owning of Labor and carries with it
the care of laborers while the European
plan is that capital shall control labor
by controlling wages this can be done by
controlling the money it will not do to
allow the greenback as we cannot control
that the fractional reserve policy
perpetrated by the Federal Reserve which
has spread in practice to the great
majority of banks in the world is in
fact a system of modern slavery think
about it money is created out of debt
and what do people do when they are in
debt they submit to employment pay it
off but if money can only be created out
of loans how can society ever be debt
free it can and that's the point
and it is the fear of losing assets
coupled with the struggle to keep up
with the perpetual debt and inflation
inherent in the system compounded by the
inescapable scarcity within the money
supply itself created by the interest
that can never be repaid
that keeps the wage-slave we've been
long
running on the hamster wheel with
millions of others in effect powering an
empire that truly benefits only the
elite at the top of the pyramid for at
the end of the day who are you really
working for the bank's money is created
in a bank and invariably ends up in a
bank they are the true masters along
with the corporations and governments
they support physical slavery requires
people to be housed and fed economic
slavery requires people to feed and
house themselves it is one of the most
ingenious scams for social manipulation
ever created and at its core it is an
invisible war against the population
debt is the weapon used to conquer and
enslave societies and interest is its
prime ammunition and as the majority
walks around oblivious to this reality
the banks in collusion with governments
and corporations continue to perfect and
expand their tactics of economic warfare
spawning new bases such as the World
Bank and International Monetary Fund
while also inventing a new type of
soldier the birth of the economic hitman
we economic hitmen really have been the
ones responsible for creating this first
truly global empire and we work many
different ways but perhaps the most
common is that we will identify a
country that has resources our
corporations covet like oil and then
arrange a huge loan to that country from
the World Bank or one of its sister
organizations but the money never
actually goes to the country instead it
goes to our big corporations to build
infrastructure projects in that country
power plants industrial parks ports
things that benefit a few rich people in
that country in addition to our
corporations but really don't help the
majority of people at all however those
people the whole country is left holding
a huge debt and such a big debt they
can't repay the mess comes the plan but
they can't repay it and so at some point
we cannot get men go back to them and
say listen you lost a lot of money can't
pay your debts so sell your oil real
cheap to our oil companies allow us to
build a military base in your country or
send troops in support of ours to
someplace in the world like Iraq or vote
with us on the next UN both to have
their electric utility company
privatized and their water and sewage
system privatized and sold to US
corporations or other multinational
corporations so there is a whole
mushrooming thing and it's so typical of
the way the IMF and the World Bank work
is put country in death it's a big debt
it can't pay it and then you offer to
refinance that debt and pay even more
interest and you demand this quid pro
quo which you call a conditionality or
good governance which means basically
they've got to sell off their resources
including many of their social services
their utility companies their school
systems sometimes their their penal
systems their insurance systems to
foreign corporations so it's it's a
double triple quadruple whammy
[Music]
the president's very economic hitmen
really began back in the early 50s when
democratically elected Mossadegh who is
elected in Iran he was considered to be
the hope for democracy in the Middle
East and around the world he was Time
Magazine's Man of the Year but one of
the things that he'd run on and again to
implement was the idea that foreign oil
companies needed to pay the Iranian
people a lot more for the oil that they
were taking out of around the Eradicator
should benefit from their own oil
strange policy we didn't like that of
course but we were afraid to do what we
normally were doing which was to send in
the military
instead we sent in one CIA agent Kermit
Roosevelt Teddy Roosevelt's relative in
Kermit went in with a few million
dollars and was very very effective and
efficient and a short amount of time he
managed to get most of their overtime
and brought in the shop around to
replace him who always was favorable to
oil and it was extremely effective
arms overflow Turan army officers shout
that Mossadegh has surrendered and his
regime as virtual dictator of Iran is
ended pictures of the Shah paraded
through the streets as sentiment
reverses
this all is welcome home so back here in
the United States in Washington people
looked around them wow that was easy
and cheap so this established a whole
new way of manipulating countries of
creating Empire the only problem with
Roosevelt was that he was a card
carrying CIA agent and it had been
caught the ramifications could have been
pretty serious so very quickly at that
point the decision was made to use
private consultants to channel the money
through the World Bank or the IMF or one
of the other such agencies bringing
people like me who worked for private
companies so that if we got caught there
would be no governmental ramifications
when árbenz became president of
guatemala the country was very much
under the thumbs of united fruit company
the big international corporations and
árbenz ran on the sticker that says you
know we got to get to land back to the
people and once he took power he was he
was implementing policies that would
they would do exactly that give the land
rights back to the people united proved
didn't like that very much
and so they hired a public relations
firm launched a huge campaign in the
united states to convince the united
states people the citizens of the united
states and the press of the united
states and the congress of the united
states that árbenz was a soviet puppet
and if we allow them to stay in power
the soviets would have a foothold and in
his hemisphere and at that point in time
was a huge fear on everybody's mind Red
Terror the Communist terror and so to
make a long story short out of this
public relations campaign came a
commitment on the part of the CIA in the
military to take this man out and in
fact we did we sent in planes we sent
and we sent in soldiers we sent in
jackals we sent everything in to take
him out and did take him out and as soon
as he was removed from office the new
guy that took over after him basically
reinstated everything to the big
international corporations including
United Fruit Ecuador for many many years
had been ruled by pro-us dictators often
relatively brutal then it was decided
that we're gonna have a truly democratic
election highly rolled oats ran for
office and his main goal he said as
president would be to make sure that
ecuador's resources were used to show
the people and he won overwhelming by
more votes than anybody had ever won
anything in Ecuador and he began to
implement these policies to make sure
that the profits from oil went to help
the people well we didn't like that in
the United State
I was sent down as one of several
economic hitmen to change role those two
corrupt him to bring him around to let
him know you know okay you know you can
get very rich you and your family if you
if you play our game but if you continue
to try to keep these policies you
promised you you're going to go you
wouldn't listen
it was assassinated as soon as the plane
crashed the whole area was cordoned off
the other people are lovingly US
military from one from a nearby base
anti the Ecuadorian military when an
investigation was launched two of the
key witnesses died in car boots before
the other country which has to justify a
lot of very very strange things that
went on around the assassination of
jaime roldos I like most people who
really looked at this case had
absolutely no doubt that it was
assassination and of course in my
position of making on a hitman I was
always expecting something to happen to
Jaime whether they approve or
assassination it wasn't sure but then
you would be taken down because he was
not being corrupted he would not allow
himself to be corrupted the way we
wanted to corrupt him
Omar Torrijos president of Panama was
you know one of my favorite people I
really really liked me it's very
charismatic he was a guy who really
wanted to help this country and when I
tried to bribe him or corrupt him he
said look John called me Juanito he said
look Juanito I don't need the money what
I really need is for my country to be
treated fairly I need for the United
States to repay the debts you owe my
people world of destruction you've done
here I need to be in a position where I
can help other Latin American countries
when their independence and be free of
this of this terrible presence from the
north that you people are exploiting us
so badly I need to have the Panama Canal
back in the hands of Panamanian people
that's what I want and so leave me alone
don't you know don't try don't try to
bribe me it was 1981 and in may jaime
roldos was assassinated and omar was
very aware of this Torrijos kept his
family together he said I'm probably
next but it's okay because I've done
what I came here to do I renegotiated
the canal the canal will now be in our
hands
he just finished negotiating the treaty
with Jimmy Carter
[Music]
in June of that same year just a couple
of months later he also went out an
airplane crash which there's no question
was executed by CIA sponsored jackals
tremendous amount of evidence that's one
of the one of to rehouse the security
guards handed him that the last moment
as he's getting on the plane a tape
recorder or a small tape recorder they
contained a bomb
[Music]
it is interesting to me how this system
has continued pretty much the same way
for years and years and years except the
economic hit going to get better and
better and better then we come up with
very recently what happened in Venezuela
in 1998 which others gets elected
president following a long line of
presidents who had been very corrupt and
basically destroyed the economy of the
country and Chavez was elected to misto
that Chavez stood up to the United
States and he's done it primarily
demanding that Venezuelan oil be used to
help the Venezuelan people well we
didn't like that in the United States so
in 2002 the coolest stage which is no
question in my mind most other people's
mind CIA was behind that coup
[Music]
the way that that coup was fomented was
very reflective of what Kermit Roosevelt
had done in tirana of paying people to
go out into the streets to riot to
protest to say this Chavez is very
unpopular you know you can give it a few
thousand people to do that television
can make it looks like it's old country
and things start to mushroom except in
the case of Chavez he was smart enough
and the people were so strongly behind
it that they overcame it which was a
phenomenal moment in the history of
Latin America
Arak actually is a perfect example of
the way the whole system works so we
economic hitmen of the first line of
defense we go and we try to corrupt
governments and get them to accept these
huge loans which we then use as leverage
to basically own them if we fail as i
failed in panama with omar torrijos and
ecuador with jaime roldos men who
refused to be corrupted then the second
line of defense is we send in the
jackals and the Jackals compete
overthrow governments or they
assassinate and what that happens when a
new government comes in boy it's going
to toe the line because the new
president knows what'll happen is he
doesn't they in the case of Iraq both of
those things failed economic hitmen were
not able to get through Saddam Hussein
we tried very hard we try to get them to
accept a deal very similar to what the
House of Saud had accepted in Saudi
Arabia but he wouldn't accept it and so
the Jackals went in to take him out they
couldn't do it his security was very
good after all he had one time worked
for the CIA he'd been hired to
assassinate a former president of Iraq
and failed but he knew the system so in
91 we send in the troops and we take out
the Iraqi military so we assume at that
point that Saddam Hussein is going to
come around we could have taken him out
of course at that time but we didn't
want to he's kind of strong man we like
he controlled his people he thought he
could control the Kurds and keep the
Iranians and their border and keep
pumping oil for us and then once we took
out his military not he's going to come
around so the economic hitmen go back in
in the 90s without success if they've
had success he'd still be running the
country we'd be selling em all the sight
of jets he wants and everything else he
wants but they could they think they
didn't have success the Jackals couldn't
take him out again so we sent the
military and once again
time we did the complete job and took
him out and in the process created for
ourselves a very very lucrative
construction deals at the reconstruct
the country that we'd essentially
destroyed which is pretty good deal if
you own construction companies big ones
so you know Iraq shows the three stages
the economic hitman sale they're the
Jackals failed there as a final measure
the military goes out and in that way
we've really created an empire but we've
done it very very subtly its clandestine
all the empires of the past were built
on the military and everybody knew they
were building them so that the version
of every building in the French Germans
with the Romans the Greeks and they were
proud of it and they always had some
excuse like spreading civilization
spreading some religion something like
that but they knew they were doing it we
don't the majority of the people in the
United States had no idea that we're
living off the benefits of the
clandestine empire that today there
isn't more slavery in the world than
ever before
then you have to ask yourself well if
it's an empire that means the Emperor
obviously and our presidents of the
United States are not emperors and
emperors someone who is not elected
doesn't serve a limited term and doesn't
report to anyone essentially so you
can't classify our presidents that way
but we do have what I consider to be the
equivalent of the importance what I call
the corporatocracy the corporate khakhra
see is this group of individuals to run
our biggest corporations and they really
access the Emperor of this Empire they
control our media either through direct
ownership or advertising they control
most of our politicians because they
finance their campaigns either through
the corporations or through personal
contributions that come out of the
corporations they're not elected they
don't serve a limited term they don't
report to anybody and at the very top of
the corporatocracy you really can't tell
with a person's working for a private
corporation or the government because
are always moving back and forth so you
know you've got a guy who one moment is
the president as the big construction
company like Haliburton and the next
moment he's vice president United States
or the president who is in the oil
business and this is true whether you
get Democrats or Republicans in the
office you have to moving back and forth
through the revolving door and in a way
our government is invisible a lot of the
time and as close as you carried out by
our corporations on one level or another
and then again the policies of the
government are basically forged by the
corporatocracy and then presented to the
government they become government policy
so it's an incredibly cozy relationship
this isn't a conspiracy theory type of
thing these people don't have to get
together and plot to do things they all
basically work under one primary
assumption and that is that they must
maximize profits regardless of the
social and environmental costs
this process of manipulation by the
corporatocracy through the use of debt
bribery and political overthrow is
called globalization just as the federal
reserve keeps the American public in the
position of indentured servitude through
perpetual debt inflation and interest
the World Bank and IMF serve this role
on a global scale the basic scam is
simple put a country in debt either by
its own indiscretion or through
corrupting the leader of that country
then impose conditionalities or
structural adjustment policies often
consisting of the following currency
devaluation when the value of a currency
drops so does everything valued in it
this makes indigenous resources
available to predator countries at a
fraction of their worth large funding
cuts for social programs these usually
include education and healthcare
compromising the well-being and
integrity of the society leaving the
public vulnerable to exploitation
privatization of state-owned enterprises
this means that socially important
systems can be purchased and regulated
by foreign corporations for profit for
example in 1999 the World Bank insisted
that the bolivian government sell the
public water system of its third-largest
city to a subsidy of the u.s.
corporation Bechtel as soon as this
occurred water bills for the already
impoverished local residents skyrocketed
it wasn't until after a full-blown
revolt by the people that the Bechtel
contract was nullified
then there is trade liberalization or
the opening up of the economy through
removing any restrictions on foreign
trade this allows for a number of
abusive economic manifestations such as
transnational corporations bringing in
their own mass-produced products
undercutting the indigenous production
and ruining local economies an example
is Jamaica which after accepting loans
and conditionalities from the World Bank
lost its largest cash crop markets due
to competition with Western imports
today countless farmers are out of work
for they are unable to compete with the
large corporations another variation is
the creation of numerous seemingly
unnoticed unregulated inhumane sweatshop
factories which take advantage of the
imposed economic hardship additionally
due to production deregulation
environmental destruction is perpetual
as a country's resources are often
exploited by the indifferent
corporations while outputting large
amounts of deliberate pollution the
largest environmental lawsuit in the
history of the world today is being
brought on behalf of 30,000 Ecuadorian
Amazonian people against Texaco which is
now owned by Chevron so today's against
Chevron refer activities conducted by
Texaco estimated to be more than 18
times what Exxon Valdez dumped into the
coast of Alaska in the case of Ecuador
it wasn't an accident they organized did
it intentionally they knew they were
doing it to save money there rather than
or anything for a proper disposal
furthermore a cursory glance at the
performance record of the world bank
reveals that the institution which
publicly claims to help poor countries
develop and alleviate poverty has done
nothing but increase poverty and the
wealth gap while corporate profits soar
in 1960 the income-gap between the fifth
of the world's people and the richest
countries versus the fifth in the
poorest countries was thirty to one by
1998 it was
74 to 1 while global GNP Rose 40%
between 1970 and 1985 those in poverty
actually increased by 17% while from
1985 to 2000 those living on less than
one dollar a day increased by 18 percent
even the Joint Economic Committee of the
US Congress admitted that there is a
mere 40% success rate of all World Bank
projects in the late 1960s the world
bank intervened in Ecuador with large
loans during the next 30 years poverty
grew from 50% to 70% under or
unemployment grew from 15 to 70% public
debt increased from 240 million to 16
billion while the share of resources
allocated to the poor went from 20% to
6% in fact by the year 2000 50 % of
Ecuador's National budget had to be
allocated for paying its debts it is
important to understand the World Bank
is in fact a u.s. bank supporting US
interests for the united states holds
veto-power over decisions as it is the
largest provider of capital and where
did it get this money you guessed it it
made it out of thin air through the
fractional reserve banking system
of the world's top 100 economies as
based on annual GDP 51 are corporations
and 47 of that 51 are us-based Walmart
General Motors and Exxon are more
economically powerful than Saudi Arabia
Poland Norway South Africa Finland
Indonesia and many others and as
protective trade barriers are broken
down currencies tossed together and
manipulated in floating markets and
state economies overturned in favor of
open competition in global capitalism
the empire expands you get up on your
little 21 inch screen and how about
America and democracy there is no
America there is no democracy there is
only IBM and ITT and AT&T and DuPont Dow
Union Carbide and Exxon those are the
missions of the world today what do you
think the Russians talk about in their
councils of state Karl Marx they get out
their linear programming charts
statistical decision theories min and
Max solutions and compute the price-cost
probabilities of their transactions and
investments just like we do we no longer
live in a world of Nations and
ideologies mr. Beale the world is a
college of corporations inexorably
determined by the immutable bylaws of
business the world is a business mr.
Beale
the world is being taken over by handful
of business powers who dominate the
natural resources we need to live while
controlling the money we need to obtain
these resources the end result will be
world monopoly based not on human life
but financial and corporate power and as
the inequality grows naturally more and
more people are becoming desperate so
the establishment was forced to come up
with a new way to deal with anyone who
challenges the system so they gave birth
to the terrorists the term terrorist is
an empty distinction designed for any
person or group who chooses to challenge
the establishment this isn't to be
confused fictional al-qaeda which was
actually the name of a computer database
the us-supported Mujahideen in the 1980
in 2007 the Department of Defense
received 160 1.8 billion dollars for the
so-called Global War on Terrorism
according to the National
Counterterrorism Center in 2004 roughly
2000 people were killed internationally
due to supposed terrorist acts of that
number 70 were American using this
number as a general average which is
extremely generous it is interesting to
note that twice as many people die from
peanut allergies a year than from
terrorist acts concurrently the leading
cause of death in America is coronary
heart disease killing roughly 450,000
each year and in 2007 the government's
allocation of funds for research on this
issue was about three billion dollars
this means that the US government in
2007 spent 54 times the amount for
preventing terrorism than it spent for
preventing a disease which kills six
thousand and six hundred times more
people annually than terrorism does yet
as the name terrorism and al Qaeda are
arbitrarily stamped on every news report
relating to any action taken against US
interests the myth grows wider in mid
2008 the US Attorney General actually
proposed that the US Congress officially
declare war against the fantasy not to
mention as of July 2008 there are now
over 1 million people currently on the
US terrorist watch list these so-called
counterterrorism measures of course have
nothing to do with social protection and
everything to do with preserving the
establishment amongst the growing
anti-american sentiment both
domestically and internationally which
is legitimately founded on the
greed-based corporate Empire expansion
that is exploiting the world
the true terrorists of our world do not
meet at the docks at midnight or scream
Allah Akbar before some violent action
the true terrorists of our world wear
5000 dollar suits and work in the
highest positions of Finance government
and business so what do we do how do we
stop a system of greed and corruption
that has so much power in momentum how
do we stop this aberrant group behavior
which feels no compassion for say the
millions slaughtered in Iraq and
Afghanistan so the corporatocracy can
control energy resources and opium
production for Wall Street profit
[Music]
[Music]
how do we stop a system of greed and
corruption that condemns poor
populations to sweatshop slavery for the
benefit of Madison Avenue or that
engineers false-flag terror attacks for
the sake of manipulation or that
generates built-in modes of social
operation which are inherently
exploitative or that systematically
reduces civil liberties and violates
human rights in order to protect itself
from its own shortcomings how do we deal
with the numerous covert institutions
such as the Council on Foreign Relations
the Trilateral Commission and the
Bilderberg Group and other
undemocratically elected groups which
behind closed doors collude to control
the political financial social and
environmental elements of our lives in
order to find the answer we must first
find the true underlying cause for the
fact is the selfish corrupt power and
profit based groups are not the true
source of the problem they are symptoms
my name's Jacque fresco I'm an
industrial designer and a social
engineer I'm very much interested in
society and developing a system that
might be sustainable for all people
first of all the word corruption is a
monetary invention that aberrant
behavior behavior that's disruptive to
the well-being of people while you're
dealing with human behavior and human
behavior appears to be environmentally
determined meaning if you were raised by
the Seminole Indians as a baby never saw
anything else you'd hold that value
system and this goes for nations it goes
for individuals families they try to
indoctrinate their children to their
particular faith and their country and
make them feel like they're part of that
and they build a society which they call
established they establish a workable
point of view and tend to perpetuate
that whereas all societies are really
emergent not established and so they
fight new ideas that would interfere
with the establishment governments try
to perpetuate that which keeps them in
power people are not elected to
political office to change things that
put their to keep things the way they
are so you see the basis of corruption
is in our society I'm going to clear all
nations and are basically corrupt
because they tend to uphold existing
institutions I don't mean to uphold or
downgrade all nations but communism
socialism fascism the free enterprise
system and all other sub-cultures
are the same they are all basically
corrupt
the most fundamental characteristic of
our social institutions is the necessity
for self-preservation whether dealing
with a corporation a religion or a
government the foremost interest is to
preserve the institution itself for
instance the last thing an oil company
would ever want is the utilization of
energy that was outside of its control
for it makes that company less relevant
to society likewise the Cold War and the
collapse of the Soviet Union was in
reality a way to preserve and perpetuate
the established economic and global
hegemony of the United States similarly
religions condition people to feel
guilty for natural inclinations each
claiming to offer the only path to
forgiveness and salvation at the hearts
of this institutional self-preservation
lies the monetary system for it is money
that provides the means for power and
survival therefore just as a poor person
might be forced to steal in order to
survive it is a natural inclination to
do whatever is needed to continue an
institution's profitability this makes
it inherently difficult for profit-based
institutions to change for it puts in
jeopardy not only the survival of large
groups of people but also the coveted
materialistic lifestyles associated with
affluence and power therefore the
paralyzing necessity to preserve an
institution regardless of its social
relevance is largely rooted in the need
for money or profit
what's in it for me as my people things
and so if a man makes money selling a
certain product naturally he's going to
find the existence of another product
that may threaten his institution
[Music]
therefore people cannot be fair and
people do not trust each other a guy
come over to you say I got just the
house you're looking for he's a Salesman
when a doctor says I think your kidney
has to come out I don't know he's trying
to pay off a yacht or the my kidney has
to come out it's hard in a monetary
system to trust people if you came into
my store and I says this plant that I've
got is pretty good but the lamp of next
door is much better I wouldn't be in
business very long
it wouldn't work if I were ethical it
wouldn't work so when you say industry
cares for people that's not true they
can't afford to be ethical so your
system is not designed to serve the
well-being of people if you still don't
understand that there would be no
outsourcing of jobs if they cared a lot
of people industry does not care they
only hire people because it hasn't been
automated yet so don't talk about
decency and ethics we cannot afford it
and remain in business it is important
to point out that regardless of the
social system with a fascist socialist
capitalist or communist the underlying
mechanism is still money labor and
competition Communist China is no less
capitalistic than the United States the
only difference is the degree by which
the state intervenes in enterprise
the reality is that monetary-ism so to
speak is the true mechanism that guides
the interests of all the countries on
the planet the most aggressive and hence
dominant variation of this monetary-ism
is the free enterprise system the
fundamental perspective has put forth by
early free market economists like Adam
Smith is that self interest in
competition leads to social prosperity
as the act of competition creates
incentive which motivates people to
persevere however what isn't talked
about is how a competition based economy
invariably leads to strategic corruption
power and wealth consolidation social
stratification technological paralysis
labor abuse and ultimately a covert form
of government dictatorship by the rich
who believe
the word corruption is often defined as
moral perversion if a company dumps
toxic waste into the ocean to save money
most people recognize this as corrupt
behavior on a more subtle level when
Walmart moves into a small town and
forces small businesses to shut down for
they are unable to compete a grey area
emerges for what exactly is Walmart
doing wrong why should they care about
mom and pop organizations they destroy
yet even more subtly
when a person gets fired from their job
because a new machine has been created
which can do the work for less money
people tend to just accept that as the
way it is not seen the inherent corrupt
inhumanity of such an action because the
fact is whether it is dumping toxic
waste having a monopoly enterprise or
downsizing the workforce the motive is
the same profit they are all different
degrees of the same self-preserving
mechanism which always puts the
well-being of people second to monetary
gain therefore corruption is not some
byproduct of monetary-ism it is the very
foundation and while most people
acknowledge this tendency on one level
or another majority remains naive as to
the broad ramifications of having such a
selfish mechanism as the guiding
mentality in society internal documents
show that after this company positively
absolutely knew that they had a
medication that was infected with the
AIDS virus they took the product off the
market in the US and then they dumped it
in France Europe Asia in Latin America
the US government allowed it to happen
the FDA allowed this to happen and now
the government is completely looking the
other way
thousands of innocent hemophiliacs have
died from the AIDS virus this company
knew absolutely that it was infected
with AIDS they dumped it because they
wanted to turn this disaster into a
profit
so you see you have built-in corruption
we're all chiseling off each other and
you can't expect decency and that sort
of thing have feeling that they don't
know who to elect they think in terms of
a democracy which is not possible in a
monetary based economy if you have more
money to advertise your position to
position your desire in government that
is in a democracy it serves those in
positions of differential advantage so
it's always a dictatorship of the
elitist the financially wealthy
[Music]
it is an interesting observation to note
how seemingly unknown personalities
magically appear on the scene as
presidential candidates then before you
know it
somehow you are left to choose from a
small group of extremely wealthy people
who suspiciously have the same broad
social view obviously it's a joke the
people placed on the ballot are done so
because they have been pre-decided to be
acceptable by the established financial
powers who actually run the show yet
many who understand this illusion of
democracy often think if only we could
just get our honest ethical politicians
in power then we would be ok well while
this idea of course seems reasonable in
our established oriented world view it
is unfortunately another fallacy for
when it really comes down to what is
actually important the institution of
politics and thus politicians themselves
have absolutely no true relevance as to
what makes our world and society
function it's not politicians that can
solve problems they have no technical
capabilities they don't know how to
solve wrong even if they were sincere
they don't have a solemn problems
it's a technicians that produce the
desalinization plants it's the
technicians that give you electricity
that give you Motor Vehicles that heat
your house and cool it the summertime
it's technology that solves problems not
politics politics cannot solve them
because they're not trained to do so
very few people today stop and consider
what it is that actually improves their
lives is it money obviously not one
cannot eat money or stuff money into
their car to get it to run is it
politics all politicians can do is
create laws establish budgets and
declare war is it religion of course not
religion creates nothing except
intangible emotional solace for those
who require it the true gift that we as
human beings have which has been solely
responsible for everything that has
improved our lives is technology what is
technology technology is a pencil which
allows one to solidify ideas on paper
for communication technology is an
automobile which allows one to travel
faster than feet would allow technology
is a pair of eye glasses which enables
sight for those who need it
Applied Technology itself is merely an
extension of human attributes which
reduces human effort freeing humans from
a particular chore or problem imagine
what your life would be like today
without a telephone or an oven or a
computer or an airplane everything in
your home would you take for granted
from a doorbell to a table to a
dishwasher is technology generated from
the creative scientific ingenuity of
human technicians not money politics or
religion these are false institutions
and writing your Congressman is
fantastic they tell you to write your
Congressman if you want something done
the men in Washington should be at the
forefront of Technology the forefront of
human study the forefront of crime all
the factors that shape human behavior
Europe write your Congressman
what kind of people are they that are
appointed to do that job as in future
will have great difficulty and the
question that's raised by politicians is
how much will a project cost
the question is not how much will it
cost do we have the resources and we
have the resources today to house
everyone build hospitals all over the
world build schools all over the world
the finest equipment and labs for
teaching and doing medical research so
you see we have all that but we're in a
monetary system and in a monetary system
there's profit and what is the
fundamental mechanism that drives the
profit system besides self-interest what
is it exactly that maintains that
competitive edge at its core is it high
efficiency and sustainability now that
isn't part of their design nothing
produced in our profit based society is
even remotely sustainable or efficient
if it was there wouldn't be a
multi-million dollar a year service
industry for automobiles nor would the
average lifespan for most electronics be
less than three months before they're
obsolete
is it abundance absolutely not abundance
as based on the laws of supply and
demand is actually a negative thing if a
diamond company finds ten times the
usual amount of diamonds during their
mining it means the supply of Diamonds
has increased which means the cost and
profit per diamond drops the fact is
efficiency sustainability and abundance
are enemies of profit to put it into a
word it is the mechanism of scarcity
that increases profits
what is scarcity based on keeping
products valuable slowing up production
on oil raises a price maintaining
scarcity of diamonds keeps the price
high they burn diamonds at the Kimberly
diamond mines and made a carbon that
keeps the price up so then what does it
mean for society when scarcity either
produced naturally or through
manipulation is a beneficial condition
for industry it means that
sustainability and abundance will never
ever occur in a profit system for it
simply goes against the very nature of
the structure therefore it is impossible
to have a world without war or poverty
it is impossible to continually advance
technology to its most efficient and
productive States and most dramatically
it is impossible to expect human beings
to behave in truly ethical or decent
ways
you
people use the word instinct because
they can't account for the behavior they
sit back and they evaluate with their
lack of knowledge you know and they say
things like humans are built a certain
way greed is a natural thing as though
they've worked for years on it and it's
no more natural than wearing clothing
what we want to do is to eliminate the
causes of the problems eliminate the
processes that that produce greed and
bigotry and Prejudice and people taking
advantage of one another and elitism
eliminating the need for prisons and
Welfare we have always had these
problems because we have always lived
within scarcity and barter and monetary
systems that produce scarcity if you
eradicate the conditions that generate
what you call socially offensive
behavior it does not exist to guys so
listen I've inborn no it's not there is
no human nature this human behavior and
that's always been changed throughout
history you're not born with bigotry and
greed and corruption and hatred you you
pick that up within the society war
poverty corruption hunger misery human
suffering will not change in a monetary
system that is there'll be very little
significant change it's going to take
the redesign of our culture our values
and it has to be related to the carrying
capacity of the earth not some human
opinion or some politicians notions of
the way the world ought to be or some
religious notions of the conduct of
human affairs and that's what the Venus
Project is about
the society and we're about to talk
about is a society that is free of all
the old superstitions incarceration
prisons police cruelty and law all laws
will disappear and the professions will
disappear that are no longer valid such
as stockbrokers bankers advertising gone
forever because it's no longer relevant
when we understand that it is technology
devised by human ingenuity which frees
humanity increases our quality of life
we then realize that the most important
focus we can have is on the intelligent
management of the earth's resources for
it is from these natural resources we
gain the materials to continue our path
of prosperity understanding this we then
see that money fundamentally exists as a
barrier to these resources for virtually
everything has a financial cost and why
do we need money to obtain these
resources because of real or assumed
scarcity
we don't usually pay for air and tap
water because it is in such high
abundance selling it would be pointless
so then logically speaking if resources
and technologies applicable to creating
everything in our societies such as
houses cities and transportation were in
high enough abundance there would be no
reason to sell anything likewise if
automation and machinery was so
technologically advanced as to relieve
human beings of Labor there would be no
reason to have a job and with these
social aspects taken care of there would
be no reason to have money at all so the
ultimate question remains do we on earth
have enough resources and technological
understanding to create a society of
such abundance that everything we have
now could be available in out a price
tag and without the need for submission
through employment yes we do
we have the resources and technology to
enable this at a minimum along with the
ability to raise the standard of living
so high that people in the future will
look back at our civilization now and
gawk at how primitive and immature our
society was what the Venus Project
proposes is an entirely different system
that's updated to present they knowledge
we've never given scientists the problem
of how do you design a society which
would eliminate boring and monotonous
jobs that would eliminate accidents in
transportation that would enable people
to have a high standard of living that
would eliminate poisons in our food and
give us other sources of energy that are
clean and efficient we can do that out
there
the major difference between a
resource-based economy and a monetary
system is that a resource based economy
is really concerned with people and
their well-being where a monetary system
has become so distorted that the
concerns of the people are really
secondary if they're there at all the
products that are turned out are for how
much money you can get if there is a
problem in society and you can't earn
money from solving that problems then it
won't be done the resource-based economy
is really not close to anything that's
been tried and with all our technology
today we can create abundance it could
be used to improve everyone's lifestyle
abundance all over the world if we use
our technology wisely and maintain the
environment it's a very different system
and it's very hard to talk about because
the public is not that well enough
informed as to the state of Technology
at present we don't have to burn fossil
fuels but you don't have to use anything
that would contaminate the environment
there are many sources of energy
available alternative energy solutions
pushed by the establishment such as
hydrogen biomass and even nuclear are
highly insufficient dangerous and exist
only to perpetuate the profit structure
that industry is created when we look
beyond the propaganda and self-serving
solutions put forth by the energy
companies we find a seemingly endless
stream of clean abundant and renewable
energy for generating power solar and
wind energy are well known to the public
but the true potential of these mediums
remains unexpressed solar energy derived
from the Sun has such abundance that one
hour of light at high noon contains more
energy than what the entire world
consumes in a year if we could capture
104 the percent of this energy the world
would never have to use oil gas or
anything else the question then is not
availability but the technology to
harness it and there are many advanced
mediums today which
accomplish just that if they were not
hindered by the need to compete for
market share with the established energy
power structures then there's wind
energy wind energy has long been
denounced as weak and due to being
location driven impractical this is
simply not true the US Department of
Energy admitted in 2007 that if wind was
fully harvested in just three of
America's 50 states it could power the
entire nation and then there are the
rather unknown mediums of tidal and wave
power tidal power is derived from tidal
shifts in the ocean installing turbines
which capture this movement generates
energy in the United Kingdom 42 sites
are currently noted as available
forecasting that 34% of all the UK's
energy could come from tidal power alone
wave power which extracts energy from
the surface motions of the ocean is
estimated to have a global potential of
up to 80,000 terawatt-hours a year this
means 50% of the entire planets energy
usage could be produced from this medium
alone now it is important to point out
that tidal wave solar and wind power
requires virtually no preliminary energy
to harness unlike coal oil gas biomass
hydrogen and all the others in
combination these four mediums alone if
efficiently harnessed through technology
could power the world forever
that being said there happens to be
another form of clean renewable energy
which Trump's them all geothermal power
geothermal energy utilizes what is
called heat mining which through a
simple process using water is able to
generate massive amounts of clean energy
in 2006 an MIT report on geothermal
energy found that 13,000 ZJ joules of
power are currently available in the
earth with the possibility of 2,000 ZJ
joules being easily tappable with
improved technology the total energy
consumption of all the countries on the
planet is about half of a ZJ Joule year
this means about 4000 years of planetary
power could be harnessed in this medium
alone and when we understand that the
Earth's heat generation is constantly
renewed this energy is really limitless
it could be used forever
these energy sources are only a few of
the clean renewable mediums available
and as time goes on we will find more
the grand realization is that we have
total energy abundance without the need
for pollution traditional conservation
or in fact a price tag and what about
transportation the prevailing means of
transportation in our societies is by
automobile and aircraft both of which
predominantly need fossil fuels to run
in the case of the automobile the
battery technology needed to power an
electric car that can go over a hundred
miles an hour for over 200 miles on one
charge exists and has existed for many
years however due to battery patents
controlled by the oil industry which
limits their availability to maintain
market share coupled with political
pressure from the energy industry the
accessibility and affordability of this
technology is limited there is
absolutely no reason other than pure
corrupt profit interests that every
single vehicle in the world
cannot be electric and utterly clean
with zero need for gasoline as far as
airplanes it is time we realize that
this means of travel is inefficient
cumbersome slow and causes far too much
pollution this is a maglev train it uses
magnets for propulsion it is fully
suspended by a magnetic field and
requires less than 2% of the energy used
for plane travel the train has no wheels
so nothing can wear out the current
maximum speed of versions of this
technology as used in Japan it's 361
miles per hour however this version of
the technology is very dated an
organisation called et3
which has connections with the Venus
Project has established a tube-based
maglev that can travel up to 4000 miles
per hour in a motionless frictionless
tube which can go over land or under
water imagine going from LA to New York
for an extended lunch break or from
Washington DC to Beijing China in 2
hours this is the future of continental
and intercontinental travel fast clean
with only a fraction of the energy usage
we use today for the same means in fact
between maglev technology advanced
battery storage and geothermal energy
there would be no reason to ever burn
fossil fuels again and we can do this
now if we were not held back by the
paralyzing profit structure
now America is inclined toward fascism
it has a propensity by its dominant
philosophy and religion to uphold the
fascist point of view American ministry
is essentially a fascist institution if
you don't understand that the minute you
punch that time clock you walk into a
dictatorship we're given notions about
the respectability of work and I really
look at it as being paid slavery they
brought ELISA you kill her and you're
living by the sweat of your brow that
holds people back freeing people from
drudgery repetitive jobs which make them
ignorant you robbed them in our society
that is a resource-based economy
machines free people you see we can't
imagine that is we've never known that
kind of world if we look back at history
we see a very clear pattern of machine
automation slowly replacing human labor
from the disappearance of the elevator
man to the near full automation of an
automobile production plant the fact is
as technology grows the need for humans
in the work force will continually be
diminished this creates a serious clash
which proves falseness of the
monetary-based labor system for human
employment is in direct competition with
technological development therefore
given the fundamental priority of profit
by industry people through time will be
continually laid off and replaced by
machine one industry takes on machine
instead of shortening the workday they
downsize you lose your job so you have a
right to fear machines in a
high-technology resource-based economy
it is conservative to say that about 90%
of all current occupations could be
phased out by machines freeing humans to
live their life without servitude
for this is the point of technology
itself and through time with
nanotechnology and other highly advanced
forms of science it is not far-fetched
to see how even complex medical
procedures could be performed by
machines as well and based on the
pattern with much higher success rates
than humans get today the path is clear
but our monetary-based structure which
requires labour for income blocks this
progress for humans need jobs
in order to survive the bomb line is
that this system must go or we will
never be free and technology will be
constantly paralyzed we have machines
that clean out sewers it frees a human
being from doing that so look at
machines as extensions of human
performance furthermore many occupations
today will have simply no basis to exist
in a resource-based economy such as
anything associated with the management
of money advertising along with the
legal system itself for without money a
great majority of the crimes that are
committed today would never occur
virtually all forms of crime are a
consequence in the monetary system
either directly or by neurosis inflicted
through financial deprevation
therefore laws themselves could
eventually become extinct instead of
putting up a sign drive carefully
slippery when wet put abrasive in the
highway so it's not slippery when wet
and the person gets in a car that drunk
and a car oscillates a great deal
there's a little pendulum that swing is
up and back and that will pull the car
over the side not a law solution but son
our radar and automobiles so they can't
hit one another
man-made laws our attempts to deal with
occuring problems and not knowing how to
solve them they make a law in the United
States the most privatised capitalist
country on the planet it should come as
no surprise that it also has the largest
prison population in the world
growing every year statistically most of
these people are uneducated and come
from poor deprived societies and
contrary to propaganda it is this
environmental conditioning which lures
them into criminal and violent behavior
however society looks the other way in
regard to this point the legal and
prison systems are just more examples of
how our society avoids examining the
root causes of behavior billions are
spent each year on prisons and police
while only a fraction is spent on
programs for poverty which is one of the
most fundamental variables responsible
for crime to begin with and as long as
we have an economic system which prefers
and in fact creates scarcity and
deprivation crime will never go away if
people have access to the necessities of
life without servitude debt barter trade
they behave very differently you want
all these things available without a
price tag
now then you can't have a price tag well
what'll motivate people man gets
everything you want scissors lay around
in this diamond this is a myth they
perpetuate people in our culture are
trained to believe that the monetary
system produces incentive if they have
access to things why should they want to
do anything they will lose their
incentive that's what you're taught to
support the monetary system when you
take money out of the scenario there
would be different incentives very
different incentives when people have
access to the necessities of life their
incentives change what about the moon of
the stars no incentives arrived if you
make a painting that you enjoy you will
enjoy giving it other people not selling
it
I think most of the education that I've
seen today is essentially producing a
person for a job it's very specialized
they're not generalists people don't
know a lot about a lot of different
subjects I don't think you could get
people to go to war if they knew a lot
about a lot of things I think education
is mostly rote and they're not taught
how to solve problems they're not given
the tools emotionally or within their
own field of how to do critical thinking
a resource-based economy the education
would be very different our society's
major concern as mental development and
to motivate each person to their highest
potential because our philosophy is the
smarter people are the richer the world
because everybody becomes a contributor
the smarter your kids are the better my
life will be because they'll be
contributing more constructively to the
to the environment and to my life
because everything that we devise within
a resource-based economy would be
applied to society there would be
nothing to hold it back
patriotism weapons armies navies all as
a sign that we're not civilized yet kids
will ask their parents didn't you see
the necessity of the machines dad
couldn't you see that war was inevitable
when you produce scarcity
isn't it obvious of course the kid will
understand that you're pinheads raised
merely to serve the established
institutions recession abominable sick
society that we won't make the history
but they just say that large nations
took land with smaller nations used
force and violence you'll get history
talked about as corrupt Behavior all the
way along until the beginning of the
civilized world that's when all the
nations work together world unification
working toward common good for all human
beings
and without anyone being subservient to
anyone else without social
stratification whether it be technical
elitism or any other kind of elitism
eradicated from the face of the earth to
state like nothing because there is no
Spain there is no Spain the system I
advocate a resource based global economy
is not perfect it's just a lot better to
what we have we can never achieve
perfection
[Music]
the social values of our society which
has manifested in perpetual warfare
corruption oppressive laws social
stratification irrelevant superstitions
environmental destruction and a despotic
socially indifferent profit oriented
ruling class is fundamentally the result
of the collective ignorance of two of
the most basic insights humans can have
about reality the emergent and symbiotic
aspects of natural law the emergent
nature of reality is that all systems
whether it is knowledge society
technology philosophy or any other
creation will when uninhibited undergo
fluid perpetual change what we consider
commonplace today such as modern
communication and transportation would
have been unimaginable in ancient times
likewise the future will contain
technologies realizations and social
structures that we cannot even fathom in
the present we have gone from alchemy to
chemistry from a geocentric universe to
a heliocentric from believing that
demons were the cause of illness to
modern medicine this development shows
no sign of ending and it is this
awareness that aligns us it leads us on
a continuous path to growth and progress
static empirical knowledge does not
exist rather it is the insight of the
emergence of all systems we must
recognize this means we must be open to
new information at all times even if it
threatens our current belief system and
hence identities
sadly society today has failed to
recognize this and the established
institutions continue to paralyze growth
by preserving outdated social structures
simultaneously the population suffers
from a fear of change for their
conditioning assumes a static identity
and challenging ones belief system
usually results in insult and
apprehension for being wrong is
erroneously associated with failure when
in fact to be proven wrong should be
celebrated for it is elevating someone
to a new level of understanding
furthering awareness the fact is there
is no such thing as a smart human being
for it is merely a matter of time before
their ideas are updated changed or
eradicated and this tendency to blindly
hold on to a belief system sheltering it
from new possibly transforming
information is nothing less than a form
intellectual materials the monetary
system perpetuates this materialism not
only by its self-preserving structures
but also through the countless number of
people who have been conditioned into
blindly and thoughtlessly upholding
these structures therefore becoming
self-appointed guardians of the status
quo sheep which no longer need a
sheepdog to control them they control
each other by ostracizing those who step
out of the norm this tendency to resist
change and uphold existing institutions
for the sake of identity comfort power
and profit is completely unsustainable
and will only produce further imbalance
fragmentation distortion and invariably
destruction
[Music]
it's time to change from hunters and
gatherers to the Agricultural Revolution
for the Industrial Revolution the
pattern is clear it is time for a new
social system which reflects the
understandings we have today the
monetary system is a product of a period
of time where scarcity was a reality now
with the age of technology it is no
longer relevant to society gone with the
aberrant behavior it manifests likewise
dominant world views such as theistic
religion operate with the same social
irrelevancy Islam Christianity Judaism
Hinduism and all of the others exist as
barriers to personal and social growth
for each group perpetuates a closed
worldview and this finite understanding
that they acknowledge is simply not
possible in an emergent universe yet
religion has succeeded in shutting down
the awareness of this emergence by
instilling the psychological distortion
of faith upon its followers or logic and
new information is rejected in favor of
traditionalized outdated beliefs the
concept of God is really a method of
accounting for the nature of things and
the early days people didn't know enough
about how things formed how nature
worked so they invented their own little
stories and they made God in their own
image a guy that gets angry when people
don't behave right he creates floods in
earthquakes they say it's an act of God
a cursory glance at the suppressed
history of religion reveals that even
the foundational myths themselves are
emergent culminations
developed through influence over time
for example a cardinal doctrine of the
Christian faith is the death and
resurrection of Christ this notion is so
important that the Bible itself States
and if Christ be not risen then is our
preaching vain and your faith is also
vain yet it is very difficult to take
this account literally for not only is
there no primary source denoting the
supernatural event in secular history
awareness of the enormous number of
pre-christian saviors who also died and
were resurrected immediately puts the
story in mythological territory by
association early church figures such as
Tertullian went to great lengths to
break these associations even claiming
that the devil caused the similarities
to occur stating in the second century
the devil whose business is to pervert
the truth mimics the exact circumstance
of the Divine sacraments he baptizes his
believers and promises forgiveness of
sins he celebrates the oblation of bread
and brings in a symbol of the
resurrection let us therefore
acknowledge the craftiness of the devil
who copied certain things of those that
be divine what is truly sad however is
that when we cease the idea that the
stories from Christianity Judaism Islam
and all the others are literal history
and accept them for what they really are
which are purely allegorical expressions
derived from many faiths
we see that all religions share a common
thread and it is this unifying
imperative that needs to be recognized
and appreciated religious belief has
caused more fragmentation and conflict
than any other ideology Christianity
alone has 34,000 different subgroups
the Bible is subject to interpretation
when you read it you say I think Jesus
meant this
I think Joad meant that Oh No he meant
this so you have the Lutheran the
seventh-day Adventist the Catholic and a
church divided is no church at all and a
church divided is no church at all and
this point on division which is a
trademark of all theistic religions
brings us to our second failure of
awareness the false assumption of
separation through the rejection from
the symbiotic relationship of life apart
from the understanding that all natural
systems are emergent where all notions
of reality will be constantly developed
altered and even eradicated we must also
understand that all systems are in fact
invented fragments merely for the sake
of conversation for there is no such
thing as independence in nature the
whole of nature is a unified system of
interdependent variables each a cause
and a reaction existing only as a
concentrated whole you don't see the
plug connected to the environment so it
looks like we're free wandering around
take the oxygen away
we all die immediately take plant life
away we die and without the Sun all the
plants die so we are connected we really
must take into account the totality this
isn't just a human experience on this
planet this is a total experience and we
know we can't survive about plants and
animals we know we can't survive without
the four elements you know and so what
are we going to really start taking that
into account that's what it is to be
successful success depends on how well
we relate to everything around us
I'm very aware of the fact that my
grandson cannot possibly hope to inherit
a sustainable peaceful stable socially
just world unless every child today
growing up in Ethiopia in Indonesia in
Bolivia in Palestine in Israel also has
that same expectation you got to take
care of the whole community or you have
serious problems and now we have to see
that the whole world is the community
and we must all take care of each other
that way and it's not just a community
of human beings it's a community of
plants and animals and elements and we
really need to understand that this is
going to bring us joy too and pleasure
that's what's missing in our lives right
now we can call it spirituality but the
fact of the matter is joy comes from
that bliss of connectedness that's our
God spirit that's that side of ourselves
that really feels that you can see the
deep inside you it's just amazing
wonderful feeling and you know when you
get it you don't get it for money there
are some connections now if that isn't a
hazard to this country
how are we going to keep building
nuclear weapons what's going to happen
to the arms industry when we realize
we're all one let's get a fuck up the
economy the economy that's fake anyway
anyway the economy that's fake anyway
the economy that's fake anyway the
economy that's fake anyway which would
be a real bummer see why the
government's crackin down on the idea of
experiencing unconditional love once we
understand that the integrity of our
personal existences are completely
dependent on the integrity of everything
else in our world we have truly
understood the meaning unconditional
love for love is extensionality and
seeing everything as you and you as
everything can have no conditionalities
for in fact we are all everything at
once if it's true that we're all from
the center of a star every atom in each
of us from the center of the star then
we're all the same thing - even a Coke
machine or a cigarette butt in the
street in Buffalo is made out of atoms
that came from the star deval been
recycled thousands of times as have you
and I and therefore it's only me out
there so what is there to be afraid of
what is there that needs solace seeking
nothing there's nothing to be afraid of
because it's all us the trouble is we
have been separated by being born and
given the name and an identity and being
individuated we've been separated from
the oneness and that's what religion
exploits that people have this yearning
to be part of the overall one again so
they exploit that they call it God they
say he has ruled and I think it's cruel
I think you can do it absent religion
[Laughter]
[Applause]
[Music]
it's time to claim the unity our
outmoded social systems have broken
apart and work together to create a
sustainable global society where
everyone is taken care of and everyone
is truly free your personal beliefs
whatever they may be are meaningless
when it comes to the necessities of life
every human being is born naked needing
warmth food water shelter everything
else is auxilary
therefore the most important issue at
hand is the intelligent management of
the earth's resources this can never be
accomplished in a monetary system for
the pursuit of profit is the pursuit of
self-interest and therefore imbalance is
inherent simultaneously politicians are
useless for our true problems in life
are technical not political furthermore
ideologies that separate humanity such
as religion need strong reflection in
the community in regard to its value
purpose and social relevancy hopefully
through time religion will lose its
materialism and basis in superstition
and move into the useful field of
philosophy the fact is society today is
backwards with politicians constantly
talking about protection and security
rather than creation unity and progress
the US alone now spends about 500
billion dollars annually on defense that
is enough to send every high school
senior in America to a four-year college
in the 1940s the Manhattan Project
produced the first true weapon of mass
destruction this program employed
130,000 people at an extreme financial
cost imagine what our life would be like
today if that group of scientists
instead of working on a way of killing
people worked on a way to create a
self-sustaining abundant world life
today would be very very different if
that was their goal
instead of weapons of mass destruction
it is time to unleash something much
more powerful weapons of mass creation
our true divinity is in our ability to
create in armed with the understanding
of the symbiotic connections of life
while being guided by the emergent
nature of reality there is nothing we
cannot do or accomplish of course we
face strong barriers in the form of
established power structures that refuse
to change at the heart of these
structures is the monetary system as
explained earlier the fractional reserve
policy is a form of slavery through debt
where it is literally impossible for
society to be free in turn free-market
capitalism in the form of free trade
uses debt to imprison the world and
manipulate countries into subservience
to a handful of large business and
political powers apart from these
obvious immoralities the system itself
is based on competition which
immediately destroys the possibility of
large scale collaborations for the
common good hence paralyzing any attempt
at true global sustainability these
financial and corporate structures are
now obsolete and they must be outgrown
of course we cannot be naive enough to
think that the business and financial
elite are going to subscribe to this
idea but they will lose power and
control
therefore peaceful yet highly strategic
action must be taken the most powerful
course of action is simple we have to
alter our behavior to force the power
structure to the will of the people
we must stop supporting the system
the only way the establishment will
change is by our refusal to participate
while continuously acknowledging its
endless flaws and corruptions they're
not going to give up the monetary system
because of our designs or what we
recommend the system has to fail and
people have to lose confidence in their
elected leaders that will be a major
turning point if the Venus Project is
offered as a possible alternative if not
I fear the consequences the trends now
indicate that our country is going
bankrupt the probability is our country
moves toward a military dictatorship to
prevent riots and complete social
breakdown once the u.s. breaks down all
the other cultures will undergo similar
things as of now the world financial
system is on the brink of collapse due
to its own shortcomings the Comptroller
of currency stated in 2003 that the
interest on the u.s. national debt will
not be affordable in less than 10 years
this theoretically means total
bankruptcy for the US economy its
implications for the world are immense
in turn the fractional reserve based
monetary system is reaching its
theoretical limits of expansion and the
banking failures you are seen are just
the beginning
this is why inflation is skyrocketing
all debt is at record levels and the
government and fed are hemorrhaging new
money to bailout the corrupt system for
the only way to keep the bank's going is
by making more money the only way to
make more money is to create more debt
and inflation it is simply a matter of
time before the tables turn and there
was no one willing to take new loans
while defaults grow as people are unable
to afford their current loans then the
expansion of money will stop and
contraction will begin on a scale never
before seen ending a century long
pyramid scheme this has already begun
therefore we need to expose this
financial failure for what it is using
this weakness to our advantage here are
some suggestions expose the banking
fraud Citibank JP Morgan Chase and Bank
of America are the most powerful
controllers within the corrupt Federal
Reserve System it's time to boycott
these institutions if you have a bank
account or a credit card with any of
them move your money to another Bank if
you have a mortgage refinance with
another Bank if you own their stock sell
it if you work for them quit this
gesture will Express contempt for the
true powers behind the private banking
cartel known as the Federal Reserve and
create awareness about the fraud of the
banking system itself to turn off the TV
news visit the emerging independent news
agencies on the internet for your
information CNN NBC ABC fox and all the
others present all news pre-filtered to
maintain the status quo with four
corporations owning all major media
outlets objective information is
impossible this is the true beauty of
the Internet and the establishment has
been losing control because of this free
flow of information we must protect the
Internet at all times as it is truly our
Savior right now 3 don't ever allow
yourself your family or anyone you know
to ever join the military this is an
obsolete institution now used
exclusively for maintaining an
establishment that is no longer relevant
the US soldiers in Iraq work for US
corporations not the people propaganda
forces us to believe that war is natural
in the military is an honorable
institution
well if war is natural why are there 18
suicides every single day
American veterans who have
post-traumatic stress disorder if our
military men and women are so honored
why is it that 25% of the American
homeless population are veterans for
stop supporting the energy companies if
you live in a detached house get off the
grid investigate every means of making
your home self-sustainable with clean
energy solar wind and other renewable
energies are now affordable consumer
realities and considering the
never-ending rising cost of traditional
energies it will likely be a cheaper
investment over time if you drive get
the smallest car you can and consider
using one of the many conversion
technologies that can enable your car to
be a hybrid electric or run on anything
other than establishment fuels five
reject the political system the illusion
of democracy is an insult to our
intelligence in a monetary system there
is no such thing as a true democracy and
there never was we have two political
parties owned by the same set of
corporate lobbyists they are placed in
their positions by the corporation's
with popularity artificially projected
by their media in a system of inherent
corruption the change of personnel every
couple of years has very little
relevance instead of pretending that the
political game has any true meaning
focus your energy on how to transcend
this failed system and six join the
movement
go to the zeitgeist movement calm and
help us create the largest mass movement
for social change the world has ever
seen we must mobilize and educate
everyone about the inherent corruption
of our current world system along with
the only true sustainable solution
declaring all the natural resources on
the planet as common heritage to all
people while informing everyone as to
the true state of Technology and how we
can all be free if the world works
together rather than fights the choice
lies with you
you can continue to be a slave to the
financial system and watch the
continuous Wars depressions and
injustice across the globe while
placating yourself with vain
entertainment and materialistic garbage
or you can focus your energy on true
meaningful lasting holistic change which
actually has the realistic ability to
support and free all humans with no one
left behind but in the end the most
relevant change must occur first inside
of you the real revolution is the
revolution of consciousness and each one
of us first needs to eliminate the
divisionary materialistic noise we have
been conditioned to think is true while
discovering amplifying and aligning with
the signal coming from our true
empirical oneness it is up to you
what we are trying you know these
discussions and talks here mr. Siefert
cannot radically bring about a
transformation of the mind not accept
things as they are but to understand it
to go into it to examine it give your
heart and your mind with every but it
seem that you have to find out a way of
living differently but that depends on
you are not somebody else because in
this there is no teacher no pupil
there's no leader there's no guru
there's no master no sabía you yourself
are the teacher and the pupil no you're
the master you're the Guru you are the
leader you are everything and to
understand is to transform what is
[Music]
you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
mmmm
Oh
[Applause]
[Music]