good morning welcome to day 27 of
possibility in a pandemic
today is April 26 it's a little weird
that it's the 27 broadcast so the 26
today I might skip a day so that that
makes sense
but not tomorrow because tomorrow is day
number 28
oh maybe tomorrow no that doesn't make
sense
just that toros day 28 and of course
there's the 28th as well and 28 is a big
it's a big number in my life for some
reason started when I was a teenager a
lot of things happened to me on the 28th
yeah so we'll see we'll see what
Torrance broadcast is I did the Thursday
broadcast after having watched the it's
not like a Morris documentary but I
can't remember Jeff Gibbs this
documentary about basically about
overpopulation and how the green energy
isn't gonna save us I don't agree with
that because I don't think we have an
overpopulation problem I think we have a
lack of valuing of humanity more so than
a overpopulation problem if anyone's
overpopulated it's the rift rich
privileged class it's that when you are
rich you go through way too many
resources and you're allowed to under a
current economic system so I I think we
have seven point five billion solutions
on this planet I don't think I think
everyone is worthy and everyone is
needed those that we value highly
that is the 1% the people who own the
businesses people run the businesses are
actually some of the least valuable
people and yet they're valuable it's
just that we over values women
undervalue everybody else and so as a
human being I'm sure they have a lot to
contribute but they don't have more to
contribute than everybody else I don't
have the point we're not gonna use that
again but this is how I but I watched
that and put up that we were discussing
that and I talked for an hour and I
didn't necessarily actually discuss it
besides just saying and I watched it and
here's the recap and here's what I
propose
for us to solve our energy problems we
tried our best I have a solution to the
energy problems themselves my solution
is that all the solutions exist right
now all of the solutions someone knows
how
do basically everything that we need
salt it's just that the system is
designed to not allow new ideas the
system is designed that when you have
innovative innovation like the
documentary wasn't looking at is this is
green energy Bible how do we make it
viable it was like what is currently
going on under the umbrella of green
energy is not sustainable and in no way
ok and if you look at who was it was
like our regular government funding it
our regular corporations who were the
ones who destroyed our planet anyway are
the ones who are like running the
project through the Friends of the
politicians it wasn't
is there a solar panel that's efficient
is there wind farms that are efficient
what is the best chance we have what's
the best of the technology out there
probably cuz there are they're a little
for-profit but also we can do that only
we can do that if Michael Moore did that
he'd have more to say and more money and
more every and more he has more eyeballs
on his stuff so it's gonna have more
clout but it's not as good and it's
trustworthy is if we do it together to
say hey what would we need to know about
green energy and there's a few people
coming but my point of bringing up that
that I did that on Thursday was that
video has gotten more watches than any
other video that I've done because it
brings over some of the people for
Michael Moore's right so anyway so I
decided okay at least once a week I'm
gonna go with YouTube's algorithm pick
one of the very popular people that I'm
still into that I I don't I'm not I'm
not gonna watch something just just so
algorithm but someone who's popular who
I can bring some viewers over from right
because the algorithm pops so what I've
decided is tomorrow this broadcast is
gonna be on Russell Brand's new video
where he interviews Ricky Gervais and
they're talking about God versus atheism
so I like Ricky Gervais esel Brants I'm
not so into God versus atheism just
because it's really my my jab them
talking about it I can get into so I'm
going to watch that and talk about that
tomorrow firstly so we can put the title
as that
it brings eyeballs since Thursday
I had the Friday session right at the
coaching that was in it was good for me
I enjoyed joy doing it for myself every
time I do south coaching I get something
out of it which is amazing I hope other
people were able to follow along and
other people watch the replay and did it
if anyone got anything out of it aside
for me
bonus yesterday I did the 20-minute
update and then I went to the roundtable
for together Natak and that is coming
together nicely it is it's more than
atrial Bentley and I discussing our
three projects and that is awesome there
was actually a point where there was too
many people to put on the screen so
Adriel had to drop down and I got in
contact with this Dyke we're now having
we're in getting be together so it's
like we didn't know of each other but
I've yet to see his face on screen and
he's doing something very similar and
he's very into like vulnerability and
love is the solution or I he calls it
radical transparent transparency
vulnerability something along those
lines so we have a conversation set up
for tomorrow I'll be having the
conversation today Sunday tomorrow right
actually before I come on here you go
like I said I'll be having that
conversation deciding if we're gonna
upload it or not but then I can only be
on for an hour with them because I gotta
come in and do this at 8:30 or we'll be
talking about Rick use your face in
Russell Brand God versus atheism and
then I have like this read lesson with
my kid with her old school and then like
talking to her principal I think that's
all I have going on to her that is a lot
for me a lot one or two things is enough
I've like bored by things but things are
happening but today today I wanted cuz
it's Sunday and last Sunday I talked
with my sister and the Sunday before
that I talked about my my brain tumors
and my that journey so today I wanted to
talk about the GPS coordinates it's a
little weird because the person who gave
that to me the person who I learned that
from has recently had some things come
to light that makes him no longer in any
way of anyone that I want to follow and
I don't look up to him anymore
I don't but at the same time I'm super
grateful that
came into my life when he did and taught
me what I was open to learning from him
at that time and he doesn't own the
technology he doesn't own the GPS
coordinate idea I don't know where he
got it from but there's tons of coaches
to talk about it but I got it from him
first off and the idea being that a GPS
system in your car doesn't give you put
in your destination but it doesn't tell
you the entire route because it would be
too confusing if it only gives you the
next coordinates right it only tells you
to turn left at the gas station in 300
yards rental meters 300 whatever
whatever metric period whatever country
and so that is not my normal I'm someone
who likes to plan out everything I want
the whole map I want every every light
every coordinate and to be able to zoom
in and out of it and to know ok I'm
going here is that the fastest is that
the next and those are definitely two
different ways of doing things one is it
necessarily right and one's wrong just
that one was my normal personality and
once I started figuring out that the
universe my subconscious whatever is
here to teach us gives us the next thing
and you don't get the next one until
you've done it once I tapped into that I
started following the coordinates and
then and I don't follow all of them I
follow a good 60% of them and that's
with me having a proven I still argue
with my guides all the time and I'm like
no I'm not doing that I just gave this
guy 50 bucks on the bus um however many
days ago and there was part of me that
was like well I don't know what he's
gonna do with this what if you'd like
overdose is what if he I'm like that's
not that's not my job my job is to
listen to this there's something telling
me to it actually give me 20 bucks if I
didn't have 20 bucks on me so I was like
I have 50 because this is this the write
about it was like yeah not serene about
then ironically I founded 20 after then
he touched me and I was like no not with
govind ID it was coffee and he's like
blew his nose on his hoodie and I felt
like disgust and like annoyance and
anger about this human being basically
existing and then it very quickly went
into
and oh my god like I have a house to
stay safe in and quite frankly Cobra
deities were going around for how long
in the lower east end and even if he's
sick it'd probably get sick Ovid but
even if it is it's like this is our
responsibility as that Vancouver has
allowed this to happen that Canada has
allowed this to happen that this trans
link that the bus system is kind of a
safe place for these people and that
makes it not safe for the rest of us and
at the same time it's not them that's
the problem like I just saw there's been
a lot of hate and violence to war of
course towards Asian people during this
time period but there's also been a lot
towards nurses and doctors and although
there is a logic to that they actually
are way more likely to have this and way
more likely to therefore be a vector
disease at the same time they are also
the heroes in this they're also the ones
who are helping us the most but at the
same time it's like the the anger and
fear that comes up when you see a nurse
or doctor out and about in the world
that you know they might have Kovac 19
or I'll try stay away from it it's like
our animal miss kicks in and then we
react to them with like anger and
violence even though they're the ones
the ones helping they're the ones we're
doing this or actually because they're
already gonna get PTSD getting more
worse PTSD like how many people doing
too much died from it and it's not all
of them it's only gonna be the ones sort
in like the er's and dealing with the
actual cope in 19 cases but anyway so I
wanted to talk today about my GPS
coordinates because although there's
there's dozens of little ones a day that
I'm given and I listen to where I don't
listen to the bigger ones are the ones
that are easier to kind of showcase
other people and there are more of the
big key points on my journey I have
before learning about the GPS
coordinates I have some but once but I'm
only gonna start with what I learned a
few years ago and
ironically one of the things was to go
to LA and see this guy who was talking
about these things and so I bought a
ticket I went my sister looked after my
kid for the day it was when she was
foster adopting another little girl she
thought she could keep and she ended up
this little girl was taken taken from
her but with her maternal grandmother
well I was staying there we went to like
Disneyland and Legoland and Universal
that that tricks my sister had it
planned to surprise us
you know that's way too much for me to
do at any trip but because I just seen
this guy and anytime you go to a weekend
like that it energizes you even he I was
best able to help my sister cope with
with what she was going through and I
came home and I did this task that was
because one of the other things this guy
talks about is is an apple tree and
although I'm sure his is the thing is
the apple tree other people have this
same again he's not the one who owns any
of these ideas I can still hold on to
the things that works for me the tools
that worked for me without holding on to
him as as a leader or a teacher that an
apple tree isn't concerned about what
the world is gonna do with its apples
it's not well wait am i making these for
apple sauce or for apple juice we're
looking to eat them are people gonna
like some are they gonna be okay it just
produces apples in fact if it was
concerned about all of that it probably
wouldn't be able to produce the apples
oh wait all these other trees are
producing apples I can't produce apples
where's my market how is that gonna work
it's just about putting them out there
and not hoarding it not saying okay well
I have ten apples I need to release like
one a day so that hopefully by the
eleventh day I have a new Apple it's
literally like just putting out what
that's what I took it to be anyway like
putting out all of my content putting
out all of my ideas and whatever happens
happens and so I got a iPad from the
local mall here and iPads were expensive
beulas oh no and I'm poor for people who
don't know and so I needed to have it I
set a goal of releasing a hundred ideas
100 apples within a two-week period
if I was able to produce 100 apples in
two weeks I was allowed to keep this
icon and all I did every time I had a
little idea pop into my head was I just
recorded like 30 seconds of that idea I
didn't do anything with the idea right I
had basically anyway I did the when I
gave myself two weeks to do comp with a
hundred apples I did it in three or four
days I was on a high simile although I'm
not bipolar a little bit manic at that
time period and I would go for a walk
and I'd bring my iPad and I like have a
record like twenty five ideas on my walk
this is like all right like I'm not even
walking I'm basically just stopping
every few feet and recording a new idea
and that's kind of the point when you
get out of your own way the ideas just
flow and you're like if you're kicking
the hose every so often like hold that
idea someone can go the new one's not
ready to come out but when you release
it it just explodes and so I don't know
if that's when I started this channel
but it's the first hundred videos or
it's the first out of maybe 110 videos
it's the first hundred right like I
might have had ten videos before that
but I released a hundred videos in that
period of time I tried to put them
together but I can't edit and owning
that like right it's not about what I
can't do and learning it because I don't
have the capacity it's about what can I
do right now and continually ask it
without trying to hold back what I can
do without trying to force it or hold it
back just allow it so during this time
period one of the things that was
sticking in my head for a really long
time was that I wanted to do ayahuasca
partially because my sister had done it
and gotten profound experience and I
kept kind of coming into my life in that
way of people having these little
stories it was like all right ayahuasca
is the thing I should be doing
I had this world-saving idea and I don't
know how to communicate it and that was
the next thing to do and so the only
person I could find to do ayahuasca with
was this person who I didn't dislike but
they weren't my favorite person like
they they had um they were the X of one
of my friends who they like broke up
right after they had their second little
boy and as always in my head I was on
her side so it was like yeah
my loyalties to hurt so I can't possibly
have loyalty the other one and and this
person's younger than me and their
shaman that was like I just there's
something I don't quite I'm not going to
look to this person for spiritual
guidance but it was the only way I could
do ayahuasca so and after I tried and
tried and this was the only person I
could do it I could do it through and so
I was like alright I'll give it a try I
showed up for the weekends and this
person is one of my favorite spiritual
human beings on the planet now I'm like
they are 30 32 somewhere in there
younger like almost a decade younger
than me and just a beautiful human being
whose purpose on this planet is plant
medicine and so we did ayahuasca and I
didn't know whey got anything out of
ayahuasca itself besides that this human
being and the community may have built
it he is an amazing person and the all
of these people I yeah that was so my my
car broke down these are the kind of
things my car broke down I've talked
about that before right before this
weekend and so I was planning on driving
out to it and I couldn't so one of the
other they're called angels came and
picked me up and we drove out and
because that angel picked me up my car
broke down we were talking on the way it
takes about an hour to get there and she
had gone to she did this thing called
white white lotus white Tantra white
something about women and wearing white
and this thing and she'd also done this
thing called the yoni massage which is
basically vagina massage where when it
happened
her whole voice had changed because it
deals with your crown your even though
it's the root chakra deals with your
like fruit shocker and everything else
is her voice changed and she all of a
sudden was able to like speak in public
and do all these things so there was
something about that was like that's
what I'm looking for and so although I
didn't get I'm like I'm looking just
change my voice and so this ayahuasca
weekend was amazing but it wasn't what I
thought because I didn't get a I didn't
get it for mother ayah I didn't get this
like beautiful right here's how you
saved the world here's how your next
step forward it was more this isn't
yours
you're doing this because your sisters
did it this actually cigarettes but
there's a part so when you do ayahuasca
you purge you throw up and I hate
throwing up I have been through
radiation on my brain where I was
nauseous all of the time I have been
through a pregnancy both of which I did
not bomb injury because I was suppressed
it and has a breast it and suppressed it
and I was dealing with nausea in my life
all like basically all day over here
every time I any of my sip of my own
senses we're off I was nauseous and so
part of what ayahuasca does is you you
purge and you surrender to it like
that's part of part of part of it
because I was purging I wasn't getting
the full impact but I was getting my
full impact and so there was you take
like a tiny bit to see if it works with
your system and but it's not really
enough to do the the journey and then
you have the second amount and because
of how my assistant works and I was
nauseous and like as soon as I took the
second amount I basically purged it and
so I never really got the full effect if
there was part of me that was like so
then I took his another Jose which they
were like wow that's hardcore it was
like I know but I've already said I
would die for this thing like I was like
if you could just take away my life and
give the world my idea
like actually implement it I would say I
would sign up for that absolutely to
give that to my child to give that to
the world I would do that so if I'm
willing to die for this how can I help
you Willy into
it's like right was I born this at this
point yeah you were so um I was so in
the moment I was like okay well if
you're willing to die for this this is
death like take the second dose this is
this is what you're here for and
although again I didn't get visuals or
anything that was like an epiphany what
I got was yeah I am I'm willing to put
myself out there for this thing I also
got during this thing when I was talking
with one of the other amazing women and
she was talking about some sexual
partners and her journey and what she's
learned through things like I was like I
got that my relationship in this life is
community not one person it's not
supposed to be that I find my monogamous
pair and then we're soul mates and I
could see that I'm like oh I sought out
cohousing and I sought out this
community and it's like community I'm
seeking and I put way more effort in to
seek you know community than I ever have
into a partner it's like the partner
thing is like what you're supposed to do
and the community thing is what I'm here
to do I was like oh okay this feels more
mine because it's not what you're
supposed to do it's generally my my
evidence that it's it's mine to do or
that it's because if it's not that
nothing it's on your GPS on your
coordinates is mainstream but it's much
more obvious when it's not mainstream
right if you've been told to grow up and
become a lawyer and marry and you have
kids and you're like wait that doesn't
feel right for me wait I don't want to
be a lawyer wait I don't want to have
kids I don't want to get married
those pieces are much more obvious then
if your thing is to become an engineer
and so my ayahuasca weekend was one of
my first GPS coordinates that I was like
yes this is the thing us to take yes
there's a stake with this person no one
else is available then my car broke down
and I got to meet her and got to my next
step I knew was to do what she had done
get a yoni massage and so it always like
I could have done that the week after
but it takes me a while these things are
expensive even though I have enough
saved it's like I don't want it like go
through my savings so it was like okay
well since this thing was five hundred
bucks and this other thing is a couple
hundred bucks I'm
like wait and feel until like
financially it feels that I'm ready and
so a few months later I went for the
only massage and again not life-changing
not world-changing my throat chakra
didn't change and all of a sudden be
able to be communicated and while I was
like getting just like after a regular
massage read rest in the room after to
go and have a chat with her after I was
like okay thanks thanks universe like
the next step in my GPS the next thing
you give me to do can it please be not
astronomically expensive and not gray
level legal right like both of these
things ayahuasca is not exactly legal
and yoni massage is considered sex work
so it's not exactly legal um but I think
so the universe literally in that moment
was like yeah stop smoking pot to
meditate like we've been telling him to
go out log it was like not that one no
thank you
and I don't even know the next step on
the GPS because there wasn't a next step
step it was obvious like those ones but
just every like realizing that even
these little these little things are GPS
coordinates like when the universe was
like right go on Twitter Twitter's where
your people are going Twitter it was
like and I have this plan to get 10,000
people cuz that's what weirdly it's what
I've wanted for a really long time so
how there's this number of 10,000 oh my
god I think it's cuz 10 people 10,000
people put in ten dollars equals hundred
thousand so I was like well when I lot
when I get to 10,000 followers I will
launch a crowdfunding campaign and that
crowdfunding campaign will not succeed
because you not all 10,000 we're gonna
actually contribute but it'll be a first
start and I thought that would take me a
few months to get to 10,000 spoiler
alert I'm still at like 3000 I tried
hard to get those 3,000 and I basically
stopped but what I did find were people
who are working in the realm I'm working
in people who have their own
world-saving idea people who are just
amazing human beings I remember when I
would first contact these like handful
of people
it was just we're changing it it was
like oh there's another human being
changing things and I met I met Remzi
from common planet
and Nicole from the Commons
why am I forgetting what her thing it's
called the transition org wow it's like
on my I think it's still my batter on
Facebook too
and although Twitter itself is not my
thing
it's not there's part of it I like but I
can't really get my thoughts into it's
the same thing that someone's gonna
retweet or like or then writing it ready
to Facebook post is hard about ready to
tweet is harder it's just like you're
more confined by the by the character
limits but I'm on there for what I was
on there for which is Remzi put me in
contact with game be like the morning of
well II because I also which is like
this look there's this parenting group
that I've been part of since my kid was
almost right after she was born
it's like about babywearing and now we
don't have babies so it's more about not
babywearing but like that same mentality
of keeping your kids clothes and
attachment parenting and right parenting
and when I was a younger parents who my
kid was younger I got a lot of advice
for them like everything he was like
what do I need I don't have a second
parent so it was like everything needs
to be run by somebody else I learned my
internal GPS system so now I don't I do
that sometimes with my product like
there's these five options which one do
other people want but from my life I
don't run things by other people it's
like unless I really need to it's like
which one feels better in my body and
that is the whole like the GPS
coordinate is the universe gives me
something to do I know it's a GPS
coordinate like I know it's a thing I'm
supposed to do and I either take it on
and say yes no or maybe right like yes
no or later basically there are times
where someone's like it'll be like talk
to that human being like no not in the
state not happening that sounds
embarrassing that's not happening or
like do ayahuasca or stop some people
meditate is the weird part about the
song so if you pod meditate is that when
I do it every time I do it I get a lot
out of it and then every time I go back
to not I get a lot out of it like every
time I go back smoking pot I get a lot
of it and the universe wasn't you have
to be sober and in your highest theta
beta eight alpha whatever that thing is
the meditation does state it was
there's something you're holding back
because the world this is good and what
you're doing isn't and so you either
need to do the good thing stop smoking
pot to meditate or you gotta own it you
gotta own that you have an addiction own
that meditation isn't somehow isn't your
thing and and it isn't is it like I do
meditate I meditate a couple times a
week but I don't whenever I try to do it
daily it falls apart I just did this
daily one this is this ups for boys I
just did one of the people in game B had
put a call out for 38 meditation I was
like yeah that sounds good I did it one
day three days after he started I was
like this isn't my thing but walking in
nature is my meditation like I'm like
there's something about that there were
it's like my church and meditation and
my reminder of why I'm here and why all
the human beings are here to like just
fall in love with humanity and the earth
and my my place in it when I go for a
walk of meditation or when I go for a
walk and it happens to you meditative
and I don't really get better to
meditation like meditation itself
sitting there I get a lot out of my
world works better with it but it's not
the same as going for a walk and so
that's my thing not this one ironically
on a whole other level because I can't
get exercise but not exercising when I'm
walking
I'd like my heart rate isn't going up
it's level um but what I like you feel
in your body does it feel expansive or
contractive sometimes it feels
contractive like sometimes it's scary
but expansive and sometimes it's scary
but contractive and sometimes it's just
 do it like it doesn't even
matter just do it and so there's a lot
of things I've done online that it's
like okay so this parenting group which
was my point
I keep getting the Colleen because they
have this thing called spammy Saturday's
where you could only post anything
business-related
on Saturdays and I don't know if my
things are business-related is I'm not
looking for money and looking to save
the world but I always wait till
Saturday that I forget and don't do it
on Saturdays and any time I've posted
anything there
crickets nothing comes from it but
something else happens every time I pose
they
poor people probably like what is this
get it why she keep posting this like
nothing happens
it's not the normal things that are
posted which is like one thing for sale
or someone's MLM or their their their
business that is like someone has done
well it's not like life coaching it's
helping people resolve their emotional
trauma I don't remember what it's called
the FT um and so she anyway I've posted
on Craigslist I posted on Craigslist
this summer this last summer summer 2019
and I don't remember what I posted it
was something about basically what I'm
looking for right now like I'm looking
for people who want to have a
conversation about creating the system
that ten thousand people participated I
don't think I word it like that I think
I'm just like if I can find people to
have a conversation with weekly we can
move this thing forward this is before I
found Bentley before I found a B so I
didn't have that I didn't have what I
currently have with the other tech and
all the game B people and two people
contacted me one of whom is this amazing
First Nations man I don't remember what
his station is and we got together for
like an afternoon to want the pot
smoking places downtown which is not my
jam downtown saw my thing and either is
going out and smoking pot but I was
gonna have him over at my place I don't
know him and it's anyway so we went he
introduced me to a few first nations
things that resonated with me and I
heard about them before but there was
something about it coming through him he
was the one that I that I ended up
putting on my own protection
jewelry I had a necklace that my friend
had maybe because it was already made
out of hemp and then I made to a
bracelet and anklet I saw the anklet on
and then one of the other people was
this woman who is just I know ahead
she's in her late 60s early 70s and
she's just like she's she just got back
from traveling he's just struggling with
his cope at night she might still be
traveling cause of copán 19 but what's
like gonna go on this amazing and places
that most people like the Middle East
right now and like places where there's
conflict like actual conflict right now
and she's traveling through I'm like I
can't I can barely go to any gym for the
for the week
let alone go to these these things but
it was amazing talking to her for that
period of time he introduced me to you
dispatching in these necklaces and there
was something about that that helps my
energy move forward because I have an
energy disability and so a lot of things
will help with the only help for a few
weeks so it's like I have to constantly
find the next thing in the next thing
and this jewelry was one of them
but beyond and so like posting on
Craigslist posting on Facebook going on
Twitter all these little things happen
but it's the as I follow them I get more
and more and then it proved itself
enough to me I'm like I'm willing to do
this process online I'm willing to
because I know the next GPS is coming in
so I was already sharing this journey
when I con when I came in contact with
game B and which was my this is all over
the place so summer I posted this thing
on Craigslist and then was wearing this
jewelery was on Twitter from the year
before I had started stream yard happens
somehow I got in content streaming
streaming I clicked my brain where I was
like oh if I could have other people
join me on camera
ie it's in the description right here
you I was then able to do like the idea
cafe and I was like okay I'm gonna keep
showing up for a board meeting and every
Friday and FAQ here's how we saved the
world the technology cooperative and
that started the week of September 11th
cuz September 11th was our very first
idea cafe and that stories cool because
I did not plan it to be on September
11th it was just the Wednesday it's
gonna be up this Wednesday it happened
to be on Wednesday and then I had the
first board being the first with me the
only person the first FAQ for it
together tech on that Friday so it was
Wednesday September 11th and Friday the
13th that I had these two things
scheduled for with stream yard and
people there was four people including
me who were going to attends the the I
did the first idea cafe and it was gonna
be on education something along the
lines and who's your favorite teacher or
what education and whatever I don't
remember what it was but the morning of
on September 11th that was like this
feels really weird to have our first one
on September 11th and not talk about it
so I asked the participants if we could
change it to September 11th what
where were you what was what's your
September 11th story everyone was old
enough to participate in that
conversation one of the people weren't
but he dropped out anyway he was like
actually about available today cuz he
was like 21 I'm like well yeah I
remember September 11 one of the people
said no I'm not okay changing it to
September 11th but actually I'm not okay
having this conversation at all today
it's not respectful and I was like okay
well we're having the conversation it's
just if people aren't okay with it being
on September 11th I'm okay sticking with
the old question the old question and
otherwise we'll switch to the new one
one of the people was a very vocal
advocate for changing it to September
11th conversation and the other person
dropped out anyway so there was three of
us we agreed to talk about September 11
one of the people is an acquaintance
that I know from this parent teen
Facebook group and our kids went to the
same school and she's an amazing human
being that I really love but I've never
heard her September 11th story because
it's not something that comes up in our
circles and ours are actually very
similar and yet different I was in
Australia which speaks English but I
wasn't at home I basically just got in
there because I was still in Sydney and
I arrived and said you'd only stay there
for a few days so um like being in a
different city being away it's a
different time zone than what's
happening in it back home where it's
only three hours difference in New York
and she was in Greece when it happens
they didn't even speak and we both like
flew in in one world than out in another
world and so seeing our parallel swimmer
acquaintance it was kind of cool the
third person the third person who agreed
to be honest September 11th call on
September 11th and was like yeah let's
share our stories was in New Jersey at
the time and gave it like from the
ground floors like not knowing what's
going on not be able to find an ATM her
friends like stuck in this subway I was
like oh this is a really weird like this
is an amazing first idea at cafe and
then that night my school grounds well
it's like a hippy schools of business
had their Wednesday yes I still hadn't
found it gave me yet Wow okay so that
night there was the groundswell like
alumni the last five years if people
came together and there was karaoke and
I didn't ever gotten pons activist first
again there was someone I met there who
was I was like we're like soul mates I
was like like she was someone I think
someone who had was dude was doing like
sustainable clams oysters those kind of
things and there was something about the
things she was saying I was like relax
so man it's we need to get to cover and
save the world
and we never ended up getting together
but that Friday the 13th I was ready to
go live for the first time energized for
the idea Cafe and all this stuff that's
happening and Remzi was like oh there's
this game be thing have you heard about
it no I hadn't we're on a Zune call
right now it's like right now I'm about
to go live at sure I'll jump on and
there was something about getting in
contact with game B it was like
energizing to say the least and then it
happened that that soon and then very
rapidly I had conversations set up
because they'll assume that was the
conversation that launched the coffee
shop in zoo so for the next few weeks
you could just pop into the zoom coffee
shop and there'd be people to talk about
world saving and changing ideas with on
game B and starting I mean day one like
nobody knows how to save the world it
was like I know I know how to save it
actually I actually know how we can
create game B no nobody knows like like
some eight-year-old in Peru might know
but like no one knows like well if an
eight-year-old and Peru could know how
to like clean up the ocean or how would
we how would we find out from her how
would we actually allow that to come to
existence
cuz I'm telling you I know how and just
brushing under the rug that nobody knows
how isn't actually the solution but
being there having conversations with
people has helped me grow immensely
since September and I don't even really
know how this so it's just like it was
like I knew how to create game B but I
didn't know how to create it with and
for people what's just gone to the point
it's like I'd created it by myself in my
head and I knew that I knew it was by
myself I had a dirty let go of it can't
be this one way it has to be something
we create together I just didn't quite
know what that looks like I'd come into
and that was so like 2:00 a.m. well I'm
house-sitting at cohousing and oh my god
and the like that neighbor thing that
happens or she like we don't get along
and that was perfect and it when it
happens I did would not have signed
and asked for that but it was like the
perfect thing to have happened and then
we house we were house-sitting a few
times one of the times I house actually
it wasn't Paula's house city but it was
a two in the in the morning for sure I
got that I was awake and I'm I don't
have insomnia so generally I sleep
during the night thank God it's not very
restorative but I do end up sleeping for
six to ten hours a night um and this
woman angel came on to my periscope and
introduced me to the world cafe well if
I hadn't randomly woken up at 2:00 I am
fed ran and there's it's like the only
time even though we're in she lives in
North America
the only time she kind of comes on is
when I'm on it really weird hours and
then she's almost always on but not if I
planned it like can't happen that it's
planning and every time she comes on she
gives me something amazing and so having
just like once you start being aware of
this this GPS thing once you start
realizing all of human existence all of
the universe is here to teach you it's
here to teach you your lessons and
everybody else there's and somehow it
works out it just does because if you
don't like again I tell you I say no to
these GPS coordinates all the time and
if they're important they come back it's
like right you didn't do it last time do
it this time I was supposed to be live
on Facebook and YouTube I don't even
know two years ago and I was like that
does not feel safe and fun no thank you
now it's easy it's like it's it's this
gradual change that feels safe and easy
enough and now I was just watching
before coming on here why and how I
don't know cuz he's not someone I watch
ever David Icke Icke IC ke it's a
conspiracy theorist and I knew he was
like which conspiracy theorist they say
he's one of the reptilian conspiracy
theorists which you know okay cool but
his interview I was like I don't know
why I'm watching this I don't know why I
don't think I agree with this person
anything no everything I watched that
interview I agreed upon um they weren't
talking Fillion thing I only watch the
first like seven minutes this isn't big
to beard later I don't agree with that
necessarily but this where because he
was made fun of as a kid he's like
there's two options you can pretty much
like retreat from life and
and like the world has disowned jewelry
kids just stopped yet Mina like
just stop caring what other people are
that's there and I'm like yes that's
what we need people to do is that that
part of it because you can stop caring
about what people think you're then able
to show up into your own your own space
and my path that has been my GPS
coordinates when they start to prove
themselves to you even if the world is
like everybody turned right in 300
meters and yours is like actually you're
turning left when you first start
following them everyone else is going
this way and you're going this way or
like it doesn't quite feel right but
once you realize that you're in this
magical journey and you're like oh
they're all following society's GPS
which is never gonna lead you to your
beauty and joy and and your your map of
happiness but yours will because even if
you take a wrong route it redirects in a
different way
just like your GPS right you take the
wrong one it's like okay do a u-turn
when weekly save and continue on your
journey
it's basically what your own GPS does as
well hi hello Bodi how are you doing
today hi I'm doing pretty good I'm
having a good day uh yesterday was
yesterday was okay but I smoked pot all
day and I'm not just to do until the
afternoon I did not manage my addiction
well yesterday that's okay I'm glad one
or two days a week well Bart that's part
of it too is like having compassion for
my journey means like writing actually
can't be judged from the outside I'm the
only one who can judge it and even I
should judge it with compassion look
even I should be like right you can't
judge it from the outside and then when
I'm judging it's always from the outside
it's right it's like well my parents he
looks pretty shitty my life looks pretty
shitty the whole world is mourning
living my life right now having to stay
inside having to stay away from from a
lot of well for me it's the sensory
stuff but for other people it's a
disease it's the virus and having it be
oh and if it's 9 o'clock in the morning
for you as well it's maybe too early
which was it's not because it's not
something that there's times where I'm
absolutely supposed to smoke at a night
in the morning and that is part of it
it's learning the difference between
because sometimes on GPS coordinates
tell me to smoke pot and sometimes it
just my addiction it's just and so a lot
of times I don't even know until I've
done it and then I was like oh yeah this
was a day
this was the day there was something
waiting on the other side and other
times I'm like oh no I'm just sluggish
and tired and can't do anything now um
like I can't even get all the GPS
coordinates into this hour I had that I
was theoretically gonna write them down
it was gonna flow nope so we're in my
necklace for game be having comic-con
contact with game be you know in
September September 13th is when I found
out about them October 16th so just over
a month later is the person who made me
this hemp necklace
one of my best friends in high school
moved out here was my roommate when I
found out I had brain tumors then moved
back to Elbert uh pretty soon after that
that was his birthday he took his own
life
a couple weeks later um after his
birthday seven and a bit years ago so
2012 yeah 2012 that's really pregnant
when I went to to his funeral
um binnu I saw I was wearing this hemp
necklace which I normally wasn't wearing
but because of it was all day every day
because I couldn't I knew I couldn't
take it off without wrecking it so it
was just on because I thought it was
supposed to be on the other ones were
tied on and well I was listening to
Charles Eisenstein talk about a debt
Jubilee and he was saying debt Jubilee
and there was something else and it fell
off in my hand
as he was saying it and there was all
these things and if it had happened any
day that wasn't his birthday it wouldn't
have been big enough to me if it had
happened on his birthday but wasn't well
someone was saying the words Jubilee it
wouldn't have registered in my brain
that oh your name is Jubilee and you're
here to do these these big things which
he already knew about but now truly
stepping into that and and then so I had
these three pieces of necklaces on one
falls off on his birthday
coincidence whenever all these things
happen we sang happy birthday to this
little boy at cohousing which was his
first birthday that same day there was
all these like 90 CDs that we used to
listen to on the free shelf it's just
like really weird day and
shared that on the YouTube channel as it
happened and then the next one the one
still on me I'm sooo don't know what
it's gonna fall off but the other one
fell off on my grandmother's birthday
and so two people who had passed it fell
off on their birthdays and it was
amazing oh yes I talk a lot yeah and no
and there's days and that's the point
that there are days where I am
self-medicating and numbing out the
world and I can be hard on myself for
that or I can just acknowledge that you
know what my life and life in general is
actually kind of hard especially right
now when you're taking on the world
support problems but it's okay to need
to know man oh if I'm doing it all day
every day I need to be look you know and
and even that when I there are times
where I kind of do it all day every day
for a week or two and I'm like this
doesn't feel right and those are
generally what proceed by going off of
it completely for a couple weeks and
then I have those epiphanies and then I
smoke and again I haven't even bigger
Epiphany like it's like this cycle I'm
not supposed to cut it out completely
and I'm not supposed to just allow it to
take over my life there's like I'm
supposed to be in it and there was I
just watched this last week a
conversation there was the bore mate'
who defines addiction in a way that I'm
like yep I'm addicted it's like
something that you can't you're on
control of it has a negative impact on
your life
I think pot fits under that and so does
media under that for me but it also has
a positive right it has the positive
side and has the negative what's that
Wayne what good question depends on the
day but the other one I was listening to
right now one of them was defined the I
think let's try sighs least I'd actually
miss Charles Eisenstein talking on
something else on rebel Winston possibly
um and I mean his definition addiction
was that it
you need morning more of it right so
first you need a tiny bit of heroin and
that you need more and more just to feel
normal and then to get high you need
even more of it it was like if that's
the definition if it's that it has to be
getting worse I don't fall under that
definition because mine's actually
getting better and better as I'm aware
of the cycle and of the impact it's
having on me in my world it's getting
better and it's a different it's it's
not abstinence it's not definitely not
that form of getting rid of an addiction
it's like a wareness
and compassion this well well being in
it and it's working but that was like
from the GPS coordinate where I was
where I think you probably missed this
bode but um where I went in ayahuasca
which is slightly illegal and definitely
expensive and then while I was doing
that I got the message to do a yoni
massage which was also somewhat illegal
and expensive and then after that
neither of which gave me a lot besides
other things that were kind of
tangential to them like I didn't yeah
anyway I got I was like in the next
thing be like legal and cheap and the
universe was like yeah stop smoking pot
of meditate not that
thanks thanks but no and but then it's
very clear because it's been the whole
time it's like smoke stop so you
probably meditate or own they do have
like own it just the honest just be
vulnerable be open about it with
yourself and with the world and so one
or the other and it feels weird to be
like right I smoke pot all day every day
okay I'm stoned right now I'm not stuff
right now but like you know that you
would know because generally speaking a
lot of times my brain when sober appears
stones and then other times I'm stoned
and appear sober so you can't
necessarily tell me when like I bet I'm
honest about it
you could ask I'll tell you which state
of mind I'm in and so following the GPS
coordinates is what I am here to do and
everyone has their own and you cannot
judge somebody else's because somebody
else's isn't gonna be yours right you
have a different destination or even if
you have the same destination your route
to get there it's completely different
all I know is most of the GPS
coordinates I'm given look really weird
to society like some of them are they're
like what's expands on what's
contractive just stop I think your own
ayahuasca I mean I don't know how to
make it but I know how to make it brain
haven't use it ya know I've only
with a shaman and they make it they I
believe learned from their grand mother
and make it and it's amazing he's but
it's not my thing we also did the second
day of ayahuasca after I threw up
continually just that's basically all I
did but the one thing so there is one
thing I definitely got out of ayahuasca
which was surrendering to the purge I in
my life so as I mentioned while I was
telling that story I was nauseous
and I hate being nauseous and I hate
throwing up so I repress it doing
ayahuasca I learned to purge and the
like he leanness of the purge so there
was something that was my GPS coordinate
that was my internal guidance that said
yes surrender surrender to it not just
on this weekend but overall and so for
the next few months really was weeks
when I would feel nauseous I would get a
bucket and surrender to it and nothing
ever came out I never actually threw up
but I would surrender to it I would try
he basically after a couple weeks of
that the nausea went away and all of my
symptoms are kind of like that I have
yet like my my fatigue and pain don't go
away when I surrender to them but they
definitely they stop getting worse and
like my my fatigues at its best when I
surrender to it and I'm like tired now
take time
you're gonna pain rein it in you're
doing okay and so yeah that it did give
me my nausea going away which is huge I
don't know if that works for anyone else
but for me surrendering to what is seems
to be the solution to everything and
ironically it's like loving and
accepting yourself as you are seems to
naturally make me a more loving loving
person like I love other people and
lovable like people like me more when I
surrendered who I actually am like I
have social awkward quirkiness
when I surrender to that it didn't go
away but it became way less I didn't do
it so it would become less I truly fell
in love with my awkward quirkiness and
allow it but most of it went away and
that's the other like if you do it to
get rid of it I don't think it'll happen
because you're not loving it not
accepting it but in loving and accepting
exactly as I am what is supposed to come
forth comes forth and so then from the
outside it looks like Oh to get rid of
nos you need to surrender to it so
surrender to it you'll get rid of it
it's like no but if you're doing it to
get rid of it you're not remembering to
it but you got rid of it I can teach ya
like that I don't I don't know about
serotonin and the gut but I mean there's
a point with all of my illnesses some
again very logical person and it's like
my natural state is logic and needing
math and science and like like what's
that so when I got brain tumors I was
very shocked that the doctors didn't
care or even want to like why why do I
have them where did they come from how
do I make my brain not makes them in the
future and they were like what do you
mean leaving carers just radiate burn it
out take Kibo cut it out who cares it
was like I care this is my ecosystem my
body created it for a reason and the
more and then through getting brain
tumors and I'm getting chronic fatigue
and fibromyalgia from the stress and my
genetics and such there's like you're
trying to solve it like there's some
dietary thing I can do some exercise
some outside alternative treatment that
could cure this they could make it
better and the more I tried to fix it
either understand it to fix it or just
try things to fix it the more broken it
got because Lucido effect if you chose
those like the more I'm in the doctors
in no way to heal it they're not even
interested in it they're only interested
in dealing with the symptoms
I can't helix I don't have the
information we don't have the
information I need other people and
there was something about that
that is like right surrendering to I'm
not supposed to know it's exactly how
it's supposed to be right now helps me
move it forward in a powerful way I
tried every single diet Under the Sun
every elimination diet every you know
the I did not try Rob Rob Egan but I
tried ketone on a truck you know I tried
to pull 30 I tried the thing that's
really close to keto paleo and other and
nothing works nothing gives me energy
and nothing makes my body not be in pain
so what's the point I'd just eat what I
love and that was the catapult forward
that was I would never give anyone else
that advice right he'd make it chips for
dinner if that's what you want that's
bad advice
but if he's coming from internally if
it's like actually yeah you can need a
bag of chips whatever if that's what you
can eat eat um was much more helpful
that doctors when you have chronic
fatigue nearly every doctor does this
thing I don't know what it's called
graduated exercise program something
along those lines which makes logical
sense you don't have capacity to do
exercise you start doing what you can do
and gradually increase it every day
doctors all give this information
everyone who's been through this
information says it's poison and the
worst thing they listen to made them
stop trusting their doctors so listening
to the people who have chronic fatigue
do not exercise listening to doctors
increase your exercise um and so once I
understood what my body's chronic
fatigue is more so because there's I
listen to things and things that
resonate she'll Swan says chronic
fatigue is um
Const I'm gonna read your comments okay
constantly that you have like the
chronic like life is chronically asking
you to do things you don't want to do
you're chronically having to do things
you don't want to do that's a chronic
fatigue is and there's like a discount
to that and they're like gas lighting
but coming from Ceylon I'm like actually
yeah that's actually it seems to me what
it is
like it affects women more women are
constantly told what to do by society in
a way that's like right to be a good
mother it needs to look like this
whereas when I let go of that it's more
like okay
actually my chronic fatigue at its best
ie or its worse my best when I surrender
to my actual energy levels and do only
what is mine and what it calls to me to
do and so it's like oh I'm just out
doing that that part of it but I also
feel very tied to the universe and then
I'm only gonna heal my body when like
the world is healed and there's if
that's my belief system and it's causing
it because it's my belief system that's
a problem but if it's actually true it's
like action is a matter if it's true or
not I'm fixing the world for my own
benefit so we'll figure it out as it
goes oh there's a few things here I'm so
put these up as I read them it's all and
it's rare I get an attack and the guy
with nausea yeah yeah
that's like loves always the answer and
then it's like I can't throw not love
and other people because that's what I
want from like and they don't give me
love right the world looks at people
with it with chronic illness especially
invisible chronic illness it's like
you're not doing enough my response like
okay I'll try do boron it's like that
breaks you just like the exercise it
breaks you eventually you have to get to
the point where it's like if it's not
mine I'm not doing it I'm only doing
what it's fun and enjoyable to me they
come back
ya know doctors are I don't think they
don't care it's just like it's just not
within their real nose like what do you
mean it's like going to a hunch or and
asking how the ecosystem works don't
they don't care they do but that's not
what they're there for they're there to
kill the Bobcat heat it right there like
well I don't know what is the grass doin
VA the VA seems like it would be another
level of like military meets doctors is
is like authoritarian on steroids it's
like the Army's like that they which is
medical the medical system does not like
when you take your own autonomy back so
free treatment cuz you're a human
everyone deserves like America is the
only country that seems to not think
everyone deserves health care that has
enough want me to give health care and
does it give it
there's tons of countries without health
care but yes you're making YouTube
videos link them to mine 9 Willa watch
them or come and tell me when you've
done one commenting I want to find I'll
go to yours and watch one I love when
people people make them rich that is
fair enough fair enough
I'm not a 42 year old white dude but I
am a 40 year old white human it goes by
sheer
yeah no I'd I have anxiety and this is
the ironic part is my anxiety whatever
whatever the ten was it used to be for
me is down I've gotten it down ninety
percent but it's still there and it
still shows up very my doctors
especially like you're very anxious well
here yes this is where all my anxiety
comes out and there's a little bit of
that when I'm live on YouTube right like
real live online I'm not my least
anxious self but also I know my anxiety
whatever level it's at is supposed to be
here to teach me that level so I'm
totally accepting of where it's at um
we've I could change anything about
myself that might be that I need to
learn everything internally like
everything needs to come from inside if
it comes from outside I push against it
and that doesn't need to happen but I do
it so it's like finding that yeah we can
all help each other that's the beautiful
world that we can flip into ya know I do
that too but not consciously I don't
mean to do it but if you give me the
negative side I'll give you the positive
side if you give me the positive side
I'll give you the negative sides just
what comes up I think my argumentative
I'll show you everything being good the
world's horrible uh something else like
the world table like no it's beautiful
look at all this beauty like it's both
it's both at the same time I can pick a
side end and run with it but ya know
pity's never really agreed it's not
solidarity it's like same with the
opposite of pity like when they have
like inspiration poured like this person
learned to walk again like it's just as
inspiring to accept that you're now in
these limitations and how do I live from
this point as it in fact somewhat more
inspiring very much more inspiring then
they're like no I'm not gonna be
satisfied my life is over if I can't
walk and I'm not gonna be satisfied and
so it's like some people that's their
path and some people this is their path
and they're both valid but society only
props up one is heroes and the other one
are like somewhat failures it's like oh
you surrender to living in a wheelchair
it's like no no I'm living my best life
right now cause I already did that one
sorry
it's incompetence yeah it's weird that's
why I mean Canada has universal health
care and we'd still do weird things to
our veterans like are you still disabled
yeah my light has got blown off but are
they still blown off you're gonna need
to prove that every four years I don't
know anyone set up their limbs grow back
maybe just have those people prove it
yeah no sure if people need that people
need to know how to how to reduce their
anxiety anxiety is part of my GPS
coordinates I don't reduce on its on its
own each of one of the things last
summer right before a game be I I was
like okay I'm smoking pot it's anxiety
causing doesn't help it and I went to
the doctor to get into anxiety meds
because I was being really impatient
with my kid and they were like you can't
say pop with it so then I had to like go
off of pot at the same time is going on
anti-anxiety meds and if they're the
wrong anti-anxiety meds you get more
anxious but when you go off of pot you
ever anxious so I was doing both at the
same time and I was on that it was view
post you sprin something like that for
three months and I was like yeah that's
enough and I went off of it and then my
anxiety went down so I was on the wrong
medication for three months that's
exactly what I was supposed to be on so
my anxiety could come down like it was
it was a weird it was weird like guilt
manifesting itself another way yeah that
seems about right
dance documentary no I could look it up
but anything that's about healing isn't
really my jam because it's like if
that's cuz that's like that I learned to
walk from the wheelchair right so I had
a stroke and I fully recovered you can
too is like a judgment on and if you
don't then you're broken it's I know my
healings coming if it's meant to be and
so surrendering to that is my like I'm
not broken because of my brain damage I
have been made whole because of my brain
damage and that is weird to say in a
world that's not so into that but both
my ATD that I've known I've had my whole
life my autism that I didn't know until
recently that I've had my whole life and
my brain changes my brain damage from
after radiation and surgery
all of which way my brain exactly what
it is to be the person to be Who I am in
the world and follow my GPS path and
needing to heal that is like spitting on
the gift it's like wait but we gave you
this so you could most effectively do
what you're here to do him but at the
same time
I don't know I'm just reading into that
he's someone who healed himself from a
stroke that like then it his point was
to heal like there's tons of people who
get conditions like I've had and changed
one thing in their diet and they're fine
and healthy they're like well why don't
you I'm like because that's not my path
that I've tried I also tried to cut out
the corn didn't work I also tried to cut
out the wheat didn't change things and
so it's is just the different but I
would totally ya know that is and that
is it's like no one should have a brain
tumor
everyone should have a brain tumor I
wish everyone had this like like cancer
can be the biggest it's a big thing in
your life it can be the biggest negative
or positive but even if it's a huge
positive you don't wish it on other
people it's a really weird it's like you
go through your whole life trying to not
have people have cancer and if you do
how can it make you have to look for it
because in fact I wouldn't trade my
brain tumors for anything if I could be
it's like at the end of my university
degree right like if I could just hand
you if you would just give me back my
money and I could give me back this
certificate but I could keep the
knowledge
I'd be down with that but of course
that's not how the world works if I
could just keep all the knowledge I have
from my disabilities and neurological
issues and brain damage but not have
them anymore yes I would sign up for
that but that's not the way it works
it's like right you can't no get rid of
them except when the world heals I like
I can't hold on to my disability any
more than I can push it away it's just
like surrendering to what is and
allowing it and not holding on to it and
not put you in a way and it's a hard
balance to get to especially in a world
it's all about pushing it away I don't
we only see truth and beauty and like
the healing of it ah yeah animals for me
is not it's more to go off of it it
doesn't actually affect me in the same
way as smoking it at all but currently
I'm smoking it with Anna might smoking
as soon as I get off of here no I want
to see it today might also be a day
except I have things I have to do so no
I first have to check off my things be
my reward at the end hmm
yeah so weird it's weird yeah brain
tumors is weird because I had two
different um like I had that when I was
25 and it was the most connected
beautiful time of my life like I let my
family surrounds me I let my my
community and my friends surround me and
I said yes to life in a way I haven't at
any other point in life and then the
second time I had to have surgery when I
had a two-year-old it was like because
of my disability resulting from it and
my like introversion am i staying home I
have a much smaller circle of people I'm
not working I'm not and it was way more
lonely like my family wasn't as impacted
so they didn't my mom came and looked
after me and my kid but it was like one
or two people at the hospital not dozens
you know like it was a very different
experience but it
like right because let's not give you
that same experience continually or
you'll just keep getting brain tumors to
get loved it's like okay sounds good
coronavirus is a blessing yeah yes and
it is it's hard it's like everything I
want to do is to lessen the suffering of
the world so they can get the good
without the bad and I don't think you
can but at least the coronavirus is it's
like a universal suffrage it's not
Universal because it impacts us very
differently but it's like we're all in
this for all suck at home there is like
even if you're not able to pay rent here
and I put food on the table so there's a
lot of other people and there's
communities and people that are impacted
much more but interesting I mean to say
it addresses your next one because I
also spoken because mostly I although
they didn't have indica blast last time
I went so I understood I got one Satya I
went in to cut and then I ended up
taking the sativa and the friend took
the indica and so I've been smoking
since he bought for the last month or so
and there's something about it actually
I don't really like it because the Teva
is supposed to be the one that like
perks you up and indica brings you down
more but I found the opposite when I
would do sativas in the past would be
much more drug you know I would you in
because and so I switched it would
always get an Endicott now that I've
convinced myself about the world's like
no you don't know you now it's the Tevas
the thing it's like whatever whatever
why even pretend I know anything it just
gets taken away it just changes the
worlds all impermanence and it's not
wonderful what going through it
well don't learn how to connect we all
are from this I don't know what it will
take
yeah and I think I mean I don't know
about you but it was one I've been
someone who's fairly connected most of
my life for an hour so we can offer
right away but it still took big events
in my life multiple of them to happen to
get to me where I am and so this might
be someone's first right this is like oh
my god the world isn't how I thought it
would be and
know if those people are set up to have
this video but if enough of us this is
our Genesis this isn't even or most of
our Genesis right it's like oh the rest
of the world is catch you not the rest
of the world has a bit of a trauma now
most of us have Strama I mean I have
world trauma constantly since I was 20
I've been going to therapists and say in
the world's impacting me I care deeply
about the world and the therapists it's
like it's not about the world it's about
you and okay it's about me and healing
myself and healing myself and he'll be
myself the more I tried to kill myself
not only the more broken I got also the
more broken the world was and finally
I'm like service don't know they're not
me
I'm intimately connected to the world
and I have been since I was a small
child and the state of the world affects
me and yet it does like it's it's weird
I think I can handle it more than most
people because if my laughing mask but
also it impacts me and I'm directly tied
to it I read the rest days and then I'm
gonna go oh you where'd you read that
one
where'd you read that one I want to get
high to relax now not philosophize over
and over again yeah I like both
I like the relaxation and lots of
ization I really like the philosophize
Asian but I don't get it as much it's
like off of it for a period of time like
a day like I just have to offer it for a
day or two and then I get it back but I
never do except when I go out for a week
or do I have my water thing okay
well it's nice hanging out with you
thanks for chatting and talking and I
will be back tomorrow tomorrow I'm
having a specific I'm gonna watch
Russell Brand and Ricky cervezas
interview God versus atheism and the
title will be that and then we will be
coming live and talking at least someone
about that it's my last one that I did
on on Michael Moore got a thousand views
and all of these get about 10 so I'm
like we're gonna once a week pick
something that I enjoy watching that is
popular and doing a broadcast on that so
maybe more people come gonna work with
the algorithm in a way that feels in
alignment with
so and enjoy enjoy your pot and I will
see you again your actual name was you
told me earlier I know you maybe you
didn't you said I'm this you just said
you're trying to live into this name in
the year 42 rogue I you actually didn't
say there was a different name so how
you bogey because that is what you're
trying to live into and I think that is
like who you are in the moment and who
you are even trying to be but like
trying to be it's like a different word
look emulating like this is my highest
self and you you know it because it's it
reflects in everyone right like who do I
look at is higher than me those are me
hitting that forum and say what the
other runs right I person so not getting
it because I'm not getting it got it
good all right well thanks for hanging
up and I've been on for now I really
want to wait until for 11 more seconds
I'm gonna it's so it says what 11 11 11
and it won't stop at that time but I
will try 1 6 7 8