[Music]
what we wanted to do is give everyone a
little bit of context into the speakers
so Bret Weinstein and they're hiring
here McGilchrist Jordan green hole a
little bit of background to their
thought as preparation for the summit
and also talked a little bit about what
the summit is and what it entails for
you as a participant because it's not
the regular kind of talk where we might
go and listen to someone at the summit
everyone's a participant and in a
particular way which we're going to talk
about in a bit more detail so rebel
wisdom the media channel has existed for
a bit over a year now and one of the
things that many of the people we've
interviewed have in common and certainly
the four speakers who we have coming to
the summit is this idea that we're in
the middle of a sense making crisis and
the the mission of rebel wisdom is very
much how do we make sense of the sense
making crisis if that's not to matter
already and that sense making crisis
takes many different forms and
definitely a big part of that is this
shift from broadcast to digital and also
the kind of the increased polarization
that we're definitely seeing through
social media and this kind of feeling
that we all have of being pushed and
further and further into very
ideological camps and how that's kind of
increased and how it's much more
difficult to have conversations across
those divides and so a real world event
is a really important part of how do we
model those conversations those
generative conversations and we'll talk
a bit more about that and even there's
sort of physiology of that kind of
generative conversation later in this
film but what's clearly necessary is
that we are able to enter into
generative dialogue with each other
where we're not just broadcasting what
we think at each other we are having a
conversation that can build on itself
and that's why we've invited the four
people that we have to the summit
because we we were very impressed with
when we interviewed them and we know
that they're able to enter into that
space and so very quickly introducing
them so firstly Bret Weinstein and
Heather huiying Bret and Heather are
both evolutionary biologists they're
also husband and wife
and they were both teaching in the same
College Evergreen in the u.s. up until
just over a year ago and famously and I
say famous if you don't know their
history and evergreen we're going to put
a couple of links in the show notes
below this that you can watch and get a
bit of a background but they famously
had this run-in with student activists
in Evergreen and had to leave but what's
really fascinating is that they were
teaching evolutionary biology some of
the most difficult hot-button topics
right now in the media about sort of sex
differences between men and women in one
of the most progressive colleges in the
country and so have a huge amount of
experience of teaching tricky difficult
topics in environments where that can be
misinterpreted there are tremendous
lessons and the key to what Heather and
I were doing was that we started out by
engineering a community that was safe to
have discussions and discussions that
were we to take what was said in our
classroom and to import it into a
faculty meeting would have caused a
conflagration for sure but you have a
group of students it's a question of
broadening their worldview so that they
can understand that all of the things
that they know they care about all of
the things that they find fun to do all
of the pursuits that drive them their
their loves their passions that all of
these things are products of evolution
and that means that understanding
evolution provides a kind of roadmap
against the inner confusion that's a
very powerful incentive for people to
embrace it so the answer to your
question is you provide the safety to
explore where people quickly get the
idea that they are not going to be
backed against the wall for saying
something that sounds radical or off and
then there's the incentive to have the
conversation which comes from the fact
that you get something positive for it
you know to understand
yourself to understand why people
interact in the way they do is a very
powerful advantage and if you're
presented with the question of would you
like to endure some discomfort in order
to have the power to understand your own
life almost everybody will say yes we
were able to talk about difficult
subjects pretty easily right we and you
know in some ways it was what students
were signing up for you know I didn't
the two kinds of programs that I did
most were vertebrate evolution which was
not did not fear too much into
politically dangerous territory but an
will behavior is rife with it you know
you can't you can't not go there if you
want to do it honestly and so talking
about and you know and humans are
animals so we didn't we didn't fear from
humans and in fact all of the seminars
that I tend to do in those programs were
specifically on humans on human
evolution readings what our history has
looked like mostly our prehistory and
frankly students especially from
historically marginalized and oppressed
groups were particularly interested
several several people told me nearly
every year I thought this material but
they're particularly interested to
finally get a read on what it was that
evolution had to say about about being
gay or about different races or about
especially any Oh in my case I would
teach a lot on sex and gender and you
know on what it was to be male versus
female the next speaker we want to
introduce is Ian McGilchrist who's
definitely one of the most revolutionary
and fascinating thinkers we've come
across since you've been doing this so
here's a psychiatrist and philosopher he
wrote a book called the masters emissary
where he really took a much wider view
of the left-right brain
split that we all have and looking not
only at how it influences how we
perceive reality but also how it might
have influenced the development of
culture as well and I think that is a
really fascinating view on the
sense-making crisis we are not aware
that our reality is constructed by two
different systems if you
we focus on different aspects of reality
and therefore construe a world with
different qualities and the first part
of the book explains that in terms of
neuropsychiatry and philosophy and the
second part of the book suggests that in
the history of the West three times we
have been in a position where to begin
with a civilization flourished when it
kept both these visions together that of
the right hemisphere and that of the
left but then in every case and I
believe we're repeating the pattern for
the third time as the the civilization
overreached itself and things
deteriorated and the mindset became more
rigid more bureaucratic less imaginative
less flexible less in touch with reality
and became locked into a way of thinking
which is that the left hemisphere which
is useful it's not a mistake that we
have it but it cannot be our way of
contacting reality a simple way of
putting it is it's like mistaking the
map for the tariff we talk a lot on this
channel about the meta conversation the
idea that what we need is a conversation
that opens up to the not knowing to what
needs to emerge beyond and what it feels
like is happening now increasingly with
social media is people are getting stuck
more and more in certainty and in what
they do know is that a right-brain
left-brain phenomena well it can be
looked at in that way in that one of the
features of the left hemisphere is that
it prefers what it's already familiar
with and it finds it very difficult to
shift set so once it's stuck into
something it keeps on repeating it so
the left hemispheres take is an
exclusive one either this is right or
that is right and therefore what I know
excludes what you know whereas the right
hemispheres take is a both and to take
that there's a room for what the left
hemisphere does there's a point in
analysis but there's also a point in
synthesis and imagination and what we
are desperately lacking is is that
overall synthesis it seems to me that at
the moment we officially pride ourselves
on being a very free thinking people I'm
going to sound like a terrible Friday
Daddy but I think the intellectual world
was far more open in the 60s and 70s
when I grew up than it is today it's
closed down to a number of dogmas and
the Internet which is a wonderful thing
hasn't helped because it's possible for
people to get trapped in bubbles where
they reinforce the things they believe
Without Really hearing other points of
view and last but not least is Jordan
green Hall Jordan is kind of difficult
to define I guess you probably call him
a futurist writer he wrote a piece that
went pretty viral after the Trump
election called deep code situational
assessment in which he basically kind of
said this is what I think's going on
with the Trump election and this is
what's likely to happen next and he
introduced a whole load of concepts that
we found incredibly helpful to kind of
make sense of the world the insurgency
the the blue church and he talked a lot
about how we're moving from like a
broadcast modality in many different
areas of life where one speaks and
others listen to a networked digital
modality and what that means for society
and the idea of the blue church being
this kind of this framework that had
taken us through from probably the
second world war on woods and was now
breaking down and all of the media
institutions and a lot of our kind of
academic institutions are part of this
blue church concept but if that's
breaking down what happens and what's
likely to happen next and it is
certainly the case that in this in this
moment in order to speak honestly
requires courage
and I was gonna say in particular when
we have to say is not that which is in
alignment with good opinion but oddly
enough I think it's even when it is in a
line with a good opinion because I think
there's something in the ambient
environment that feels honesty as a as a
bad thing in and of itself
I almost a a complicity to always be
ever so slightly ironic and never be
fully connected to trying to speak
honestly but at the same time human
beings have evolved in fact I won't even
say it's the essence of what we are that
differentiates us from our premia
ancestors to be very very attracted to
honest insightful expression oftentimes
in history we've needed that something
to make it and the situation was not
easy
the situation was complex challenging
and so it required that something that
whatever it is that happens when we are
gathered together in a space of well
collaboration let's just make it again
very simple a space of peace a space of
mutual understanding not for the purpose
of delivering on the same opinion but
really for going deep and trying to find
something which is trying to frankly
express itself like to listen and so if
that story the story that is told is
true then it would be in our bones it
would be in our deepest mythology and
our deepest traditions I do this
religion that this is the place to go
that when trouble is brewing gather
together answer into this space this is
where we do these sorts of things this
is how we solve these kinds of problems
so those are our four speakers and now
we want to talk a little bit about what
we're actually going to be doing at the
summit and how we're going to be doing
it which is probably more important
we've been doing events like this for
about a year now
on a smaller scale so we
evening events where we've had a speaker
and then we've broken off into groups to
discuss and really figure out how we
feel about it personally and then be in
a dialogue with one another and that
there's been a real hunger for that and
that's been very exciting to do
so the summit is by far the biggest
event we've done and we've capped it at
150 people and partly because we want to
keep it intimate we want to have an
environment where we really can get into
dialogue with each other we're going to
be breaking off into groups so a number
higher than that is difficult to do that
with it's also coincidentally the Dunbar
number which is for an Oxford professor
Robin Dunbar pointed out that a 150
people is about the amount where you can
kind of have coherence within a group
and beyond that it becomes more
difficult to do that
so we've always run retreats as well as
the media side where we work with
meditation and we work with kind of all
of these ways of kind of hacking our
physiology to get into these spaces and
what I think is really if you look into
that world what you see is a lot of
understanding of overwhelm and how that
puts us into either fee either we're in
an exploratory mode towards the world or
we're in a defensive mode and there's
many different models that show that and
we've actually got a film coming up work
that we're working on at the moment
which is about the physiology kind of
the physiology of generative dialogue
with Peter Levine who is a kind of a
superstar in the world of of trauma and
growth when our nervous system is in the
sympathetic arousal state the fight or
flight
we will perceive the person there's no
way we won't perceive the person as as
an enemy as an adversary that's just the
way we're wired and again the question
is how we get from there to here here
being social engagement you know one
thing is important for me is is that we
hold it lightly because in a sense we
are all participating in an experiment
at the summit and also that we kind of
try our best to get into a space of
what's called coherence together and I
think it's interesting to hear Jordan
green hall talk about what that word
means
so coherence is when people are able to
enter in
a relationship where they basically been
to form an emergent whole as emergent
properties that is greater than the
individuals involved greater than the
sum of the parts
and to achieve coherence first and
foremost requires both sovereignty and
awareness of sovereignty I mean you you
have it and you're aware where you are
and a continual consciousness of
recognizing that you have to maintain a
certain level of sovereignty to be able
to enter into coherence at all and that
be in coherence has the highest
intelligence has the highest capacity to
perceive and respond to the whatever is
going on so you prioritize that so first
a - opera - yes okay cool now are we in
coherence yes okay cool now and start
trying to do something if not if
something is out of coherence okay how
do we get back in coherence oh is it
because I'm out of sovereignty Oh gave
me to get back into sovereignty and kind
of building back up so we're hoping that
the summit is going to be fascinating
I'm sure it will be with the speakers
that we've got but also fun and if you
were to distill down what say three or
four principles of having a generative
conversation in good faith ah what would
they be what conditions allow for that
so how do you know you're having one
maybe like what are what are the what
are the signals that you're actually
doing it right that you're actually
having a good conversation
no wrote apologies apologies for actual
wrongs but no wrote apologies don't
apologize for things that you did not
actually do and if you see sort of a
culture of rote apology in a big
conversation
there's probably fear right underneath
the surface similarly I would say look
for laughter look for humor look look
for and not just you know there's
everyone can tell the difference between
a nervous laughter and and regular from
the gut laughter in which things even
when you didn't see something coming or
maybe that's
and when things get funny when a
conversation that was very serious are
very technical suddenly erupts and
laughter if that can happen there's
probably not fear right beneath the
surface and another thing we're hoping
to do with the summit is create an
environment where we can integrate
opposites because very often
polarization we see in culture comes
from not being able to hold two things
at the same time and being able to do
that is a huge skill that helps us go a
long way in having a new type of
conversation this brings us to a very
important metaphysical point which is
that a thing that its opposite according
to the left hemisphere simply as far
apart as they can be and we move always
in a linear way to what we'd identify as
good everything I know tells me that in
fact opposites are connected and if you
pretend that you are only having one you
don't notice the dark side and this is
terribly true in psychiatry it's almost
a truism to say that a lot of the work
one does as a psychiatrist is helping
people to see that there is a good sight
to what it is that they fear and dislike
in themselves but there is also a dark
side to the bits that they pride
themselves on and that you cannot get
rid of the dark side you accept it and
work with moving it towards something
creative and all creativity and all life
is creative mental world is creative our
daily reality is created partly by us
not out of nowhere but it's grounded in
something else but we help creator that
process depends on opposition it depends
on a degree of resistance actually and
as soon as you've decided that x y&z are
good and their opposites are bad and we
must have more and more and more and
more of the thing we've decided as good
you end up reaping a whirlwind because
the things you didn't take note of come
back and bite you in the bath
[Music]
you
[Music]