hey guys welcome to episode number 36 of
the future thinkers podcast today our
guest is Daniel smocked and Berger
Daniel is an evolutionary philosopher
strategist and social engineer his work
focuses on complex systems the evolution
of humanity and global resource
allocation his goal is to find the
shortest path to a fundamentally
redesigned world system that supports in
an ongoing way the highest quality of
life for everybody on the planet he
specifically focuses on developing
economic and governmental systems that
by design incentivize life enhancing
behavior Daniels recent project is neuro
hacker collective which is a smart drug
brand with a vision of holistic human
optimization in this episode Daniel
talks about many deep and fascinating
ideas to do with building a better
future for all of humanity he
specifically talks about the different
systems we will need to transition into
this new world and to mitigate
existential risks this is a really great
episode I think it's one of our
favorites if you want all the shownotes
books and mentions from this episode go
to future thinkers dot org slash 36
before we get into it as always I want
to thank our recent patrons and donors
Diana Pascal rich and Nigel thank you
guys for making this show happen you're
awesome all right here's the show
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution and technology
society and consciousness I'm Mai
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova this
episode is brought to you by eternity
the Oracle machine eternity is a new
blockchain platform for smart contracts
with a token crowd sale launching in
March 2017 go to future thinkers org
slash eternity and subscribe to their
mailing list to get notified when it
goes live to get notified of new
podcasts and videos go to future
thinkers org and subscribe to our
mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and you tube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or review share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/scishow the meditation app
that we've created with Vinay Gupta
called the cutting machinery go to
cutting machinery org
[Music]
Daniel welcome to the show thank you so
much for joining us so we're gonna have
a lot of things to talk about today but
why don't we start by talking about an
optimistic future of humanity and what
we need to do to transition into that
future there are a lot of visions and
theories out there about the ultimate
macro system that we need to adopt not
only to survive the century but to
thrive what is your vision of that first
I wouldn't talk in terms of an ultimate
system talk in terms of ongoing
evolution and so rather than kind of a
utopian as one has previously thought of
a perfected system we're going to think
of a proto pian process right a process
of emergence into more elegantly ordered
complexity that has more and more
emergent properties and more of the
things we're interested in gets over
some of the underlying causes of things
we want to get past I would say that
rather than just iterative evolution we
are on the brink of a phase shift and
phase shift defined by core axioms and
core foundations of most of our macro
global systems from our worldview to our
economics to our governance to our
infrastructure going through
foundational shifts so this looks like a
step function in evolution where we have
had capitalism that has gone through
kind of iterative developmental
processes and we've had representative
democracy that's gone through iterative
developmental processes and you know
scientific methodology and worldview and
etc now we are on the brink of something
that requires larger more fundamental
axiomatic and structural shift and so we
can talk about what the criteria for the
other side of that have to look like for
it to be a non-self terminating system
and for it to be a anti fragile system
and those are two of the important
criteria of any kind of world that is
interesting for anyone right
it is definitely non-self terminating
and then not anti fragile then there's
more things we'll talk about on top of
that so you want to talk about what
those criteria must be well sure but
first let's define the problem so what's
wrong
our current system and why do we need a
transition out of it so when we say our
current system we are sweeping a lot of
things together and it's worth kind of
pulling those apart a bit we might be
talking about macroeconomics which
obviously the macroeconomics of China
and the macroeconomics of Russia and
microeconomics to the United States if
NATO are different systems but there are
kind of beyond national global economic
systems that we can we can look at we
can look at governance systems again
national and then transnational
governance and then beyond anything
that's codified how human
decision-making works right we can think
of governance in the highest sense of
how do we do collective decision-making
at various scales from a business to a
family to a nation to groups of Nations
to a species as a whole navigating
things that face the whole species
economics we can think about how do we
do resource allocation and how do we do
human incentive systems with
infrastructure we can talk about how do
we meet our physical needs and
relationship with a physical planet
right education medicines we have a lot
of different systems that Co evolved and
they are interconnected and Entering and
then you can think of a you know kind of
evolving paradigm that involves all of
those things but we're gonna need to
talk about at least the core ones in
distinction from each other so what is
the problem we're trying to fix well one
thing is those current systems the
interface of those current systems with
each other and the net effects are
unsustainable and unsustainable means
self terminating means that these
systems run to their own end and then
fall off some kind of cliff right and so
when we look at growth curves of
different kinds of organisms anytime we
see a growth curve that has an
exponential up that is not forever
and sometimes the exponential up goes
logistic and that's very nice sometimes
it drops off pretty hard before it
Logistics sometimes it goes through a
lot of unstability
sometimes it just Exponential's up and
then drops off a cliff right so we were
under half a billion popular
for all of human history as far as we
know 200 plus thousand years until the
Industrial Revolution and then in just
over 200 years we went up to over 7
billion people and growing and that is a
profound exponential population curve
not only have we went through this
profound exponential population curve in
relationship to our ability to extract
resources from the planet that are not
replenishing themselves which is what
the Industrial Revolution was rate
mining farming fishing logging etc the
ability to take some kind of resource
reserves that took hundreds of millions
or billions of years to develop and to
be able to extract them at a radically
fast pace and obviously much faster than
they can renew and then the population
is growing on that savings account until
you hit the end of a savings account and
then there's real problems not only have
we been growing in population but we've
been growing in resource consumption per
capita so this is a multiplicative issue
that we are getting near the end of the
viability of that particular part of
right when we think about running an
economy it requires a year-over-year
growth requires it because your
fractional izing the monetary supply
even deeper than that just interest
where the monetary supply has to
fundamentally expand right then to not
debase the currency you have to increase
the total amount of goods and services
services sit on top of product economies
which relate to a linear materials
economy product materials economy which
the linear materials economy means
extracting resources from the planet
unruhe nobly which means devastation of
ecosystems and things like that and then
turning them into trash in ways that
usually consume a good bit of energy
from dirty sources create a lot of
pollution and externalize harm to people
in environments along the way you know
and then end with waste so that kind of
exponential growth economy and attached
to a linear materials economy just
doesn't work ongoingly
a planet right it only would work
ongoingly on an infinite playing field
which were not on and so that is a
fundamentally self terminating system it
makes plenty of sense that when there
was just so much low-hanging fruit in
terms of coal and oil and fish and trees
and etc that we would do this
exponential boom kind of thing it's just
that's not viable anymore
it also happens to be the technologies
that would allow us to be really viable
in a post growth economic system it's
not about net more consumption but about
using the same things in a closed-loop
materials economy in ever more
interesting ways so a materials economy
that is closed-loop post growth and
upcycling continuously upcycling the
technology it takes to do that is
technology we are just now getting
happens to be that that's at the same
time that we are just now getting to the
point of self-determination of the old
system right so we both have to shift
and can at the same time the
technologies it takes to build this kind
of sustainable regenerative thriving new
set of world systems is technology that
we developed via capitalism and linear
materials economy and the military
industrial complex and all those things
so they served in evolutionary relevance
in terms of where we're going and they
have just completed a particular
evolutionary relevant lifecycle now
we're going through a discrete phase
shift into a new life cycle very much
like a fetal time period right in the
embryonic time period is unsustainable
the caterpillar can't just keep
devastating its ecosystem without
pollinating forever but that's not how
it works
and a baby couldn't stay in the belly
after 40 weeks and act parasitically but
that's not how it works it is going
through a period where its system is
fundamentally not capable of the kinds
of autonomy that it will later be
capable of so it's a finite evolutionary
period of unsustainable development to
then go through a discrete phase shift
to then be in a fundamentally new period
and so I think it's a very fair analogy
to look at humanity as having
in a kind of embryonic period Bucky
fuller used to like to speak to it like
that like a you know chicken embryo
having finished eating the egg white on
renewable resources emerge from a world
it didn't know it was in right emerge
from the shell into a world where that
it now has a beak
to eat that it didn't have before we
knows eating the egg whites come from
plants that it's poop fertilizes and
it's part of this larger kind of
regenerative process they evolved so
when we talk about what the problem is
our materials economy is unsustainable
our macroeconomic structures themselves
or ideas of ownership and valuation and
etc are all fundamentally unsustainable
they're coming up on the cliffs of
unsustainability our exponentially
increasing tech curves are creating more
and more existential threats etc right
so this is all what we would call self
terminating and even before we get into
existential and catastrophic risks it's
also already causing suffering at just
such massive scales whether we're
talking about you know war and drum
strikes on civilians or whether we're
talking about factory farms that are
these just rolling apocalypses or
whether we're talking about fishing the
oceans down to nearly nothing or what we
can forecast future catastrophic
scenarios but we're in them right we're
in these rolling catastrophes moving
towards complete unviable 'ti and so the
future systems were interested in have
to prevent total existential risk and
total catastrophic risk they have to
solve the foundational causes of the
current unnecessary human induced
suffering and then create world systems
that make possible and probable and
induce higher quality of life across all
the very meaningful quality of life
metrics for all life and optimize
evolutionary rate it seems like most
people are saying capitalism is what's
gotten us here and you're just taking a
couple extra steps to see where it
results you know a plus B equals C or
when we proposed basic income in the
past that's usually their answer well
capitalism has got us this far why would
it not take us further you think about
that embryo that baby growing in the
mother's belly
and if you didn't know that it was a
baby that was going to birth at a
certain point it would be easy to
mistake it as a very serious parasite
yes because it's it is taking a lot of
nutritional load from her body right it
is modifying her physiology profoundly
and if you imagine a mom in the eight to
nine months if you didn't know that
there was a discrete phase shift about
to happen you'd be pretty sure she was
very near dying in a pretty terrible way
this is the difference between a
parasite and a baby is that the baby
goes to that for a finite period and
then phase shifts into a different phase
right interestingly when we look at
parasitology biology vector ology there
are many parasites that when they
initially start feeding on an animal
human whatever and they haven't before
they kill them fairly quickly the ones
that were aggressive enough to kill the
hosts quickly don't propagate right
because they killed their host they
don't live very long they don't get to
travel on to many other hosts the milder
versions that don't actually kill their
hosts get to both live longer and
propagate more and so there are a number
of pathogens that get less toxic over an
evolutionary time frame because they
have to be we don't get the chance of
killing lots of planets to figure out
you know we could do it that way that
only the planets where the people were
less problematic in this way and that
making it through but we want to do a
more conscious version than that right
and so rather than the slow evolution of
a parasite to be less pathologic we need
to do the actually going through a birth
into a new phase model and we can what's
so fascinating is that if we define a
civilization where we have a sustainable
population that does not require
imposition from the outside some kind of
eugenics program or Chinese births
limiting program whatever it is a
emergent self-organizing phenomena and
we've already seen plenty of places in
the world where when education gets high
enough economics and female empowerment
and etc that population stabilizes can
even decrease to find the right levels
of where it's
I've seen that in Japan we've seen it in
some of the Scandinavian countries and
so to have a steady-state population
that is within the sustainable carrying
capacity of the planet connected to a
post growth materials economy where the
materials that we are using are being
designed in a cradle-to-cradle way where
they're recyclable 'ti after this
particular use is built right in there's
no such thing as waste there's just
moving the old stuff back into new stuff
the new stuff is being made from old
stuff so it doesn't require a virgin
resource acquisition the only new thing
coming into the system and doesn't mean
we won't ever take a new thing into the
system as far as atoms go we could we
find an asteroid with some interesting
platinum we could do that or but we have
a system that doesn't require trash or
extraction right
that's what post growth means is post
necessity for growth so that it actually
can be a sustainable viable and then we
just keep increasing the efficiency of
how we utilize those resources and
attenuating the forms that they're in
the only resource that we keep bringing
into the system continuously is energy
because that's what we keep having
ongoing access to so we have new photons
coming in all the time we don't have new
atoms coming in all the time right these
new photons coming in all the time
allows us to keep recycling the atoms
where we're upcycling them rather than
downcycling them because this is not a
closed system right we get to
externalize entropy out of the system
bring you know enough energy to keep
driving more central people in the
system so when we ask what are the
necessary and sufficient criteria of a
sustainable non self terminating
thriving anti fragile world that does
obsolete the catastrophic and
existential risks the current cause of
suffering and create higher qualities of
life we could actually do this
construction in detail sometime but I'll
just kind of state the things as far as
infrastructure goes our physical
relationship with the physical world it
does require these three criteria
closed-loop post growth and upcycling
right negative entropy but it's not
actually negative entropy no
thermodynamics sense because we're
bringing energy into the system as far
as social systems go economics
governance
law language
social agreement fields by which we
navigate collective agreement collective
decision-making collective resource
allocation all the things beyond just
individual action we can think of
governance as how we make decisions that
involve Co decision-making collaborative
decision-making most all of the
decisions were going to make are going
to involve allocating resources of some
kind in some way so we think of
economics as how we allocate resources
and the other major thing that economics
has done is human incentive so when
there's a bunch of shitty jobs that
nobody if they didn't have to would want
to spend all their life doing maybe I'll
pave a road a little bit now and again
but I don't want to spend 40 hours a
week my entire life until retirement
doing that as long as we have shitty
jobs especially in the labor economy
that the society needs done for the
quality of life that is related to
infrastructure then we need to get the
people to do the jobs Smith talked about
this Marx that everybody there is it's
the core of economic theory so if you do
some kind of communism where everyone's
needs are met by the system then how do
you get the people to do the shitty jobs
well then the state has to force them
and we call that imperialism is why we
don't like communism right or everyone
has to do an equal amount but that's
still the who is gonna enforce us take
that so enforce them so capitalism says
no no we'll let the free market enforce
them right which is if they don't do the
shitty jobs they just go homeless that's
really not freedom still it just moved
the forcing function from the state to
market right well as we're moving into
technological automation this
foundational axiom of all economic
theories which is how do we deal with
the labor economy right this this is an
axiomatic topic is being obsoleted we're
obsoleting that all of the conversations
that Marx and Smith and friends had and
so that both solves problems and it
brings new ones so when we have
technological automation that is capable
of automating the shitty jobs and it's
important to get when I say that that
doesn't mean that the machines are going
to take your jobs and you can't garden
if you want to
in garden or wash your toilet if
you want to you just don't have to wash
your toilet all the time because you we
can make bathrooms that clean themselves
better right and then if you just want
to do that you're welcome to human
freedom can absolutely do that if you
want a garden you're welcome to do that
but can we create vertical agriculture
systems that automate many aspects of
that while providing high-quality
nutritious food with lower impact on the
environment yes we can right and that
opens up more human freedom not that's
the other so as long as we have a
situation where the jobs need the people
then we have to make it where the people
also need the jobs ie capitalism right
which is why that system has you know
succeeded in a Darwinian sense in the
way that it has it's important to get
that Darwinian selection does not select
for the true the good and the beautiful
right it selects for what is adaptive
which means what is dominant within
scarcity dynamics now even if that's
gonna you know be going extinct in the
very near future because it's not
forecasting it's not adequately
forecasting right as soon as you can
make it to where the jobs don't need the
people the automation you can also make
it where the people don't need the jobs
which is what the Commonwealth economics
is moving towards in a first step in the
direction is the basic income basic
income is not enough but it is a step
and the key for it not to be a welfare
system when we think about the problems
of the welfare system and how you have
people who don't have the Darwinian
motive to create the capitalism gave
them so they just sit on the couch and
smoke crack all day those are people
that have already been broken this is a
very important point when you look at
little children they're asking questions
all day long why is fire hot why is the
sky blue where do we go after we die
where you know they're fascinated asking
deep philosophic and physics and you
know etc questions and they want to help
do stuff and they want to build stuff
and they and then we don't answer those
questions because why the is fire
hot that's actually a very deep physics
question and then it's moving from
physics to consciousness studies let the
mind brain interface of subjective
experience of hotness with photons on
the skin and nerve pathways and so we
say I don't know spell cat
we don't facilitate their interests
while forcing them to be interested in
completely uninteresting and
thereby breaking their interest in life
so then they just want to veg the
out right and so now we have broken
humans or if they can just veg out they
will but this is not human nature this
is broken humans in a system that
systematically breaks humans and so it's
very important to get that in this kind
of economic system that we're proposing
there's a fundamentally different
education system that's possible because
we don't have to prepare kids for the
workforce and since we don't have to
prepare them for the workforce the whole
goal of education becomes identifying
the unique aptitude and interest and
fascination and inclination of each
child and facilitating the out of
it and realizing that they don't have to
actually be able to do everything
because we've automated a lot of things
and then we've shared a lot of things
right but what they can uniquely do and
what they can light up the most and
uniquely doing and then have the benefit
of that be fully available to everyone
in a Commonwealth economics that makes
radically more abundance possible then
for everyone then is actually possible
for anyone in this system I'll come back
to explaining how that's possible then
that's the goal of Education right
facilitating the emergence of radical
uniqueness when I think about what is
required in this post-birth sort of
society I'm going to call it I think
people are optimizers so it's more like
picking the route or direction that they
want to go to and then make that part of
the system more efficient over time like
I myself do that with every aspect of
our lives
with our website with you know I'm like
an efficiency optimizer no doubt people
when they find what their calling is
what they want to be doing they're gonna
spend a lot of time doing exactly that
in in the grander scale the way you say
the incentives are all out of whack
yeah ad motivates them to learn which in
turn D motivates them to optimize
anything which is exactly what this new
system needs and since you identify as
an optimizer
then you think of it through the lens of
that they'll all be optimizing that's a
good lens someone else would say that
they will all be creating
yeah that's me while they map to each
other there
they're both different experiences
phenomenologically and they actually are
different parts of the creative
lifecycle and etc right different modes
you also have some people who identify
things that they're particularly
passionate about we're all of the topics
they're passionate about kind of braids
together into a very clear through line
and there will be other people for whom
that's much less clear that are more
focused on interpersonal connection and
depth of subjective experience and the
creative process itself independent of
any particular result that's being
produced and one of the beautiful things
is that's not possible
in a macroeconomic system where you say
how do you turn that into the dollars
you need to live in a macroeconomic
system where that's not the question
there is a important difference between
appreciable wealth and exchangeable
wealth when we think about a rainbow
it's not extractable and exchangeable
wealth for anyone seeing a rainbow when
you think about hearing a song when you
think about somebody complimenting you
seeing a smile like none of these are
things you can put on a balance sheet in
any metrical way but when you think
about what makes life most rich it's
largely these things that fit into
appreciable but not quantifiable wealth
and so one of the beautiful things that
happens when the primary balance sheet
that we're paying attention to is the
balance sheet of the Commons the natural
world Commons and the built world
Commons that everyone has access to
without possessing is that we have a
system that gets to start optimizing for
appreciable wealth generation because
we're not only focused on exchangeable
wealth accounting systems I think we're
already seeing that a little bit with
the Internet where people are producing
you know they're producing music they're
making memes they're writing blogs but
they're not really most of the time
they're not expecting to make money from
it they're just doing it because it's
exciting for them or they they get some
sort of satisfaction out of just
producing it and putting it out there
and it's accessible to the world of the
internet now while those people
still have to work their day job to
support themselves and then they're
gonna come to their music and their day
job might happen to be something that
they experience is relatively
soul-crushing in terms of possibilities
they know how to access then they come
to that little bit of music you think
about what would happen if we just
supported them to be in the position to
do music as deeply as they could wanted
to right and what if they didn't have to
try and gear it towards what was
sellable so that they could then switch
from the soul-crushing to the
money-making music but what was really
authentically what they felt was their
greatest offering you know their most
unique offering we had a very different
kind of creativity happening one of the
issues right now we see in this kind of
post fact world where what is fake news
and what is not fake news and what one
of the issues of the inability to make
sense of almost anything that we're
facing is how much of any news that you
find or any idea has some financial
interest associated with it how much
education is an advertorial
you know in some way how much of science
itself is actually just are in the arm
of capitalism funded by something that
has a vested interest attached and so
this is a very tricky process right
where what we can actually believe in
and then how much of music is geared
towards what is going to have the right
kinds of frames for me mobility so that
it can get puppy enough to sell Pepsi or
whatever rather than what is actually
what someone most authentically wants to
create that other people's most
authentically want to experience you
think about what it means to create
systems that remove all of those other
agendas so that there are no vested
interest agendas so now you know we
talked about that the criteria from
infrastructure what that had to be
here's the criteria for social systems
we said governance is decision-making
economics is decision making an
incentive but we just started to kind of
hint at that the incentive moves from
primarily extrinsic incentive to
intrinsic incentive and you have a
system that's all about facilitating
intrinsic
generative incentive right which D
necessitates most of extrinsic incentive
which becomes key then economics is
largely about resource allocation
systems optimization of resource
allocation towards all the various goals
that matter
so most decision-making in you know
governance is around resource decisions
law is how do we make sure that those
decisions actually get follow through so
we can actually think of economics as
the heart of social systems right so the
key criteria for the future of
macroeconomics is that all the
externalities get internalized meaning
everything that we affect by a decision
is factored in the decision making
process and the process by which
resources get conferred to things so
another way to say this is that the
agency the incentive of every agent
whether it's a person or a group of
people called a company or a country
even though I believe both of those two
things will become obsolete just think
any person or group of people any agent
the incentive of that agent has to be
perfectly aligned with the well-being of
every other agent and of the Commons as
a whole the degree to which the
individual agents are incentivized to do
something that is external izing harm to
other agents of the Commons is the
degree to which those problematic
externalities will continue to happen to
acquit ously in a decentralized fashion
at scale because they are incentivized
in decentralized fashion at scale that's
the key of the future of macroeconomics
is the alignment of agency and
well-being from individuals and Commons
and that correlates with closing the
loop right we talked about a linear
materials economy moving to a closed
loop one right in the same way here
we're closing the loop between agency of
individuals well-being of others right
all the externalities being internalized
is moving from an open loop system where
I could affect things but not
internalize those effects in the cost
equation - now all internalized in the
cost equation and then that corresponds
to a worldview where my sense of self
and my sense of the rest of universe are
not fundamentally separate concepts that
I wouldn't exist without arcs
Jim at all it wouldn't exist without the
plants that make the oxygen I wouldn't
exist without the bugs and the fungus
that make the plants work to make the
oxygen I I am NOT an individual I do
happen to have a self-organizing
membrane that has some individuality to
it but I am an emergent property of
everything else so when you close the
loop between sense of self and sense of
other then what's in my best interest
what's in the best interest of others
also there's a loop closure between
advantage self at the expense of others
or sacrifice self as well-being of
others both of which are nonsense a
radically interconnected system so what
we're looking at is how we close all the
causal loops so that every thing that
influences decision making is being
informed by everything being influenced
that sounds like quite a spiritual
proposition also it relates to some of
the ideas that I've heard for example
Ken Wilber talking about sure where this
kind of evolution of the system and
evolution of the self converge believe I
actually have the quadrants on the
whiteboard behind me for a conversation
earlier ultimately so if I'll just use
the quadrants from integral philosophy
for a moment when we're talking about
the evolution of infrastructure we're
talking about the lower right hand
quadrant right the plural not just
single right external so all the
physical infrastructure is the
physicality of the collective when we're
talking about social structures we're
talking about the lower left which is
the interior right the agreement fields
that we agreed to use this word to
symbolize this experience of this
meaning we agreed to denote this value
to these things we agreed to make
decisions in this way is the lower left
the upper left is our individual value
system or worldview our internal
singular process right which is affected
by Education and Culture and media and
etc the per right would be human
physiology and we usually think of
physiology as nature and the other three
collectively as nurture the other three
can change and collectively make up
culture which is nurture which is then
conditioning the expression of Jeannette
predisposition because we are of course
changing radically one generation to the
next matically much faster than we're
changing genetically but that's not an
adequate way to think of it because
physiology can actually affect human
experience in human predisposition
radically independent of just genome
change through natural selection
everyone who's had their hormones off
knows that you can have be incapable of
accessing certain emotions or incapable
of being out of other emotion trader one
who's had their neural chemistry deeply
off or just been very sick or tired has
known certain cognitive abilities can
shut down or other ones be you know over
predisposed so when you realize that
empathy runs on certain neural networks
and that can be down regulated or up
regulated right complex thinking runs in
certain kinds of neural processes and if
those are damaged or not developed it
can lead to fundamentalism and only
being able to see something one way from
a hardware point of view not just a
mimetic point of view right and you can
also up regulate the kind of connect
Tomic complexity that leads to more net
information processing and perspective
taking so what has to happen in the
upper right so we can think about that
the upper quadrants as being about the
individual the upper right is kind of
the hardware of the individual the upper
left is the software of the individual
right so you can think about human
physiology and then human mimetics
worldview values definition of success
psyche right is the software but of
course it's a place where there the
software and hardware not as distinct as
there are in computer systems every
software change is actually plastically
changing the hardware and vice versa the
hardware's predisposing software so that
you can see the analogy but also its
limit then you can think of the lower
quadrants where the lower right is
actually the hardware of the collective
infrastructures the hardware of the
collective and the social systems of the
software of the collective those for the
hardware and software of the individual
in the collective is one taxonomy that
is necessary and sufficient for
understanding human experience and human
behavior so there are things that
condition human behavior in the
upper-right physiologic predispositions
for human behavior predispositions for
feeling more depressed feeling happier
feeling you know having more empathy
less etc there are mimetic
predispositions for behavior religions
value systems trauma etc there are
economic and cultural predispositions
for behavior right as long as that
old-growth redwood tree is worth a
hundred thousand dollars cut down as
timber but it's worth nothing alive on
my balance sheet in that economic that
extraction arey non appreciable
recognizing economic system is going to
lead to cutting all the damn trees down
which we've seen and the same with the
whale being worth a million dollars on a
fishing boat but worth nothing alive in
the ocean right like the economics
conditions you in behavior and
infrastructure actually conditions you
in behavior it's just a interesting but
important point it ends up being not net
neutral no medically right if you have a
infrastructure where the only way to get
electricity is from coal which we know
is causing an egg's or Bihar to other
life right mountaintop removal mining
mercury in the ocean whatever but we
need electricity to live you cannot have
full empathy in that infrastructural
system you actually have to
down-regulate your empathy to justify
getting long and even though you'll want
to not look at certain pictures and
videos when they come across because you
know you're contributing new things you
actually can't really handle
contributing to so you'll turn down your
awareness you'll change your behavior
you'll turn down empathy because
infrastructure is actually predisposing
patterns of mimetics and behavior right
so all four of those quadrants are
irreducible to each other but inter
effecting so if we have solutions that
are in any quadrant only they will be
inadequate and what you try and do in
any quadrant will necessarily affect and
be affected by the other ones so if we
want to think about civilization it's
not civilization design because we're
not talking about top-down are
it's the design of processes that lead
to emergence right if we want to think
about civilization birth midwifing right
is supporting the emergence of a viable
self-organizing healthy resilient
civilization we think about the
foundational shifts that have to happen
in each of those quadrants and you know
we mentioned most of them involve
closing open loops so that our
decision-making is Omni considerate our
decision-making ends up being in the
highest good of all that is being
affected by the decision what are some
of the more pressing loops that need
closing right now in your opinion
especially moving into 2017 what's
happening in the world right now what's
happening in the states with the u.s.
elections 2017 one of the things that we
see is a system a political system that
has been breaking and really broken for
some time having more complete and
obvious breakage and so we see a
Democratic Party that has all of the
kind of vested interests that it has
co-evolved with and you know damaged
structures that it has having supported
one of the least well-liked candidates
in recent history and anti supported one
of the most well-liked candidates in
recent history resulting you know in its
failure the Republican Party failed to
have any really adequate candidates come
forward and so a candidate that
represented change by being outside of
the system won even though in so many
ways represented regressive change and
so the two-party system as a whole broke
each of the major platforms broke and
we're a very relatively small percentage
of people in the United States used to
know that there was real corruption
involved and the
process a much higher percentage of
people know that now and have less faith
that just going to the polls and voting
is an adequate solution to the
revolution that they might hope happens
so what that portends for future
election cycles and also how people
start to have civic engagement
independent of elections is all
interesting right
you know Trump is a very interesting
person in this position with the cabinet
that's coming because there's plenty of
really concerning things right there's
plenty of really concerning things in
terms of the embolden 'try that has
already been here you know so deeply but
that in being brought to the light and
the surface and and embolden that way is
both more concerning more problematic
but also more capable of being healed
because it's up more obvious represents
an existential catastrophic view on the
climate and energy but is also starting
to be surrounded by some people that
have meaningfully better perspectives
like Elon Musk and others so hopefully
there is influence potential there but
we also see things like really seeking
to remove people from office who have
had crony capitalists ties for such a
long time and propose things like
auditing the Fed that are actually
revolutionary revolutionary and in a
good way and so it's very interesting to
see what could happen over the next time
here to here but what we're seeing is
let's let's look at it from a larger
sense because similar things are
happening in other places in the world
right not just in politics but in the
failure of several developed countries
economic systems and you know etc if you
think about it in terms of systems
theory and complex adaptive systems
there's a kind of foundational principle
that says complexity will evolve within
any organizational system inexorably
just because
there's movement and with movement there
are self interacting dynamics and that's
going to lead to increased complexity
right and so complex is going to involve
within any organizational system until
it actually exceeds that organizational
systems capacity to manage and when it
exceeds it you're gonna start getting
increased chaos and then increased
entropy and then the dissolution of that
organizational system and then you're
either going to get the entropic
step-down to the previous level of
organization or out of the chaos you get
the emergence of a higher level of
organization that isn't a retrofit of
the previous system but a fundamentally
new kind of system that's a place that
globally I would say we're at we have
you know representative democracy is
just fundamentally not capable of
handling the kinds of collaborative
decision-making we need to make right
now when you think about the founding of
the United States and the time when
people would get together in a town hall
without representative decision-making
right they get together and all vote on
something and then someone would have to
be represent the whole group who's gonna
ride a horse to where all the other town
halls met to decide what the state did
or it made sense to have representatives
for very real technologic limits you
know and there were other reasons that
were argued but that was a part of the
etiology of the whole thing right and
then when you couldn't have a town hall
big enough for the whole population and
so we have an Internet Town Hall
beginning for the whole population
nobody has to ride a horse we have we
don't need the representatives in the
same way we have people that actually
have real topic matter expertise that
can be groups of decentralized
peer-to-peer mavens that can actually
make relevant decisions based on real
knowledge of how those kinds of systems
work connected with the data and the
facts you know necessary we've already
seen these kind of peer-to-peer systems
do
decision-making at the scale of
complexity there operating than a
representative democratic system one so
you know that system served evolutionary
relevance but it is obsolete and if you
think about it could you have
representative democracy we have people
in positions of legislative power where
those people are still agents within
capitalism who need to advantage
themselves within capitalism as as
individuals and members of families
could you have representative democracy
and capitalism together and not have it
become crony capitalism well we have
never seen it happen and it's just a
structural thing it's not just
particular bad people right it's just
structural you have a system where you
incentivize people to acquire stuff and
then you put people in a position to
legislate in the interest of things that
they're more interested in and you know
that that's going to happen right so
capitalism and you know an economic
system that externalizes as much harm to
the Commons as possible right and where
your profit margin is actually
proportional to how much harm you can
externalize that pits all different
kinds of people against each other in
ways that keep enmity unavoidable you
know a linear materials economy that is
devastating the past fear that we live
on across the entire thing like so that
whole system it wasn't self terminating
when the complexity was low enough that
we had a billion people and we'd cut
trees down with axes but with the kinds
of industrial fishing boats that can
just trawl the entire ocean with slash
and burn with ICBM you know in 7 billion
of us that same kind of mindset we had
becomes very quickly extinction Airi and
so the the scope of our power the
complexity of our problems the number of
us are making those systems fail now we
can think of this as the baby at the end
right the complexity of its being kept
growing which meant more and more cells
which meant a bigger baby until it was
at the end of how big it could fit in
there and
get out of the birth canal which
triggered the contractions for it to
come out right now sometimes the mom and
baby die in the birth process that can
happen but if it's supported properly
then rather than die in the birth
process you get discrete phase shift
into the next phase of evolution and
that's exactly where I see us at over
the next you know from an evolutionary
time period very small period of time
which is the ability to have the
evolution and emergence of systems that
support a globally interconnected human
civilization that is actually on the
asset side of nature's balance sheet
rather than on the liability side so
what kind of things can we do as a
civilization to kind of aid in that
midwifery process to allow for this baby
to be born any of the places where you
can help close major open loops and then
do it in ways that can lead to
scalability are things worth looking at
so if you think about infrastructure the
ability to change production and waste
management manufacturing to a
closed-loop process so you start
thinking about could we have
decentralized systems of 3d 4d printing
with modular upgradability built in
rather than designed in obsolescence and
proprietary nonsense built in and
cradle-to-cradle design built in and
then have them connected to recycling
systems that move to lower entropy and
higher efficiency moving eventually
towards things like atomic sorting where
then the old things get to be brought
back into the individual parts to make
new things all run on renewable energy
sources low toxicity low entropy
renewable energy sources on the biologic
side of that stem-cell meet the vertical
farming the synthetic biology as part of
the you know creative materials process
and then the waste management of the
organic fractions it involves anaerobic
algae scrubbers etc and so there is no
waste there is no raw material sourcing
that isn't particularly building those
systems and not just individual
technologies but those the Guild's the
ecosystems of those technologies that
lead to closed-loop sustainability of
that system and then scalability of
those systems that is stuff that is
worth building so if you look at
building the future of our social
systems and knowing that the goal of our
social systems has to be aligning the
incentive of agents with the well-being
of other agents in the Commons start
thinking about how to close the
incentive wellbeing gap how to close the
externality gap then building ways to
measure externalities and just see them
to then be able to quantify them and
internalize them those are technologies
worth building right to be able to build
a balance sheet of the Commons the built
world Commons the natural world Commons
to be able to have data mined sources as
well as repurpose the IOT sensor systems
to have real-time sensor driven balance
sheet of the Commons right so then we
can see where the Commons are net
increasing and their resilience versus
decreasing where they're decreasing what
actions by what you know players are
involved in that and you know how to
really quantify it those are things that
should happen starting to move towards
things like robotic automation of the
shitty jobs that does allow the ability
to have things like a Commonwealth
economics really start to emerge and
then looking at the accounting systems
of how a Commonwealth economics access
based systems rather than possession
based systems so when you start to think
about people's access to Ober rather
than owning a car if you had an uber
system where there were enough cars in
close proximity for peak time that's the
total amount of cars that have to be in
the system that's still something like
that twentieth of the amount of cars
that are in systems where people drive
themselves in the car spend ninety five
percent of their time sitting that's a
lot less resource taken out of the earth
for actually more utility value safety
etc and the transportation system
especially as part it becomes
self-driving and then
all electric upgradeable and then
everyone can have access to the highest
transportation possible rather than what
you could afford previously and your
access to the resource doesn't limit my
access to the resource
whereas your possession would limit my
access so in a situation where there's a
finite amount of stuff and the less of
it there is the more value is added to
it but not real utility value right like
even though gold has some real utility
value as a as a conductor as a reflector
we don't use it for its utility value we
put it in bars and put it in a safe
where nobody really uses it for anything
at all other than representational value
based on its scarcity but we will damage
ecosystems that are actually supporting
our atmosphere and cleaning our water
and making pollinators work to get to
the goal right and because there's
enough air that I don't have any
differential value having some of it
over someone else there's no value so we
just keep ruining the out of it so
how to have a real valuation system that
is valuing proportional to real value
rather than you know nonsense value
that's about differential advantage in
competitive systems so building those
valuation systems you know those are the
kinds of things that need to happen
building the blockchain kinds of
technologies the post aetherium you know
kinds of technologies that allow non
corruptible contracts and currency and
meta currency exchange and governance
right so in the social systems these are
all things that needs to happen to bring
about the future of social system and
world view building better systems of
Education that actually help develop
children's innate unique capacities and
their intrinsic incentive to thrive and
experience life fully and contribute to
life fully helping to develop and evolve
those education systems and then helping
to also develop media that gets to
support people with real information so
the future of sense-making systems and
news networks and you know educational
resources where information that is
trustworthy and relevant happens right
peer to peer vetting processes etc as
well as the right kinds of
psychotherapeutic processes for
reconditioning people that have went
through so much trauma and damage and
then being able to be in a position to
raise future
with less damage built world
technologies that are designed to evolve
and support the well-being of the humans
in those systems well being sustainable
with the planet rather than being
cognizant to only very few metrics they
affect so that means pain that isn't
filled with VOCs that are carcinogens
and neurotoxins and endocrine disruptors
it means paying attention to the kind of
lighting that's involved in all the
building materials etc for not just
aesthetics and the utility of keeping
rain off but for recognizing that if
humans are gonna spend 90% of their time
in built structures how do you build
those structures in a way that is
conditioning optimum human experience
and predisposition of the people who are
in those so that kind of intentional
architecture and design process so all
of these are the kinds of things that
internalize externalities that do more
comprehensive design for all that is
affected close the causal loops and
don't just support something being
better within a self terminating system
but support the infrastructure the core
structures of new systems emerging ok
this is interesting a lot of young
people ask us for advice on what they
can do to contribute to a more positive
and sustainable future it seems like
from your framework closing loops is the
big answer and they can close loops in
any number of industries but what would
you add to that the fact of them asking
you the question is something I would
have them look at if they are asking you
what they can work on to have their life
be of greatest value to life it's a
great care and if they understand you as
people who have studied things that are
relevant to that getting Ihram but is
valuable to the degree though that they
are seeing US authorities and they're
looking for an external authority to
give them the answer to what to do with
their life that thinking itself is one
of the things they have to overcome and
if you think about the way most people
have been raised as children we very
rarely got punished for doing what that
authorities wanted us to do
and most all of the times we got
punished or for doing things that we
wanted to that maybe appeal to our own
sensibilities or desires intuitions
feelings and most of the time that we
got praised and rewarded was for doing
things the authorities either wanted us
to do or you know we're at least aligned
with what they figured what we figured
from previous expressions they probably
want us to do and so this is a very deep
conditioning when we are most
susceptible to conditioning to look to
others to look to teachers and Sunday
school leaders and parents and you know
authorities to tell us how to live our
lives and when we touched our bodies we
found that the parts of our bodies that
felt best to touch with the parts that
we got most in trouble for touching so
obviously what feels good to us is bad
so we can't trust our feelings but the
authorities know that it's bad so we can
apparently trust the authorities but not
our feelings and no one was ever really
interested in our thoughts or
perspectives they were pre-defined right
answers to things and we got praised
when we got them and we got in trouble
and we didn't get them and people were
not generally interested in our
aesthetic and design ideas they were
interested in us keeping clean things
that were someone else's design ideas
and so we got conditioned very deeply in
that system that is part of the system
that is self terminating because most
people are working at jobs that are
causing more net harm to the world than
benefit that they don't actually feel
good about but they do not trust their
own feeling or believe that they can do
something else or know how to actually
figure out what to do or believe in
themselves enough to self assess or self
initiate and most people when they look
at various situations in the world
actually feel really not ok with much of
the way the world is in ways that come
actually from love in them they come
from beauty in them even if expressed as
anger or jaded Ness but they don't
believe in their own ability to find
solutions to figure out so they
just numb out
alcohol or on TV or whatever they do and
so when you look at the people that have
ever meaningfully moved the world
forward where they solved some problems
that had not been solved it really
needed to be solved nobody taught them
how to do it because no one clicks the
problem wasn't solved yet
nobody could have taught Edison how to
make a light bulb nobody could have told
Gandhi how to get home rule for India
and one of the fascinating things was
that they decided to do it because they
knew that it was important before having
any idea how to do it and then they
trusted in both the rightness of it
enough and their own capability to learn
enough to really apply themselves deeply
and to continue through all of the early
not successes until they found stuff so
what I would encourage young people to
do is to take profound responsibility
for their existence and to know that
there are a lot of people and a lot of
books and a lot of courses that have
valuable to teach them but if an
adequate answer to what they should do
with their life existed anywhere that
whole thing would be done already and
the fact that the things aren't done
means that all the best teachers and
thinkers have not gotta get right they
have ideas they have things to learn you
should absolutely learn from them and
you're going to have something to add
not only in terms of your work but also
in terms of your creativity so I would
say look around at the world and see all
of the things that really bother you and
realize that them bothering you as part
of your guidance and see all the things
that you really love all the things that
are beautiful and you realize they're
connected right animals are beautiful
and then all of the devastation of
animals and their habitat is really
bothersome people are beautiful so
homelessness and order bothers them
right you children are beautiful so bad
education systems are bothersome so look
at what you love look at how what you
love is not well supported in various
areas and realize that it does not have
to be that way
any more than the world had to stay dark
in the time of Edison
and yet for all of human history before
Edison it did right and taking on
something that seemed impossible
literally delivered the world from
darkness in that way right and then
study the out of the topic right
without thinking that a completely
adequate solution is there there's
probably a lot of partially good
solutions maybe a technology that is
totally good technology but it hasn't
market feasibility hasn't came about yet
or the way to bring the meme out there
or parts of the ideas are there but they
need synthesized whatever it is
studies a problem well study what an
adequate solution would look like gain a
real clear inside of what adequate
solution looks like in your own area of
what you care to contribute to and as
things emerge that you feel like you can
contribute to as you're learning about
it contribute to them and continue to
assess on your own and initiate on your
own with of course good input from all
the places of good input that's the key
thing I would say take really deep
responsibility for the impact that you
have in your life while you're here and
then all of the study all the training
all the application that you need to
empower the kind of impact you want to
have make sure that happens
excellent advice right yeah Daniel thank
you for joining us this has been
enlightening yeah the thought that
you've done on all of these things is
fascinating it's a delight to be here
with you and when I see two intelligent
creative people who are looking at the
world and saying what is a vision of a
beautiful world that is commensurate to
our full capability and potential and
that is realistic and grounded in the
face of our real capability and
potential and asking what you can do to
help bring about the positive versions
of feature helping to even get positive
visions of the future from people who
have thought about it well and share
those with people is an incredible work
and I'm delighted to see this podcast
when you're doing in that blended be
here at the allman thanks we're looking
forward to chatting with you again
alright that's it for this episode I
hope you guys enjoyed it thanks for
listening if you want the show notes
they will be at future thinkers dot org
slash 36
this episode is brought to you by
eternity the Oracle machine eternity is
a new blockchain platform for smart
contracts with a token crowd sale
launching in March 2017 go to future
thinkers org slash eternity and
subscribe to their mailing list to get
notified when it goes live to get
notified of new podcasts and videos go
to future thinkers org and subscribe to
our mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and you tube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or if you share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/crashcourse org slash bap
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]