this could be a pretty fun hour or an
hour 40 minutes because my it's
electronics just died
it works if she can find something else
to occupy herself Oh
day two of possibilities in the pandemic
and I don't know how this time period is
supposed to go I found myself stressing
it's not have anything specifically
planned for it I'm by myself but I was
just going to go through like I did
yesterday the pollution and what that's
looked like over the last month six
weeks I don't remember when we started
them I wanna say six weeks ago in
February why we're doing them and what
he can do together that's what I would
love is for this 40 minutes to become
something that the audience is able to
co-create
more than just me here hopefully we have
people who are very committed to making
this project work committed to creating
these solutions that we come up with in
solution raising and or the process
itself of how we work together
we're gonna come up with great ideas and
then how do we work together from there
to actually bring those ideas into the
world
so I a solution raising is a
proper statement my fellow Sava chol yes
that's not so do not need to complete is
a conversation where within a one-hour
period we brainstorm together an actual
possible solution that we could take
right now it doesn't eat it's not
perfect it
let's get us a giant step in the right
direction out of the six that we've done
anyway so the hour-long conversation
looks like fifteen minutes we talk about
what's going on YZ we've done our
education food infectious disease
community transportation and labor
hey Shiloh you tak here me shylu can you
hear me is it like the mic that's bad
what is the problem let's see if we can
Audio there's no other option it's just
this for Cistus
you
you
and bubbly interesting that somehow
worked I switched from one mic setting
to the same mic setting but somehow was
repeated so perfect perfect the other
option is I just go out it in San y'all
can you hear me now I'm gonna sue me
again until I hear otherwise no I did
not freeze I was
[Music]
I did freeze at the same time but
solution raising where was I
so it's an hour-long conversation for 15
minutes we talked about how it currently
looks and we spend 15 minutes talking
about what our individual ideal would
look like in the future
hello to legit and so we've had six of
them one on education wanna
p-per and i'm going to go through what
we came up with in groups of between
three and five
the brain is working there but that's
not what I'm doing in 64 minutes guess
it's remembering people's names solution
if they an education our the idea that
we could use existing video that's out
there on YouTube on all the social media
platforms including private websites
that aren't on one of the streaming ones
that or in the way that you can decide
you want to learn a subject and we can
choreograph a structure so you can
actually learn it together and we can
tailor it to our individual education
style ah you know what it's glitchy
because the the coronavirus and
everybody is online right now everyone's
streaming everyone's online and I'm
trying to stream at two different
locations I apologize for the
glitchyness that really sucks I feel
like people can join me on camera and
then it's not glitchy but might be glad
she to our audience which is probably
part of the problem I apologize it's
hard to want to hang out and go create
something if the audio and video is
child or tomorrow to be out in the
living room where it's closer to my
Wi-Fi and therefore less of a problem
but with a kid and a roommate it'll be a
little a little challenging um anyway we
can all the six amazing different
projects I guess if it's trophy it's
they're all gonna make sense to go
through each individual one but we came
up with
and education this thumb is used to we
have a food system that was a gardening
/ neighbor corporation bulk buying
sharing in labor and sharing recipes and
that part of the labor as well be like
executive functioning intellectual
secure you know what's for dinner
and what that bring signs were into
basically a personal assistant for food
where any of the labor that it can do it
does at any Labor's we can create
together is it I have been well
infectious disease we came up with a
safe way for us to feel like we can
share our data with you with each other
so that we could do things like track
the k√∂ppen 19 outbreaks in a way that
our current medical system can't because
it relies on positive medical tests and
it doesn't feed back into the system we
can create something that we feel
comfortable sharing our physical
locations our symptoms our positive
versus negative test results to be able
to do things like
and understand it better community we
came up with a very rough concept of
having a hundred people having ten
thousand people but having a hundred
people working on a hundred different
projects so any groups of a hundred
you're backing attackee tackling a
hundred different issues that
communities that need to start face like
physical actual communities you would
live in so like plumbing and food
sovereignty and pet ownership and
childcare and education whatever it is
that that you would actually want to
talk about creating within
unity that you're part of and creating
the infrastructure that helps us
actually do that actually work with a
hundred people and find them and work
through creating a problems solution to
a problem together in transportation we
talked about this hub idea
start with its like a heartbeat so
there's a center that everything gets
shipped to and then it gets shipped out
so
they think about like exchanging it on
market place or something or and then
having anyway everything's picked up and
delivered once
it's get it because it would it pick it
up from you and go to the center and go
out the next day to everyone needs to go
to - and we can figure out a way to make
that should be much more easily with
codes that you skip and to know where
things go but
it's sorry I don't think I meant for
that that's what the point of a solution
raising is that we come up with a
project that we could do right now if we
had 10,000 people and
two five people for an hour we came up
with these various options that we could
create and
that's bigger than anyone can
participate in how do we get a hundred
people on a Saturday having that same
type of conversation and then how do we
decide on what the best idea is and how
do we actually create it in the world so
that we Oh
what we all invested in it emotionally
and financially and want to use it and
fruit
just for basically all the ones right
out there right now that are creating
money like TaskRabbit
and up pork or cleaning and having a
platform for labor all of the gig
economy stuff that's out there that
doesn't pay well enough having a
platform design for the worker to get it
18 ever any people hiring them and what
does that look like and how can we
create that in a way that it's Omni win
forever it was I mean we came up those
things in six hours each one was a
different hour-long conversation and
they're fun to have I mean if you like
that kind of thing if you like
generating ideas they're all available
on the together tech YouTube channel
which if you're watching this on YouTube
is um along in the the other channels on
the side that I've said yes these
channels link together a tech 90
a cafe oh but I am doing this every
evening from 6 to 640 my brain is but
then I also smoke pot before coming on
so it's a double double fun so it
actually makes my brain a little bit
better for what it needs
I tell see nobody keeps eternal bedtime
without falling asleep right away
this forty minutes every night I don't
actually know what it looks like but I
want to figure out how to move it
forward in a way that isn't reliant on
you
I'll move something for there is
designed to generate an idea and if any
of these six things existed it would be
amazing
all of them existed we live in a
different world if there's something
that we actually support and actually
participate in that if you have an
education system that you can learn from
and track your education and help you
fool learn together with and form teams
to do projects with then that would be
fun
you
I would like to Bob's and one we are
able to figure out your ideal diet work
with other people in order to
and cook it prep it dispose of it like
we can actually work together to create
anymore to say it a sustainable or
healthy food system by creating
something that helps us in that these
all those to education and food both
took place somewhat pre-pandemic where
we knew it existed but if people weren't
on lockdown and I don't think anyone
first saw look at this
what's that and the infectious disease
was like right around that time or it
was starting to spread again nobody was
on lockdown that wasn't what we were
talking about
that we could track the next outbreak
before it gets to this point not maybe
leave it up to our governments who don't
seem to have
like that is the idea for me anyway
during this pandemic is our governments
currently are all that we have they're
the best that we have to tackle these
and they are in no way out of quit but
they're the best we have a corporation
can't do what they're doing an
individual can't do what they're doing
resigned to be fragile because it's
designed for thee so
for various likely with people so any
room there is for mitigating it's not
really built into the system and the
system also isn't capable of assessing a
problem and creating a solution that in
any way works that is the best that
there is
let's see I think it's better than
nothing staying in and not doing
anything stay in and on attracting the
disease for me
[Music]
very important
but it doesn't solve our economic
problems it doesn't solve our other
health problems it doesn't solve any
emotional just didn't solve anything and
this is something that although
oh and for a lot of us the actual cost
isn't real it's saying the disease or
you're having someone we love get the
disease which is why we're all staying
inside and mitigating that much more
than it would have been otherwise but
the need to pay rent and the need for to
know you have access to food and to know
individually or allowing our governments
to solve it isn't really a solution
because they're not going to do it
properly
because
[Music]
I don't and the pivoting and changing
and evolving and implementing new new
ideas as they come in and of any kind of
an efficient manner be created from the
base it has to be something that we
create because we want to be part of it
we want to have access to food so how do
we get access to food without needing it
to be grown all over the world
[Music]
and is it safe and I mean just all of
the issues we currently have with food
and medical supplies and everything else
in the economy being able to actually
solve the problems so that it's not
being left up to the people who clearly
don't actually
they don't know what they could be doing
because very few people do and it's not
something you can know all by yourself
generally it's um
the theme that has to be with other
people's stuff like not you know you all
an economic and historical expert
they're not chemistry and biology and
hey hey listen
Holly the thing we fix the problems but
we can create the thing that helps us
and helps the pieces come together in a
way that we all understand it just not
what these six projects are but it is
what I'm hoping to to create with other
people create how we do the solution
raising it's because that is doing it
from the base up having people come
together and have a conversation about
what they would want from a specific
area and realizing the potential and
power that we can actually create
something together actually feasible to
get a small group of people together who
want to do the work who are willing to
do the work openly and transparently
and get a larger group of people who are
going to fund and offer advice and ideas
but with the efficiency of a smaller
group of people like we don't have
currently have the ability to have
10,000 people working on a project so we
need 10,000 equal to fund it and be
involved in it but not having the
conversations because even if we can
have 500 people having the conversation
every week because you can have a
hundred people on zoom' and you can have
these conversations and then have people
if they think they came up with a good
idea at the table have somebody who can
learn just like present it to everybody
else but that's not the word like bring
it summarize it summarize it and present
it the rest of the group so that under
100 people there are 25 ideas they could
be created and doing that times five so
that would be 125 ideas that are created
and having the best one
float to the top bias voting on them and
yes the best one might get lost in the
shuffle but anything we come up with is
going to be amazing parents what we
currently have when we're making it
together and we're in on it together and
how is it that it's a boy I haven't been
on talking to myself in so long I'm so
used to having someone else to chat with
that's also I'm committed to being here
by myself and with whoever else is is
going to be co-hosting so I'm pretty
cold source I don't think she'll oh yeah
I'm like I said I'm going to try to do
this much closer to the Wi-Fi tomorrow
so that it's not as choppy me it's not
choppy but that's not helpful to all of
you I'm gonna watch the replay I wonder
if the that's better I also wonder if
it's better if I don't go on periscope
in which case it will only be on YouTube
doing them because it's more important
to follow it then de Paris cope where
random people might come across it but
tomorrow I will try
- ooh Britt to work cuz right now it's
not gonna work over there
but alright we'll do some nights try to
I can't really because I've had the
conversation my kid my kids Oh like I
don't know if she has clothes on at the
moment
it's just life life is happening on the
other side of the door
update on
lucien raisins we found six of them we
came up with six amazing solutions to a
one each in education and food and
infectious disease community
transportation and labor and now i want
to find
other work on creating solution raisings
itself the process of how do we because
all of these solutions are something we
could potentially do with 10,000 people
and $100,000
so then part of solution or a theme is
going to be how can we actually get
10,000 people and $100,000 so we can
create one of these projects just keep
creating them and keep improving the
ones we do create and learning from that
process and learning from that process
learning what we need to be able to
facilitate that process
you
and yeah really enjoyable to sit through
it doesn't make sense for anyone to I I
am live yes high five
you
okay I'm lighting volunteers yeah always
volunteers not paid anyone
to do this so until we figure that all
out the point isn't to make a profit
that's kind of what's wrong with the
world right now is that everything's
designed for profit so we're designing
things for literally every other purpose
so he doesn't sign education systems
that we want to use to teach us
something not so that they earn money so
we can all be rich we design a food
system that gets us fed in a nutritious
and if that helps us actually track
things and trust things and work
together to facilitate the process of
needing to be in quarantine and social
Oh distancing we work together to create
community infrastructure I'd be able to
find teams and run teams and I mean team
very loosely a bands a creative group
like I got closely computer like this is
gonna help this is gonna help with the
connection okay why can't they give you
free McDonald's because McDonald's isn't
really down with that we also will not
be creating free restaurants that
doesn't really make sense we can create
food systems that are it cost cost of
the sharing of our labor anyway I was
gonna hang out tomorrow that's just what
I'm gonna normally be on for but if it's
a really bad connection I'll have to
figure out something and I will be close
to what and I can't even admin