so what I plan to do over the next few
weeks is when I feel called to to do a
video explaining when I don't have a
piece to move forward with what I want
to explaining what's going on currently
which it's like things happen daily but
I know how to get them in order to see
why I'm trusting this path forward and
to truly get the amazingness that is the
unfolding of the universe if you're
gonna get my journey in that then you
gotta have to get my past journey so
hopefully it shows you your journey that
you also have a past that has led you
exactly to where you are to be you and
fulfill your purpose and move forward in
your journey the intertwining of the
right journeys which are people who feel
called to do that intertwining are going
to create this thing it is going to
happen this thing being a world that
works for everyone
game be omni win society that if you're
part of it it works for you and
everybody can be part of it you're
allowed to come be part of it that is
what we are going to create together I
assume that is a technology cooperative
but hey it changes and it's it's gonna
change it's gonna move forward and you
get to watch it and I get to look like a
crazy person
before it unfolds in any way where it
starts proving itself it's already
proven itself to me because I have all
this to look back on I have my entire
history now to look and be like Oh what
if I didn't have brain tumors and if I
wasn't a single parent what if I wasn't
autistic or I had known I was autistic
my whole life
what if I'd known I was queer when I was
20 Wow that would have been a whole
different life like what if I knew now
what in my 20s and it wouldn't have led
me to where I am now it needed to be
this life in this order with everything
unfolding at the exact time it did and
yet I could have learned some lessons a
little earlier and that is the key is
like it's not like if you lose a path
that goes away forever it there are
things you were here to learn and if you
don't learn it that lesson just gets
harder and harder and harder and beat
you over the head with it until you get
it and even then doesn't sometimes give
you the limits you don't get to go back
and learn it back here so if it costs
you money it costs you money if it cost
you time it cost you health if it cost
you you don't necessarily get those
things back because now you've learned
the lesson so in that fun but it is and
it proves itself to you because as you
learn your lessons you're like you start
to learn them faster and see that that
everything you experienced up to this
point has led you to who you are to
fulfill your purpose in the world and so
you stop caring about all the other
people not doing anything what if people
are lazy what if I give my gifts to the
world and I don't get recognized doesn't
 matter because the reward is
giving your gift and yet there's still
like a little piece that's like what if
I don't catch a Grammy what if I don't
get to you but it's that's part of the
journey moving forward I'm not I haven't
arrived it's some pinnacle of human
perfection and now I can tell you how to
get here what I've arrived at is
happiness and authenticity and I can't
even necessarily tell you how to get
here because it's a it's all of it it's
everything that I had to accept to be me
my light my shadow my talents my job
my path every shitty thing that happens
to be along the way every amazing thing
that happened to me along the way
to lead to this point where I can bring
all of my formal and informed knowledge
and an experience and my challenges into
my purpose which is to create a world
that works for everyone and I don't get
to explain it and have it be executed
I'm just gonna create it together it is
already happening but they won't quite
appear yet to be outside role that it's
happening but just some it doesn't do
when you're participating in it it feels
like it the people that are having these
conversations we're having fun it is an
enjoyable experience we are already
getting something out of it and the more
we can create that for everybody else
the more we can help other people figure
out their purpose and execute it and
make that process easier we get
everything that process gifts to the
world all of the innovation all of the
creation all of the arts all of the
connection all of the new systems and
technology it's not about like central
planning
putting it all out it's like how do we
help you live your best life how do we
help you see everything that brought you
up to this point how do we help you
execute your future so that you have the
means to go after so you have them needs
to be yourself and go after what you
want in a game be home anyway fashion in
a
we're gonna be more likely to help if
your thing isn't gonna kill our planet
right like no we are going to help
assess the actual risks of what we do
because that's part of being a human is
understanding the externalities and the
impacts we have on the world around us
like I started this with one subject and
ended with another or thanks to make
some of you talking about my backstory
so that well I'm moving forward ensuring
there's running forward it makes more
sense and the more I'm able to let go me
like the more I don't need this to look
a certain way
I don't need likes i don't need
subscribers I don't need it to even make
sense I just need to be willing to share
it then it was also the journey forward
it's also the it'll track to the right
people at the right time it already is
we're already creating the world that
works for everyone
by creating a process and an experience
that works for us as we create the next
thing that work brings in more people it
works for them and we're gonna I'm gonna
keep doing it and everyone's gonna keep
moving forward in their own way and it's
gonna happen I feel like skipping about
a glide and I get it look like a crazy
person until it does so see you next
time