and with Anderson Todd his first name is
Anderson his last name is Todd some of
you have noted that the discussion I had
with him was causing quite a stir we
were talking about young shadow work the
work of Jordan Peterson and the
relationship between young and
Christianity and I'm pleased that
Anderson has agreed to join us again and
to answer questions I want to indicate
something I'm going to give priority to
the questions that are specifically
towards Anderson some of your sending
questions to me they please resubmit
those to the general Q&A I do for
patrons I want to focus today on the
questions that are specifically directed
towards Anderson and a response to our
previous discussion at some point
Anderson it might be good if you went
over your discussion of the golden
shadow again
but I'd like to begin by a question
right I get the first question it's my
channel which is some of people have
commented about the argument that I was
weaving through our discussion but you
were largely in agreement with that
Young is better understood as a non
theist and that his relationship to
Christianity was much more ambivalent
and critical than an apologetic
relationship and that was part of the
some of the criticisms of some of
Jordans take on young and so some people
replied by that by saying that because
I've seen this no doubt you have to this
famous interview with young towards the
end of his life I believe where he was
asked if he believed in God and he said
I don't believe I know and many people
take that as well they they seem to be
taking it as an indication that Young
was stating very clearly that he was
some kind of theist how would you
respond to two to that well I guess the
first thing
say that as I mentioned in our talk
young is perhaps best approached with an
eye to completeness over consistency in
his work that's changing the emphasis
changes so particularly after he had his
heart attack I think he comes in much
more strongly sort of firing the guns a
mystical sense and also you know
indicated that he had sort of more
direct rather than inferential or
logically arrived in some way in college
however when I think about this I often
think about because it is in fact a
common question I think about Young's
relationship to AAA and the 12 steps so
a lot of people don't don't realize that
you know I actually had some impact on
am twelve steps I didn't know that yeah
so I think yeah the guy who's a a
founder was in correspondence with you
know I'm during the period and there is
a sort of a famous set of letters of
exchange where basically says that he
wants to conquer his addiction he needs
to to make a sort of a transformative
appeal to a higher power now the
interesting thing is right when that
sort of filters through a a eventually
that becomes a relatively theist and
sort of you know the Christian century
sort of within they con things but of
course if you read young the notion of
an appeals of a higher power when you're
considering the relationship to the
capital s self it's considerably more
complicated the thing even if it has all
of the symbolic machinery in appearances
of that stuff so when he says that he
you know he doesn't believe he knows is
what does he know what does he mean when
he's talking about God and then I sort
of how I would approach it and to
whatever extent you want to draw a
distinction between you know theism and
non-theism that sense it's like well the
appearances might be the same but how
you're interpreting the underlying event
different correct right and I would tend
to say that based on sort of the
overarching body of his work it's fairer
to interpret you know in fact of saying
like we can't really know the underlying
we can know that there is an event we
can know that it's powerfully meaningful
we can have an encounter with that thing
I know it in that sense
mm-hmm but that's not quite the same as
as sort of the theistic faith commitment
right so that would line up with the
fact that young often points to
impersonal representations of the self
like the Sun or mandala figures as also
things that point towards how he knows
God isn't that isn't that correct that's
right and so you know you have a kind of
a double relationship there as you do
with many archetypes so they're sort of
the personalized intercessor an emissary
versions of the self and like we talked
a bit about Richard yep yeah yeah last
time and that's sort of very close to
the self in a way as far as archetypes
go but then there's also these sort of
yeah impersonal principles of
organization right that you see and so
there are sort of archetypes of pattern
right so the mandala is sort of the
best-known example of this but you get a
bunch of other examples yeah right and
the Sun as being a thing is you can
treat it as a personal sort of figure
but the whole point is that it's it's
it's more transcendent than that yeah I
think about the use of the Sun in Plato
in the Republic at the road with the
road how it's a representation of the
good yeah yeah I often consider this
stuff and this is not directly derived
from from you know but I don't think of
it it's sort of in Kabbalistic terms
right and as you climb the tree of life
you're dealing with sort of these
increasing and rarified
versions of the divine in some sense
right so
you know the the solders here which is
sort of in the middle of the Tree of
Life is a kind of you know solar
resurrecting God representation it's
definitely divine right but it's it's
the sort of birth rebirth kinds of gods
but when you get up to the top when you
get up to things like a catheter that
doesn't even have energy or form they're
just kind of like raw Godhead yeah right
and so there are I think some
representations on solving sure that
overarching a non personal sort of
aspect impersonal aspect but but again
the stuff is you know plate you want
right that's very interesting I'd like
to we have time I'd like to talk you
more about the sort of polarity between
the personal relationship to God which
might be sort of more interest
psychically directed and the impersonal
one which might be sort of more
ontologically directed and what happens
when they get in to serve an anti-god
residence because it strikes me that
people generally are trying to point
both directions at the same time when
they're invoking this notion of God so
we have another question I'd like to ask
you or switching to questions from
patreon so once again thank you very
much patrons for all your support
it's much appreciated and so the first
one is from Lisa Connie I believe and I
hope you'll be these questions out -
unison thanks my question for Anderson
Todd how would you evaluate Carl Jung as
a philosopher was he one if so to what
degree if mr. Todd would be able to
explain that Carl Jung's philosophy I
just want to mention one thing before we
begin not only is Anderson a practicing
psychotherapist somebody who's been
through this continuing to be within
he's also the person who teaches the
young courses at the University of
Toronto
so Anderson often has to deal with these
kinds of questions in this course is
about the relationship between young as
a psychologist and young as a
philosopher so what would you say about
you know what kind of what kind of
philosopher is is Carl young and what's
the elevator pitch version of his
philosophy right okay so it depends in
part what we mean by philosopher I mean
you only have sort of an analytical
tradition philosopher is I would say
quite weak yes right as a continental
philosopher on the other hand he's sort
of well nested within a tradition of
other people in that vein a very most
content in that way - yeah very much
right and so you know when you look at
the influences which we discussed before
right we you know you look at Hegel when
you look at content you look at
Nietzsche and you look at you know hated
Schopenhauer v yes so which is weird
actually anyway but you know you look at
those people and he is firmly situated
in that tradition and I would say in
that sense how is he as a philosopher
relatively derivative but insofar if we
mean by philosophers we mean Philo
Sophia if we mean a lover of wisdom
there's no question that Jung is firmly
situated in that camp and I think that
the thing that Jung brings somewhat
uniquely I don't know if this qualifies
as an elevator pitch but when he
interfaces and knits together a bunch of
this material he does so with an eye
towards the phenomenology of lived
experience would I say everything and so
you know depth psychology in many ways
is one of the last sort of big umbrella
psychologies right psychology in
academic psychology experimental
psychology now tends to be very focused
on relatively narrow kind Josh Jones
that's right depth psychology is in some
ways less a psychology per se than it is
a sort of overarching worldview and
method like it sort of encompasses you
know virtually anything I can talk on
almost any topic right so in that sense
as a lover of wisdom I think Jung is
deeply committed to philosophy and to
asking the questions that I would say
are fundamental to philosophy who are we
who are we as people and what
are we what kind of beings are we right
and his answer to that is that we are
not unit of beings right that's sort of
the psychodynamic basis is the rejection
of this unit of bias so in that sense
we're not unit of beings that's an
important part he's he has a lot of
emphasis on this transactive quality
although I don't think you know I think
Corbin in fact sort of articulates a lot
of that much better yeah but his lived
sense of it as being sort of a clinician
and working with people in a sense of
how those inner transformations and math
and ultimately speaking the efforts that
he made to try to you know to try to
seal the mind-body rift like we talked
about that and I think he just didn't
have the machinery available but given
what he did have available he actually
makes some sort of remarkable inroads
right for the time which is why I think
a lot of you know there were a lot of
other thinkers in the period that took
him quite seriously
even when he was persona non grata so
you know how do I think he rates as a
philosopher he does not always have the
meticulousness of mind I think that
characterizes the best philosophers but
he has a scope and a breadth and a depth
that compensates for that provided that
you're not reading him in isolation
that's a good answer
thank you that's very helpful so the
next question is patreon from Connor
aside from Green journaling and in your
experience what practices would you
recommend for getting in contact with
the archetypes after having done shadow
work the archetypes after everything
that's what questions asking us so when
I teach this material very often I mean
what doing dream work is useful in part
because it is a very ready at hand
altered state so the argument that I
typically make when I teach this
material and I teach a course on this is
that in fact our best bet is altered
states promptly construed hmm so what
what I've been including that is you
know I maker or rough you know there
isn't very good taxonomy around altered
states we don't have good and
categorization
but roughly speaking I sort of dropped
them into three camps I think of of
endogenous altered states I think of
sort of psycho technological or
technique based altering states and then
I think of exogenous altered states
right so the endogenous are all of the
states that you know deviate from some
kind of statistical baseline and give us
an extreme experience so for instance
experiencing extreme emotions bends our
salience landscape and our experience in
ways that the ancients for instance
could easily recognize this like love is
madness
yeah right and so all these things that
are in some sense madness right that are
form of madness for whatever that's
worth our states which give us sort of
an access and a perspective to parts of
the unconscious and parts of our own
nature that we don't normally have and
so being able to move into those states
and move back out of them right and
reintegrate that material is sort of the
first move that I would generally
recommend so that can include strong
emotions it can include other kinds of
endogenous states that are easy to get
through spinning right yeah so spinning
I joke is sort of the first altered
state kids figure out how to reliably
reproduce right and they'll span and
spin and spin and spin and spin in the
grass but you know it also plays a
somewhat central role in various
religious traditions right the end of
whirling dervishes this movie tradition
and I have some sort of cog site
theories about how that might involve
the hyper activation of the cerebellum
provides insight and if whatever but the
point is right you're trying all these
things where you're moving your
experience you're moving your sort of
phenomenological landscape into novel
configurations and different experiences
and that's gonna reveal things about you
would would taste like the flow state
also be included in that category yeah I
would say so I mean the flow state
hopefully is a relatively common one but
it is a relatively also extreme state
right so peak experiences for sure
insofar as we think of Maslow's peak
experiences is linked up with flow
States absolutely states of awe right so
all the stuff around positive psychology
state of powerful states of awe but also
other kinds of things I mean basically
making a picture for experience if you
want to get to know your unconscious
you combined together experience with a
certain kind of analytical mindset and
you want your experience to be in many
ways as sort of varied as possible you
want to chart out far points because
you're going to get more information
about yourself right the nature of your
mind and then you have to treat it with
the kind of analytical eye so is it kind
of like a deep learning cycle you run
all this experiential variation and then
you do a sort of an analytic compression
to try and pick up and then you re very
and you're sort of cycling through it in
that way so you're looking for
invariance I think that's that's
something that you're definitely looking
for but there's also an analytical
component which is you know you're
drilling in with sort of successive
Socratic but what are we actually
talking about obviously right so so as
an example a thing that I find a lot in
clinical work that was something of a
discovery for me was you know a lot of
people have a hard time accessing their
preferences right so people don't know
what they want and that was a shock to
me because I have very ready access to
my preferences but this lines up with
some good cognitive psychology people
are very bad at affective forecasting
right actually very bad at forecasting
how they'll be happy or sad when I win
some and your end forecasting generally
right yeah end to end of history
illusion yeah yeah and all that business
so yeah I think people and and that
typically to me demonstrates it's like
right we don't really know what the arc
and velocity of our being our frame we
don't really know where we're going um
so but but nevertheless nevertheless
when we're doing this sort of back and
forth right we're we're expanding into
the space won't bring it back the
analytical question comes up so when
people don't know the preferences that's
hard enough but even if people do know
their preferences the question is then
why do you have those preferences and
the more extreme or unusual the
preferences are people don't question
them so it's like you really like a
piece of music why why do you like it
and there might be a lot of reasons why
you might have particular attachments to
it you might have whatever or you know
you have a particular taste so for
instance people's tastes
in sort of fiction or sex are often very
revealing right
okay so people's attractions so people
you know if you start to ask yourself
why why do I like this right and
drilling in and also you're altering
your state you know frequently enough
that you're having novel experiences and
then sort of tracking your own
experiences in this analytical way I
think you begin to be able to sort of
infer both a bit of structure but also
some of your unconscious contents that
are normally harder to get at so that's
that was the endogenous what about the
second technological and the exogenous
right so really I think those things are
are continual my minutes come with
arbitrary distinction the endogenous are
just easy to get at and typically safe
right like if you're doing breath work
for instance to move in on an altered
state yeah you know you might over
saturate yourself with oxygen or
something but you know you're not gonna
you know have too serious a problem the
psycho technological I think of as being
techniques and sometimes technologies
but mostly techniques which leverage the
existing systems in different ways or
exact those systems or build those
systems this seems like camping
meditation you know extreme exercise or
or pain pushing yourself into places or
training yourself to do to enter states
that normally would be difficult to
access so that sort of thing and then
the exogenous is you know introduced in
whatever way so psychoactives are fairly
classic but also things like you know
strobing technologies there are kind of
stuff the exposure to art or certain
types of ritual right that are that
happened to you and now of course you
know things like non-invasive brain
stimulation and their feedback and right
these sorts of technologies that we
didn't have access to but that do allow
us to intervene on our state so is there
a programmatic recommendation here like
start with the endogenous stuff and
because you talked about the need for
variation and then do you move into the
cyclic technology cyclo technological
and then perhaps only like when you're
with you know a good guy or therapist I
think it there's so yes a good guide in
the therapist so right the general rule
around altered states is you should
always have safe containment right so
it's the same thing with psychedelics
it's been known for a long time if
you're gonna engage in this stuff you
need to have a sitter minimally and
probably you should have a sitter that
has some experience and you should
control percent and setting and all that
stuff is pretty primitive like I mean I
often say it's like set and setting is a
very yeah yeah you know that I argue
about expensive yeah yeah right and if
you look at like the Griffiths work
around psilocybin you can see that you
really want to have things a bit more
controlled if you're gonna start getting
in the mystical experience territory
sorry that that a lot of that research
shows that a lot of these profound
benefits of using the psychedelics are
in conjunction with therapeutic that's
right yeah so in I mean I just recommend
therapy to everybody I think that we
should think I think we should think of
therapy as less like emergency medicine
and more like nutrition well more like
some combination of a personal trainer I
used to say dentist but people a lot of
people are afraid of dentists so I
stopped using that analogy I'm not
afraid of the dentist so it never
occurred to me foot yeah but you know a
personal trainer or or even something
like basic preventive medicine I mean
you go to the doctor every six months or
whatever for a checkup and it's a
checkup
but people typically only get into
psychotherapy when they're yeah they
already feel like they're about to so
maybe another analogy might be like sort
of a Sifu within a dojo or something
like sure yeah yeah so yeah so that is a
general containing thing right you know
play play safe have containment have
some kind of integration and
decompression in mind yeah and then as a
general program I mean a lot of it is
about your comfort zone you know not all
altered states are for all people is it
like is there kind of like a zone of
proximal development yes so this there
is but the problem is that that's a very
sensitive area right I mean you know if
what you're telling somebody is like you
know you stay stay inside your comfort
zone the thing is that's not quite true
you actually won't be slightly outside
your comfort zone but simultaneously you
don't want to be urging people to go
outside their comfort zone right right
because so so there's a balancing act
there there's I think and people differ
right some people want to take small
steps they might want to do a little bit
of dream work investigate a little bit
of you know meditation and you know
maybe try a float tank or something
other people want to load you know
twenty-four different things into a
catapult and launch them all at once and
so they're you know interested in
simultaneously doing ayahuasca and
holotropic breathwork and strobe stuff
and suspending themselves from hooks I
think it's a matter of preference and so
and you know in general my
recommendation though is you don't need
necessarily to go into the deeply exotic
to achieve significant results okay
right if you spend enough time
meditating you're meditating in the old
sense contemplating if you spend enough
time analytically contemplating your
interpersonal relationships you can do a
lot if you spend some time paying
attention your dreams in your
imagination like one of the things that
float up in your mind you can you know
pick up all kinds of things right and if
you want to move beyond that into you
know deeper fields of experience it's
sort of a matter of temperament and
preference I think I would also say
you're also perhaps also matter of skill
yes yeah no I agree all right so that
was an excellent answer for a very good
question if there's another question I
want to ask you from Clara who's also a
patron now I thank you for the critique
of the hero's journey I am left to
wonder however about the role of fear my
felt sense is that the hero's journey is
all about conquering your deepest fears
in order to improve your relation to the
world our fears aren't fears a big
source or even cause of self-deception
so I would I just wanna
remind everybody that we talked about
that mythology isn't just not just myths
of the hero's journey for every Odysseus
and Jason there is you know there's a
Phaeton or an Icarus or Arachne and so
hubris is talked about as much as the
hero in a lot of Greek mythology for
example and you were trying to say no no
you gotta set this all into a much more
comprehensive almost like a
self-correcting system rather than
focusing a little too much on the hero's
journey so I'd like you to comment on
that in answering the question but I
also want to slant it a little bit
towards something that we talked about
last time in that I've argued about is
also the role of mythology the hero's
journey and the aspirational project
mmm-hmm okay so on the first point I
guess but you know the role of fear in
the hero's journey well I mean so I'm
not sure first off yes it's true that
fear is a significant obstacle in some
ways although fear can also be an ally
and this is a thing in many cases what
you're doing with shadow work it's not
about conquering well that was my point
about hubris right yeah versus not
having an adequate fear of what you
should be afraid of right that's right
so so fear can have utility now that
doesn't mean that you shouldn't come to
some kind of you know more balanced
relationship with it often right there
are things that we fear that are
disproportionate or there are things
that we feel where we are not in control
of our fear but having some relationship
with fear you don't just want to remove
fear know people that have no fear
typically do not have great lives
mm-hmm right and we see this in cases of
you know that they're interesting
developmental cases of fearless people
and there are cases right where people
have sustained you know bring their
brain insolia right and and they have no
fear and that's a problem right
fearlessness can be a problem it can
lead you into dangerous situations that
said for the most part we tend to have a
kind of excess of fear and our
relationship to it is a fearful one if
that makes sense
yeah and that needn't necessarily be so
you know
so okay so on the like things that you
can do in an altered state territory a
game that I sometimes recommend to
people if they have this particular case
it's called
werewolf so here's the game you're sort
of tapping into some leftover machinery
I think from earlier in evolution so
here's a game go on a camping trip with
your friends have a fire in the woods be
careful about that and then once it gets
good and dark walk in the forest ideally
an open stretch and walk far enough away
from the fire that you can sort of make
it out a bit you have a clear path and
then turn around and run back to the
fire in the dark as fast as you can
almost immediately after you start doing
this and my experience and lots of
people I know you'll begin to have the
terrible like atavistic sensation of
being chased because I don't know how
many times in our history didn't run
back to the fire through the woods with
something after us right so it's sort of
contours and constellated this fear
thing and and it's a terrifying
experience I mean I've undergone it a
bunch of times and it sounds like fun
and games until you're supposed to be
like okay it sounds like so it's not
ever done it right it's like roller
coasters it's sort of a horror movies
right I also like it's a matter of taste
but but the point is in doing that one
is directly moving towards of fear and
you're coming to a different
relationship to your fear than simply
being fearful your fear can be a set of
experiences that you have but that you
can process as sort of useful
information in some cases or an ally
without it being an unconscious dominant
right without losing agency to it in the
same way so instead of just soft right
yet yeah and actually that's right
flecked on it you can reflect on it so
you know I think that when we're talking
about the hero's journey you know in
that sense you're potentially overcoming
a lot of things I mean there are worse
things than fear there are worse things
than fear I would argue that
meaninglessness is worse than fear right
fear at least is sort of motivating but
when you you know traipse into a patch
of
you know nihilism yeah you stumble in
this world s pond where it's just
nothing nothing moves you in any
direction you just kind of want to lay
down a die that is worse than fear yeah
fear at least will move you with
something you can work with it's
something you can write whereas often
you know nihilism and it's sort of
unanswerable the absurd can be very
difficult answer I was thinking you know
there's all there's even you know
mythical elements of people heroes
getting stuck in the doldrums right or
the slough of despond yeah yeah yeah
right exactly
or Odysseus on the island of the
lotus-eaters writings like that that's
interesting I think of that as an
intoxication story right yeah that's
true but they sort of lose motivation at
the same time yeah yeah I mean yeah
straight-three we just did the Odyssey
in my course because I do it every year
right and of course there's a whole
series of things where these
accompanying figures for the DCs all
sort of regrets right they don't lose
consciousness they turn into pigs they
right he has to drag them out of the
opium den so to speak right the Lotus
Eaters so yeah there's a whole bunch of
those so I think that yes you know
overcoming fear is an important part of
that overall journey but it's not the
only thing and in fact right like it can
be equally important all this stuff is
typically balanced you've gotten sort of
you're trying to integrate opposites
right so it can be just as hard to have
to overcome the heroic components of
your site right right right
so an example of this is people who
suffer excessive ambition right which
can be a kind of heroic inflation where
you know that kind of like I can do it
my attitude pushes too hard on the
psyche and then you start to cruise
towards burnout alright right people and
that's a very widespread and reported so
again there's a writer's laughing with
recognition the there's a there's a sort
of a back and forth and I don't think
that you can sort of pick one one thing
in a sense and tag that there's always
something else coming up that has to be
negotiated yeah and then above them
beyond that negotiating the heroic
archetype itself which is what I play
right so did we get into the dream with
Siegfried I think I mentioned it but
maybe didn't okay
there's a famous dream that mentioned in
memories dreams reflections where young
sniper rifle and he blows the Solar hero
away blow sleep Siegfried the dragon's
lair away then he has horrible guilt and
then you know a massive storm washes
away and he feels this immense relief
that nobody will discover the evidence
of his crimes there's a lot going on
there but one of the things is that you
know he wakes up from that and as he
starts to chew through it he's like oh
right I have to kill the solar hero in
myself because that lowering that kind
of confrontational adversarial gogogo
externally focused energy it's necessary
to move in a state of more spiritual
equanimity and balance that it
characterizes wisdom you you that's
great because you actually I think did a
lot towards answering my second point
which is that the relationship of
aspiration is an anatomic relationship
it's not just the hero's journey that's
right there's a sense yes you you do
take the step forward but then you also
have to right you have to then we
internalize the patterns that you learn
about there's much about there's much
appreciation in the sense of learning
understanding coming to have new
preferences and values as there is and
just sort of making the hero's journey
that's involved in the process of
aspiration yeah that's right and I mean
you know these things have a way of
shifting I mean there are values and
challenges associated with stages of
life and I think that we used to have a
better recognition of that in our
culture right there are unique
challenges that come with particular
phases of life and to making emotional
transitions into those and then dealing
with those particular issues right is is
often central to the process of going
through some kind of psychic growth so
young talks about this you know when he
says the first half of life and
obviously he's generalizing here but the
first half of life is is external
it's an extroverted half here challenge
in the world and building stuff up and
doing all that heroic stuff and taking
it on and building yourself a career and
building yourself a persona and getting
status and then the second half of life
post 35 is turning inwards
and right trying to process through the
nature of being who you are right what
your legacies are death yeah so this
lines up with the the shifting of the
temporal horizon right so people until
they're 35 they live from their birth
yeah and then after 35 they start living
towards their death that's right now I
don't think that that's totally true in
all respects like I disagree with you
that you can't do any important right
inner work right no 35 but I think it's
interesting that traditionally before
you can train as a union analyst you
can't train if you're under 35 right you
can't even begin because the assumption
is that you don't have the requisite
life experience and depth and stuff to
even start the process here I think in
Toronto it's not 30 I think it's 30 well
that's the same age Plato recommended
that right yeah so that's interesting
because that also like I said it
reflects that sort of cognitive factor
that the temporal horizon flips around
out at that stage yeah ok let's pass on
to another question if that's okay with
you sure so this is from a patreon
McKenzie Levitt who that's also somebody
who writes to me and she asked how
should we apply self compassion in the
process of shadow work judiciously okay
so could you expand on that a little bit
sure um so are we using self compassion
like it's Neph technical sense here I
wonder the problem I have with that by
the way is I I have deep arguments about
that being sort of theoretically
incoherent and bordering on self
contradictory right I think it's a
language of training thing yeah and I
think it's also you know there's a
theoretical there's kind of a
circularity even in
the analysis of that yeah so do what you
want to do with it
like this is always an you might the
other head against this yeah and I know
that there are so it's a contested space
so I'll approach it I guess maybe in
like the colloquial so we're a
self-compassion playing with shadow work
um I think it is necessary when you're
doing shadow work to be realistic about
the harms that you are inflicting while
still bearing in mind that harms to
yourself or other both okay
while still bearing in mind that you
have a responsibility to attempt to
address those things right but that a
lot of it was unconscious like there's a
balancing act with all these things and
the thing that I say most often is an
explanation isn't an excuse mm-hmm right
but before vacation
yeah but nor is an excuse right like
it's not an excuse so in a sense it
doesn't get you off the Hulk right but
at the same time you often need to go
kind of easy on yourself it's contextual
this shifts around a lot I mean some
people are more inclined to sort of let
themselves off the hook right they
project onto other people it's not my
fault we talked about this before and in
that case sometimes the sort of locus of
control and also the locus of
responsibility needs to shift inward so
guilt is not a bad thing that should
always be noted No
yeah Nora shame it's just that they're
often misapplied or they're
disproportionately so let me thank
counterbalances for all my criticisms of
network sort of you know scientifically
and what we just said about the
the we need a more balanced attitude
towards guilt and shame you know we have
our mutual friend Leo and he has often
said of me that I have a sadistic
super-ego as his way of and so it did
he's there is that the kind of thing
that this question might be addressing
the concern that you know because
people's upbringing or perhaps their the
religious formation or some comp
combination of Constitution and
upbringing they might have I don't even
like the friggin language but you know
wanna talk about just to do sadistic
super-ego yeah I mean I think so like
when you're doing shadow work as we
mentioned there are sort of multiple
aspects to it so some of it is some of
this golden shadow retrieval stuff where
you're going back and you're pulling out
aspects and you're doing an aspect shift
on them to recognize that they are not
necessarily bad to begin with or that
there was no reason to abandon them
right that can include things from your
childhood but also just traits that you
chose one path over the other because of
emotional reasons or associated whatever
your reasons were and you go back and
reassess those things oh wait maybe
actually it's not so bad and and I can
have that back or maybe I didn't need to
throw that away so the golden shadow
stuff when we're talking about sort of
deep dark personal shadows stuff and
collective shadow stuff well then it's
the 2:00 in the morning confrontation
with yourself it's looking at yourself
in the mirror and recognizing oh I've
been a right the problem with that
is if you don't have sort of experience
and control and balance that's very easy
for that to turn into self flagellation
depression right you're in implode right
right so you know I don't know that
there is you know a one-size-fits-all
answer that you have no no I didn't
think you were right but what I mean is
you know where the self compassion come
in judiciously right it's applied where
it needs to be applied and when I say
judiciously I mean like there is there
is a judgement so lots of discernment is
needed that's right yeah that's right
and frankly a lot of it as most things
is sort of trial and error this is why I
say that moving outside of your comfort
zone is almost unavoidable
but this is again where I mean this is
where tradition can help because if
tradition can set up banks of
constraints so the variation on our
trial and error sure doesn't take so
long and he paul banach later said
something I thought I really liked he
said you know your culture is good if
it's got resources so that you can
acquire wisdom through the culture
faster than you possibly could on your
own yes yeah I think that's an excellent
recommendation yeah I agree it's
interesting it seems to me that young
often appeals to kind of lone wolf
alchemists but people who really want to
do the spiritual project all on their
own right and there is obviously some
community stuff around it I mean I I
belong to some communities around it but
but the notion of alchemy as a kind of
model for how the stuff works is that
you are working in solitaire and encode
there is a kind of an obscure artist but
also this heroic yeah almost Faustian
kind of approach to it where you're
coming at it all on your own and you
know that certainly wasn't the case sort
of with early people around you that was
an intense and lively community of
discussion well young that also had a
committee at core bad right that's right
and right arrows those arrows lectures
but other analysts so I agree I mean you
know you want the stuff framed inside
wisdom traditions and even if you're you
know to whatever extent you are within
an operating tradition that's good
also you know despite lousy saying that
you know books of the leaves and scum of
dead men there's a lot to be you know
gained from the wisdom traditions that
we've accumulated in the last you know
seven thousand years for sure right so
drawing that stuff in often allows you
to take a certain amount of perspective
that can give you some guidance where
you might not otherwise have it to know
where to put the boundaries but even
still you're bound to overstep because
it's the nature of exploring the space
that sometimes you're going to put your
foot someplace that hurts and so in
those cases if it if you're on the edge
of exploding sometimes right a bit of
self compassion
necessary sometimes what I advise my
clients to do if they're going through
something really hard that's in this
area it's like tell them to move the
line of their free will around so what I
mean by this is like try to shift
yourself around from a state of feeling
like right trying to feel as though you
exist in a state of agency and free will
and your banking choices
right but occasionally to move over into
a state of determinism and we do this
anyway to take away pain we say well it
couldn't be any different
yes it is what it is yeah right we say
you know like well I don't would I have
made different choices like all of these
things are ways of pushing ourselves
into a more deterministic framework
because it removes a certain amount of
the pain and guilt of personal
responsibility but then of course the
problem with that is that then we feel
like we have no agency and no control
right right so then we swing the other
way but then we have is a very flight
there's gap right exactly
and so moving around in that space and
especially moving you know if you feel
yourself being really stuck in
experiencing a lot of pain moving around
in that space is often part and parcel
of that and so self compassion it's like
to the extent that the slider moves
towards determinism you can create
yourself more and more self self
compassion right because it wasn't this
is what as you move the other way you're
gonna rain into so complain that's right
that's very helpful Anderson let's go
yeah yeah so this is a question from
Danielle of Posse how does the breakdown
of the nomological order relate to the
current world who you perspective clash
of economy and ecology or perhaps even
Nomos and logos in another sense given
the two worlds problem I think he's
referring there to the axial age
mythology that I criticized in you know
in and awakening the meat from the
meaning crisis with a useful geometric
metaphor of the no more logical order be
orthogonal maximal contrast rather than
bipolar maximal conflict Wow okay that
was a lot of theoretical moves in a
short space yeah I was impressed by that
was cool okay so so sorry let me take
this to room you only do you want to
read it again yeah yeah go through it
maybe I can address it and I kind of
point by point yeah that's right yeah
I'm of anomalous order relate to the
current world
perspective clash of economy and ecology
so he's he's saying radically but though
we've lost the the Noma logic order for
reasons articulated or eliminating for
the meeting crisis but we still do have
these opponent opposing opposites right
like the economy and the ecology or
perhaps even I almost or logos well I
mean the first thing I would say is of
course that the dichotomy between
economy and ecology is is stupid
right if that's a bad it's a bad move
the idea that those things are opposed
is a very poor conceptualizing the
question all right so second the
question criticising our culture right
when so when we have that split between
ecology and economy I mean I guess we
could say that they both start with the
Eco don't they like what basis could the
economy possibly have except in ecology
what what meaning would have at some
level we have to admit that the basis of
economics and of the moving around of
value has to have some grounding in the
productive capacity of the planet to
make a life and if it's not that then I
don't get it we just move and gold
around on the moon you know so but it
actually right traditional economics and
this isn't a criticism of economics just
of the way that it implements sometimes
sort of treats it that way
economics exists in a space of sort of
infinite growth right and infinite
growth is not is not a thing in the
world it's certainly not a thing within
a finite ecological system but that's
where we actually live you know likewise
as we've moved to a more abstract and
notional ideas within economics that has
value because those things can zip
around right like as efforts we can
manipulate them we can twist them we can
derive things we can write we can do all
kinds of fascinating things with this
sort of high abstract conceptual
material but the further we remove it
from food the further we go from having
a sense of what economics is supposed to
be talking about which is the movement
of value and value at the end of the day
has to be about sort of you know
sustaining human life at least that's me
I mean maybe I'm
green on this okay no I think that's
fine the second part of the question
that you wanted to address was in
another sense given the two worlds
problem would a useful geometric
metaphor of the numa logical order be
orthogonal maximal contrast rather than
bipolar maximal conflict that so he's
trying to say is there a way that we
could perhaps restructure yeah the the
cultural cognitive grammar so that we
move out of this oppositional mode which
is in alignment with yeah basically what
you just said yeah um
yes but not I think I would have to
think about that more deeply the whole
key question yeah it's neat it's an e
it's a neat question so I like the set
of moves I would have to sit and think
about it I think maybe at length that's
that's a tough one to do off the top my
head intuitively it seems like the
answer is yes but I always want to check
intuition against rational procedure
well the part of the difficult we were
facing and this is no criticism of
Daniel is he's proposing a metaphor for
what you know working out what aspects
of the metaphor we're supposed to be
picking up a little requires some
community discussion right yeah yeah I
mean yeah my gut says yes and that's
cool like works for me but you know
first you have the intuition of the
insight and then you sit down and do the
hard work of checking you proof right
okay so yeah so I'd have to think about
but that's a cool idea I would encourage
you to like expand and articulate that
idea okay please do so all right we're
gonna shift to some live questions a
couple right so this is from cuase to
tour how do we know what kind of therapy
might be useful for us specifically oh
that's a good one okay well so there's a
few different answers I could give to
that question one is I mean like most
therapists I think these days I tend to
have an eclectic standpoint I don't is
it eclectic or integrative that's it
that's a matter of you know is it is it
self-care or self hacking you know so
well there's a philosophic there is a
philosophical difference okay so it is
integrative but as you know I hold my
integrations lightly I don't force an
integration where I
don't think that it sort of do right so
I probably I'm an eclectic properly
speaking but I mean you know making
strong intellectual and personal efforts
to integrate things so I just haven't
succeeded in doing it yet and actually
maybe I should touch on that I haven't
succeeded in doing it yet for some
important reasons right like a thing
that I bring up with my students but
also with my colleagues regularly is
there's a sort of running set of battles
about the theoretical basis of therapy
of psychotherapy right right and so if
you consider something like CBT right
the core idea on CBT right one of the
core ideas comes out of Buddhism and
stoicism and it's the thought comes
first so if you control the thought and
there is a circularity to it but the
thought comes first you control the
thought you control the feeling well
EFT which was a mode that I trained in
has precisely the opposite it's none of
the feeling comes first and the actual
answer to this question drumroll please
is we don't know because we don't know
how it works yet yeah we don't we know
you won't have evidence for both we've
evidence both lots of therapies in
different modes perform approximately
equally well right and these are report
the single best predictor so that's the
thing we have a kind of pre post
blackbox right assessment model around
psychotherapeutic efficacy that shows
that yeah there are definitely some
factors that are important rapport
accounts for depending on the study you
look at between 50 and 70 percent which
is a huge is huge yeah it's huge I mean
if you and if you think about it that
way the you know the question you know
what therapy is good for you is know
what therapists yeah that's what it's
gonna say doesn't that change the
question and you should shop around yeah
you should shop around like any
relationship and it is a relationship
it's a human relationship it's a
relationship of psychological intimacy
yeah that's right I mean even more so
like I would encourage people to shop
around for the doctor you know don't
necessarily go to the first doctor go to
a doctor that you feel that you have a
good working relationship with and we
don't almost have that option but right
likewise even more so with therapy like
see one and see how you hit it off like
do you have a good working relationship
it's possibly your complex
they're gonna interlock in a way that's
gonna make the work almost impossible
but also just it might not be your style
so since rapport accounts for so much of
the effect the question you know what
therapist are you looking for and of
course with all things you know you know
it's like a normal distribution so you
want to try to find one that you think
is good and one that you think can keep
up with your concerns right one that has
the training that you want is one and so
forth above and beyond that I think some
of it's a matter of taste and some of
it's a matter of what issues you're
working on so if you are doing things
like CBT for instance I think of as a
terrific tool right it's a tool and it's
good for certain kinds of things if what
people are experiencing is like an
onslaught of negative thoughts they
can't control CBT can be very effective
and it's worth learning anyway so I mean
it's a terrific tool to learn if on the
other hand what they're having is you
know a set of deep unresolved issues
right around say you know an absent
parent or something right but an absent
might mean dead and it might mean
inaccessible and it mean missing and it
might be emotionally distant and right
well there are techniques for that like
there's the empty chair technique which
is for unfinished business so
emotionally focused therapy users are
using it borås it from just all to come
at it at all but yeah so EFT might be
what you're looking for in that context
likewise if what you're looking to do is
sort of deep meaning based work about
the narrative arc of your life what it
means to be you well then you're not
doing CBT for the most part now you're
doing something depth and when you look
at the profiles of these therapies yeah
they perform approximately as well but a
few years ago it was Sweden switched
over their healthcare system I should
really check this reference but switched
over the healthcare system entirely to
CBT they went all in on CBT they were
like that's what we offer without for
CBT and in some ways it was kind of a
disaster right and but interestingly
what they did after that was tracked the
relative relative efficacy of CBT
against depth right again sort of
psychodynamic depth second
peas and you know psychodynamic deb
psychotherapies have taken a beating
because CBT has managed to sort of
establish itself as the empirical the
evidence base the evidence-based therapy
but actually what you see in the profile
in the study is that CBT has a strong
initial response but often that efficacy
and usefulness falls over time yeah
whereas depth tends to build over time
yeah so one one is I mean you'd expect
it one is more cognitive intervention
the other is more existential yeah so
you know the general answer I would give
as a collective integrationist is do
both again you want a variety of tools
it sort of depends what you're working
on but you always want to be working
with a variety of tools because they're
going to tend to balance each other off
all of you yeah an ecology you know
there's no such thing as a free lunch
but if you put enough discount items
into the basket yeah right at least they
balance each other out that was a weird
mixed metaphor but I like it okay here's
here's one from Alex Levy yeah what is
the best way to understand Jung's
archetypes
what's the best way to understand them
well what might be helpful to I mean
let's rule out some popular alternatives
that might be misleading right as a way
of zeroing in rather than trying to get
sort of an a priori definition okay so
one thing that I would stay away from is
trying to essentialize them right people
really want the list then want the list
in the map right so they want a fixed
map that has fixed structures and they
want a fixed Lix list with fixed
properties sort of a cast of characters
at the beginning of the drama
yeah even more than that they want
something that's really structural right
so it's like what what's this and what's
it do and it reminds me a little bit
actually a functional localization in
neuroscience oh right right right right
right because like we really want the
brain to be a map of Europe and it's
like oh Lichtenstein is where you do
your language process and of course the
work of Michael Anderson has
radically undermining that with them
yeah massive redeployment but also
connection networks and me you know the
whole thing is much much messier plus
they're all your brain cells are all
squirming around in there yeah but
anyway so you know people want to fix
the map and they want a fixed cast and
you should abandon both of those ideas
the the nature of the thing is more like
a concept and concepts of blurry
boundaries and they contain each other
they can swallow each other they can
have relationships with each other that
are more complex than sort of hard
boundaries
it's very rare outside of pure math and
maybe fundamental physics to be able to
get like a concept that you can nail
down to an Aristotelian list with an
essence right so are they kind of like a
big continuing family resemblance thing
yeah I think so so that's one thing is
that you sort of want to move away from
trying to nail them down in that sense
now you can get a really interesting
sense of archetypal material by I mean
there's a reason that you only focused
on myth and that primarily actually von
Franz his follower got really in a fairy
tale fairy tale is really interesting in
part because as I say fairy tales don't
contain psychologies they are
psychologies the characters and fairy
tales don't they don't have psychology
the are psychology and what I mean is
like you know there once was a
woodcutter and he lived in the woods and
there was a wolf you don't get a lot of
interior tea yeah but what you get is
this sense of the the typological past
interacting in certain ways and being
able to do analysis on that - trying to
drill into their psychology you know
what I mean I think not getting
homunculus with them this is for
instance why I have deep beef with Shrek
and wicked
what's the other one the Angelina Jolie
one remotely so the lip Maleficent yeah
with a sense costume looks great but
it's like please stop muddying this
stuff up you're gonna gonna mangle kids
first they need nice clean categories to
move this stuff around anyway um okay so
you can do interesting work now if you
just dive in and start reading that
stuff it's not that helpful you would
want to do that with an eye to reading
some of the analysts who have done that
work and certainly loads and loads of
analytical work unpacking that stuff I
mean that's the bread and butter of sort
of mid-century
this means a theological question yeah
because if they're vacant Tinian like
games yeah yeah like it's how would any
claim be open to dis confirmation right
well okay so the thing is that then
right that's about making general
investigation of why why are you doing
this well ultimately speaking what you
want to do of course is learn how to
pick up phenomenological markers in your
experience mmm right because that's what
this game is really about so does it
shift from being a theoretical account
more to being like a path of training
and transformation yeah yeah totally yes
that that's why you know it's easy to
get stuck if you're interested in
Jungian psychology and just doing like
endless and I like doing this right and
analyses of films and books and comics
and novels and fairy tales right and
that's fine you can get really
interesting stuff out of that but if
you're not then re grounding that
experience of mythology or fairy tale or
story in that high abstract sense if
you're not regrinding in the lived
experiences and you're missing the point
so you compare it's a fair region system
I just want to make sure I get the
empirical confirmation is in the degree
to which it facilitates sort of
long-term transformation that's right
that's right so I mean you know you can
think of it experimentally right that
you're like okay well maybe I should
interact with it this way based on that
and then you see the results and of
course it's the kind of anecdote driven
you know on on the ground and in the mud
sort of experiment that our lives are
composed of right where you don't
typically get nice clean test conditions
hold rules and stuff but but there's no
that we do you know sort of run little
experiments in our lives well that's
what the Bayesian proposal is right
totally so so you know so that is the
sense in which you get it sort of as a
lived experience and so all of the
reading that you're doing around it is
about trying to pick up the the
structural phenomenological markers that
will enable you to start recognizing
these things and then applying the
techniques so this means there's deep
truth to this claim that some people
made in the comment we to our last video
like if you haven't gone through Jungian
analysis and there's a deep sense in
which you're not really understanding it
because if the normative standard is the
degree to which it's being implemented
in transformation yeah then you're
really not applying the appropriate
normative standard which means you can't
be appropriately understanding it well
look I wouldn't want to go too strong on
that ok why not cuz I'd like that
argument ok so I wouldn't want to go too
strong on that because in many ways
because people already interact with
this material in a sort of a naive way I
mean naive like they're they are unaware
of Jungian material but they interact
with the structures that are being
described in a kind of any way right so
being through Union analysis are going
through Union analysis right it brings a
particular focus and language to it that
helped shape it it's like any other
community of practice you learn what
things are called
but it's all at the point look my point
is you know it's a community of
practices that we establish our
normative standards yeah and if you
don't have that and if that community is
aren't you gonna fall into inevitable
issues of autodidactic bias and all
kinds of things when you're working with
this kind of you know it's as you argued
it's not really tightly conceptually
constrained right yeah I suppose so
I mean if you just launched in if you
just sat down what the collective works
and read them end-to-end and attempted
to implement in that way could you yes
sort of I think you could write you you
could take the kind of it would be a
very uphill battle right and if there's
a part of you that sort of enjoys that
you know like the alchemical struggle of
working through the great work and your
own time and lots of people do I mean
you know I'm not the only person in the
world I think who does a certain amount
of like self development semi
recreationally right right and there's a
weird line right you sort of get you
become increasingly interested in your
own pain and dysfunction not hopefully
in a narcissistic way but rather as just
like oh like I'm doing the work I'm
doing the work and it just becomes part
of your day-to-day is being part of a
community of practice and going through
it and going through the established
stuff like is that important of course
but I don't think that existing union
practice is the last word in doing some
kind of archetypal or depth work I see
and so like people could be for example
within a religious community and
accessing this material yeah yeah and I
think that's a good one so so I wrote a
paper a bunch of years ago for you
although I think maybe Leo read it where
I was talking about some Vajrayana
Tibetan Buddhism and specifically
talking about practices in Tibetan
Buddhism that really interests me where
you use a combination of ritual and
meditation and prayer to visualize a
artificial spirit or tutelary deity into
a parent existence and autonomy okay so
you're conjuring like a ghost or a
spirit in a sense right but it should
have a parent autonomy it should be so
solid and seemingly independent of you
and then as soon as you're done
well you the idea is you dissolve it
back into the pure light and in so doing
you're giving yourself a direct
experience of the fact that like the
imaginal space right sort of sort of
creates reality within that system and
whatever when you're doing that kind of
stuff I mean the the connections between
you me and psychology and Tibetan
Buddhism are all over the place is a
very Union kind of system it's all like
gods that are very archetypal ii driven
heavily symbolic right and using
techniques that you know in a lot of
other forms of Buddhism would be sort of
you know slightly eyebrow-raising
and yet
you know they're doing all this stuff
and there's no mention of young they're
just working with archetypal energies
and materials I get that so yeah no
that's a good okay that's a good and
actually if on the note of Tibetan
Buddhism and and shadow right it's just
cuz I think this is sort of an
interesting anecdote I'm really
interested in this this figure so we
tend to think of Tibetan Buddhism and
the Dalai Lama etc is having sort of no
shadow alright that's a guy who does not
seem to cast a shadow and they have
obviously a very good reputation and
they've been quite hard done by and like
no question right however there is a a
group a sacked in Tibetan Buddhism that
has been excommunicated by the Dalai
Lama and they're a group that deals with
an entity called a door Josh algodón
right and or Shoshanna ban is like the
Darth Vader of the Bodhisattvas right so
there is an ongoing argument right the
the Dalai Lama pushed these guys out
because he basically said your demon
worshippers and you're out this entity
that you worship and communicate with
and so on and so forth is bad news and
he should be gone and their response is
you are a bigot and you're pushing us
out you just don't understand the symbol
see when he's drinking from the Goblet
of blood what he's really doing is
ingesting right the ruby red light of
compassion and when he's chopping the
heads off of his enemies he's slaying
ignorant sir right there's this symbolic
recontextualization where they're
arguing about the hermeneutics right and
and the kind of exegetical qualities
around the symbol but but that's that's
a pure shadow yeah right there so in a
sense right that's some collective
shadow stuff going on are they in or are
they out and the question of doors yoga
Dan for them you know you could easily
interpret with a union lens but you
don't need one
Isis airily right you've made that case
that fair no I think that's - yeah yeah
I
I think my argument holds but what what
you're saying is it it's the the the
point I was making about sort of being
within a community of transformative
practice doesn't have to be exhaustively
applied to just the Union community
that's right I mean you know in Paul's
point that you want to be within a
culture that facilitates yeah right that
you'reyou're the self appropriation of
your own development and and wisdom yeah
of course right you nobody wants to be
in the culture that tries to put its
boot on you know wisdom yeah
and and obviously that's helpful but I
don't think that the Union community
sort of super specifically I don't know
that's a tough question
you know yeah so we've come to the end
of our time and I think people for
joining the bonus Q&A there was lots of
great questions and some fantastic
answers from you Anderson we're going to
be doing our regular Q&A with me on the
third Friday of the month which is the
21st of this month again thank you
always to my patrons for making this
possible if they can great questions
Oh excellent questions and you can
support my work on the meaning crisis
patreon.com slash john dot for fakey so
thank you very much Anderson and thank
you all for your questions and for your
attendance