did I have a very special guest his name
is Arnie Rubenstein and he's the CEO of
rites of passage an organization that
has provided workshops rites of passage
ceremonies for over a hundred thousand
people worldwide in rnase 30 years
experience as an emergency room doctor a
mentor speaker a workshop facilitator
he's helped countless people make this
transition from childhood to adulthood
this marking of a transition this
ceremony to acknowledge the different
life stages seems to me of vital
importance and maybe even not only
life-saving with civilization saving RNA
builds community as he puts it and wants
to acknowledge the growth of the human
being through all the different stages
of life which he describes as a ladder
but anyway I'll let him let him speak
for himself
he's coming to Denmark for our rites of
passage as leadership training program
for men and women from the 12th to the
15th of October then again from the 15th
of the 18th of October making of men
camp for 13 to 18 year old boys and
their fathers so I'm going to meet him
at the European men's gathering from the
12th to the 15th of September and I'm
very much looking forward to that and
the last thing is at the end of this I'm
going to attach a video which describes
some of his recent work with Aboriginal
communities so he's helped to facilitate
the first race of passage for the blue
chala people in over 200 years
and I don't cry very much but I watched
this very short video and I will it it
made me burst into tears instantly it
was it was so very touching
and it seemed that what he's doing and
is so incredibly important so without
further ado
well my name's Anna Rubenstein I am the
CEO of the rites of passage Institute I
actually started out as a doctor in
family medicine and then I did 20 years
of emergency medicine and one of the
things I saw was what I call the
over-representation of teenagers how
many boys and girls were ending up in
emergency for yeah basically stupid
reasons which I can talk about and as a
result of some of my own things in life
I started getting involved in some men's
work about 25 years ago and I was
astonished to find that all the men
basically had the same problems and we
said wow you know imagine if they'd been
something for us when we were teenagers
our lives could have been very different
well then as a result of that workshop
we ran a men and boys father-son camp oh
this is 1994 and it was just astounding
we had three days out in the bush with
28 men and boys sharing stories and
letting the boys ask questions and doing
some really fun stuff and you know
something extraordinary happened and
then I started exploring rites of
passage and discovered that all over the
world communities indigenous communities
would run a rite of passage for their
boys and girls basically when they
reached puberty between knowledge the
fact that they were becoming young men
and women and that all of these
communities used the same elements to
run these rites of passage they ordered
the same things in different ways
according to where they were but the
elements were always the same so then we
started running some rites of passage
once a year and I was still working as a
doctor and I just saw that these
programs were changing people's lives
and I actually became increasingly
frustrated with medicine for
lots of reasons and more and more
interested in rites of passage and their
potential impact and as these things do
it just progressively took over my life
to the point where we've now helped set
up programs in probably about 80 to 100
places in Australia including multiple
schools and more than 20 countries
globally we've had over 150,000 people
through our programs we've got lots of
big projects having a lot of which has
been in the last few years I think we
thought the the increasing influence of
technology people are looking for and
asking the question around what's real
mm-hm and also what's happened to my
children
why has my beautiful 12 year old 13 year
old son disappeared into his room and
and I'm addicted to gaming and why is my
teenage daughter walking around the
house with her phone this far from her
face the whole time and who are they and
so a lot of people coming into our world
work and it's it's you know it's an
exciting time uh-huh so you mentioned
some you know some of the issues that
young people have for teenagers
etc and and you mentioned technology can
you expand a little bit on that what are
what are the the biggest struggles that
young people have today and and what
what is this you know existential crisis
that young people have meet I've heard a
bit called a meaning crisis like
and-and-and why they're they're so
attracted to technology and you know
different kinds of addiction and all the
various problems that young people have
today yeah well I think that young
people have all the problems that
they've had for a long time with now the
addition of Technology so this the
problems that have been there for a long
time are around transitioning from child
to adult which is a massive change and
with that comes a question of Who am I
what's my identity what's my purpose in
this life where do I get the wisdom and
the
and the skills to navigate what's going
on how do I have healthy relationships
now all of those things you know
sexuality major major questions for any
teenager and then on top of that we now
have the additional problem of
Technology which is basically a drug
it's a highly addictive well-thought-out
substance and what we see is that the
the children the teenagers who are doing
well they all have a computer in a
mobile phone and that's a great addition
to their lives and they're very useful
tool but the ones who are struggling and
have self-esteem issues just
disappearing into their computers and
their phones and the actual thing that's
missing is something to create this
clear demarcation between your time as a
child where your main thought is about
yourself it's a very egocentric period
as it's supposed to be you know being
the center of the universe and everybody
else looking after you which is very
different from healthy adult psychology
which is understanding that we're part
of a community and and my work started
with boys and you know we actually wrote
a model it's been boy psychology or boy
behavior and healthy adult man behavior
but also it seems like there's there's
there's you know I think Warren Farrell
called it a boy boy crisis or something
like this the difficulty of
transitioning into being an adult and
and and I guess rights you do rites of
passage for that and so one of my
questions was you know how how this
rites of passage
how what would this look like and how it
would be different than let's say a
traditional rites of passage and what is
it boys what's why boys and men and
what's why we we saw why is this so
important well first of all I agree
there's a boy crosses but I just have to
say there's also a girl crisis and
there's an elder crisis yeah and there's
a global so the next
quite a few crisis points going on and I
actually think they're all interrelated
and the thing about boys is you know
that they are supposed to be boys and
children when they're children that's
fantastic and in the main we do pretty
good with our children but unless we
create a transition and something to
mark the fact that they're becoming men
the danger is that they remain in boy
behavior and boy thinking and that's a
major problem if they then get to become
something like a global leader or a head
of a business you know or anything or
even a father and the indigenous
community directly noised that a shift
had to happen and so they would take the
boys away and they would share stories
as a way of passing on wisdom and
knowledge they would create challenges
they would work to make a vision for the
future for the for the young and they
would also identify that each child each
boy is different and they believe these
boy had a spirit and so a critical part
of the rite of passage was to recognize
the spirit or the unique gifts and
talents of each boy
and then that boy would then bring those
those gifts to the community he is
nothing so employs a lot of a meaning
they're looking for purpose and that's a
there's a big struggle for them to find
that and this idea around that boy
behaviors what's all about me and I want
power and I can never be wrong and I
want a mother you know there's a lot of
means still running around who just want
power can never be wrong and what I'm
you know don't take responsibility for
their actions and want a mother yeah and
you know there's an argument that many
of our world leaders are still
functioning on boy psychology and that's
a big problem
whereas in healthy man psychology we
understand we're part of a community we
support others where we take
responsibility and we're not looking for
a mother we're actually looking for
genuine relationship with the feminine
and when we look at all the issues
happening with me too and you know
that's that's boy behavior patriarchy is
not the problem
patriarchy is not a problem it's boy
behavior which is a problem it's man in
boys you know it's it's so it's boys in
men's bodies and so so we believe it's
still possible to create a healthy rite
of passage today we just need to know
what we're doing so they don't become
men because they did they remain too
attached to the mother in some sense and
and they're not able to inspire home or
leave this comfort of a domestic world
in and yet go into the wilderness yeah
that's part of it I mean inna an
indigenous community at 13 14 the boy
would be taken away from his mother and
some of them would not be allowed to
talk to their mothers for three years
and and and interestingly we see a lot
of teenage boys who retreat into their
bedrooms and basically don't talk to
their mothers for three years but you
know they would be formally taken away
and and it would be recognised as to
what was going on and you know they
would then be mentored by the men and
the mothers would move to a new stage in
life and would the social structure of
the community would remain healthy
whereas what happens now is the boys
stay in the house they become monsters
just eating everything that they can and
and often it quite abusive to their
mothers the mothers are beside
themselves and don't know what to do
and also this attachment remains the
average age that a boy in Australia
leaves home is 28 Wow and you know
that's just extraordinary and their
mothers are still looking after them
cooking for them washing for them and it
you know it's very possibly remaining a
boy this explains why they can't have
our relationships I imagine I mean
that's right they can't go and have a
relationship with a woman because
they're they're still in relationship
with their mother that's right yeah
and then they're looking for a
substitute mother and then and then the
war starts between the man's woman and
his mother as to who's the most
important woman in his life and it's
just it just doesn't go well yeah and it
seems that the rights of money young
people experience today is almost
unconscious like they have to suffer a
lot in order to become a man it seems
like this the rites of passage might
exist but as it exists not it's not a
conscious thing it just know they're
soft they're creating their own they're
creating their own this is the problem
that's why I saw an emergency you know
boys you know sometimes killing
themselves or coming close on tire in
cars on drugs in fights you know in all
these sorts of things or you see it in
the in the in the armed forces where
they create their own rites of passage
and they haze each other or in
fraternities universities or in gangs so
rites are passing they're actually a
fundamental part of life the transition
from one stage in life to the next will
happen the question is whether it will
be facilitated and happen in a healthy
way which involves elders or whether
it's created by the peers and when it's
a peer created rite of passage it
becomes about power and abuse time again
this is a gang yeah all of that right
mm-hmm
so how does that differ for it for girls
maybe you could talk about girls for a
minute because well you know let's go
through their rites of passage as well
but a healthy girls rite of passage is
facilitated by older women and is about
honoring the the stages that she's going
through and the fact that she's becoming
you know a woman and a fertile woman and
about getting her to learn to trust her
inner knowing and in a voice and to
trust and support the other women in her
community all of that and when it
doesn't happen the girls don't trust
each other they're actually in
competition it becomes all about body
image
and I you know regularly saw girls who
were creating their own rights of
passage by getting drunk and you know
losing their virginity in a terrible way
or something like that and then coming
into the emergency department where I
was working and so you know teen
pregnancy all of these things become
their right of passage becomes the
moment where they grow up and shift from
being a girl to a woman so instead of it
being a community celebration it becomes
an individual moment of shame right and
many women spend the rest of their lives
on some level having to deal with that
could we generalize and say that men
often you know engage in antisocial
behavior and women it's often social
pathology like well I look at it
slightly I looked at it yes I guess the
way I saw it is that men will go out
there and do the stupidest thing
possible which I guess is antisocial
behavior whereas girls will tend to
internalize excuse me girls will tend to
internalize and then get into a very
unfortunate or difficult situation right
it's almost self-harm or something like
that correct it was a much more like
it's Oh calm eating disorders not all of
those things yeah and I've heard that
suicide for young girls this is like
increasing because of social network and
Instagram and all of that yeah yeah it
is definitely social media is having a
you know very negative effect and the
whole thing for me is you know we can
spend the whole podcast talking about
the problems but they're well documented
I think we have a tremendous opportunity
in setting up healthy contemporary rites
of passage which is what we've been
doing for 25 years now and we see the
life-changing impact this has on
everybody who attends so I saw the video
you sent me where you were working with
Aboriginal people
maybe I'm from Canada and and of course
I've been hearing about Aboriginal
issues my whole life so I'd love to hear
you talk about that and sure well like
you know Canada North America many other
countries the indigenous population in
Australia has been decimated has lost a
lot of its culture and in most areas the
rites of passage have been were banned
for you know nearly 200 years and more
and more the indigenous communities are
recognizing that their culture and and
creating something for their children is
critical and 18 months ago I was
approached by an Aboriginal elder who
from the bachelor mode and he said to me
we're very worried about our boys
because they're running amuck and
there's no right of passage there's
nothing to bring them into manhood and
and set up a mentoring system and all of
that which we would like to do but it
hasn't happened here for 200 years and
we don't know how to do it anymore
can you help us which was familiar was a
massive request and very humbling and so
we agreed to do that
so together using our right of passage
the rite of passage framework that we'd
identified and as much culture as we
could find from their community we ran a
rite of passage last year which was the
first rite of passage for bachelor boys
on Bachelor land in two hundred years
and maybe we could put a link up here on
the website yeah we'll do that reset
mm-hmm it was very beautiful video and
you could almost see these young boys
come to life oh it's extraordinary you
know these boys are living in the city
they're struggling a lot of them are
living with their grandparents because
bad things have happened with their
parents and they they arrive on the can
and they're often very resistant and
difficult and Dean's something happens
you know when they start hearing the
stories of the men when we go walking
out in the bush when we listen to them
when we talk to them about what they
want to do with their lives and what
they need to let go of if they're going
to become good men and then when we
recognize and honor the gifts and
talents and the genius and spirit that
we see in each of them it completely
changes their lives it's you know it's
the most powerful thing I've ever been
involved in well yeah III it's amazing
how encouraging encouraging it for it
for young people it's just a little bit
of encouragement it's just extraordinary
what that can do how that can empower a
young person it's like watering a plant
yeah it's a game-changer I mean we have
so many boys who look and girls I talk
mainly about boys but everything I say I
believe is relevant to girls so many of
our young who just don't recognize their
own gifts and feel like that there's
there's another way they have to be you
know they're sold through marketing that
they have to look a certain way act a
certain way wear certain clothes and if
all of those things don't come together
perfectly there's something wrong with
them you know the majority of our boys
and girls are walking around thinking
that there is something wrong with them
oh you know that's extruding the makeup
industry the makeup industry for girls
the cosmetics industry is not based on
highlighting their positive aspects it's
it's based on covering over there- right
no no the original meaning of makeup is
actually to highlight the beauty of a
person right that's what it should be
right rather than cover up yeah believe
parts of them or whatever it happens to
be and you know men used to wear a lot
of jewelry and it was about pride and it
was about you know you know the way we
you know wear costumes or whatever
of you know rather than it was been
about about you know image yeah having
stuff and so when these girls you know
having an opportunity once again to hear
the stories of older women and and and
share their own stories and then they're
told by their mothers or the older women
who are there about the things they see
in them the gifts they see they have the
view the the natural beauty and strength
that they have you these girls just
shine they they just they visibly grow
in front of you and they become proud
and the the theabout rights to passage
which is very interesting it's supposed
to be intergenerational so supposed to
be the elders with the the the young and
and the big issue from the young is they
don't feel like they're seen but when
you mix the young and the elders
together
the elders see the young they just do
yeah and you know a big issue with
elders is loneliness and lack of purpose
and when you put them together with the
young they get but you know their
loneliness doesn't become an issue and
that the purpose is there so you know we
know that there's an issue with our teen
our teenagers everywhere that's that's
well documented what we talk about less
is that there is as great an issue with
our elders yeah and the fact that those
two things are completely linked that's
that's so important isn't it I mean on
one level the elders you know you don't
really have a culture unless you have
elders right that's right and the
holders of the culture and they pass it
on to the young yeah and if they're just
if they're just sent out to pasture then
the whole society dies we need yeah we
need we need oh and also we need a
process we need to be able to go through
all the stages of life right
yeah that's right I look at it like
there's a staircase there's a staircase
and we're all on that staircase and the
idea is to keep moving gracefully and in
a healthy way up the staircase yeah and
what's interesting is that for a boy or
a girl to move from being a you know a
child to a young adult their mothers and
their fathers also also have to take a
step the mothers have to let go the
fathers have to stop controlling and
telling them what to do so the mothers
and the fathers also need to move
towards the next stage of their lives
well that's beauty and so the more but
sure that young people get the more the
more that the elders are free to be
themselves and you know develop their
spiritual lives or or whatever right is
that what you're saying that's right all
we're all supposed to be moving up that
staircase and and you know unfortunately
the a lot there's a lot of pressure for
everyone to try and stay down the
staircase and pretend they're young yeah
and you know there's a lot of shame
related to getting older especially
unfortunately for women and so you know
there's all this pressure to look young
and and older men who are still
competing and holding the young down as
opposed to really giving extra respect
to people because of the fact that
they're old I mean you see in
traditional cultures like Italy where
the the mother has a lot of power right
she's she's very important yeah of
course you know that the postmenopausal
women are very important you know on
some level yeah yeah this almost seems
like that we need to go back to our
origins in some way or our tribal or
tribal roots that we can understand a
lot yeah I mean your relationship the
original people can tell us that about
that well it's so interesting because at
the site you know we have this emergence
of artificial intelligence that is
coming there's no doubt it's coming and
technology is not going to become more
of an influence out you know and so is
not going to
unless of an influence it's going to
become more and and one of the biggest
questions that people have is is
technology and artificial intelligence
going to destroy us is it going to take
over
mm-hm and and I look at it and my
partner actually runs a global
artificial intelligence software company
and we talk about this a lot and and I
believe that actually what is gonna save
us and what's going to make the
difference as to whether or not
technology destroys humanity is whether
or whether we can actually really get in
touch with what it means to be human and
what it actually means to human is
passing through the stages of life and
recognizing them and creating rites of
passage because the core reason for a
rite of passage is not only to recognize
a person's age and stage in life it's
also about recognizing their spirit
their gifts their genius you know who
they are as an individual that's right
it's about the community so so it's
about sort of restoring community isn't
it is is artificial
are these new machines going to destroy
humanity and even further or are they
gonna allow us to self-organize into you
know creative types of credits of get
deeper communities yeah yeah so it
becomes about creating a modern and
appropriate rite of passage we can't go
back to creating aboriginal or African
or Papua New Guinean rites of passage
we're not gonna do that and it wouldn't
be appropriate but the concept of
celebrating and recognizing the
different stages in life is absolutely
as relevant today as it's ever been
so the rites of passage is I want to ask
you about what they look like you know
what do you actually do in your camps
yeah and also how that differs from
traditional rites of passage because I
think
rites of passage we're often very brutal
aren't they I mean even though they way
you talked about young guys and how
they're they can be very you know they
can have this violence may be potential
violence in them and and they want to
push the edges and and that kind of
thing so so what would you know how do
how do we how do we push people with
that without you know in a loving way
without destroying them or so in terms
of the brutality side of it that the
traditional rite of passage was created
in the way it was because a boy was
going to become a warrior or a hunter
and so they had to be able to deal with
the possibility of death or pain so the
majority of the rites of passage for
boys involved the boys being out of face
death and deal with pain the girls who
were going to become you know often you
know mothers and and and working thing
that you know as within the community a
lot of their rites of passage involved
endurance and working together as a
group today
our boys are not going to become hunters
and warriors it's more about we look at
it we say to the boys what sort of men
are you're going to become are you going
to be men who make the world a better
place and contribute positively or
you're going to be men who take from the
world and leave it you know in a poorest
state and you know also for women
there's a lot more potential now for
women to take positions of you know
power and authority and all sorts of
things and and you know we very much
believe that women should very much have
an opportunity to access their own inner
power and their inner warriors and that
so in terms of the rights of passage
today yes boys still need a way to
understand that they have strength and
power physically but it absolutely does
not and should not be
brutal and it should not be violent and
in fact that's the big thing for the
boys to learn to not be brutal and
violent in their power yeah and and and
to learn in the same way as the girls
would have to trust their their inner
voice and their inner knowing and to
support each other and and for the girls
too you know it's interesting to give
the girls a real opportunity to you know
to find their own inner power and and
you know very much now the rites of
passage whereas in the past was very
clear a boy became a man a girl became a
woman there are very different roles as
we know and we see more and more men and
you know men and women can do all roles
now and so the rites of passage that we
do have to reflect what's happening in
the community sure sure
but do you think there's still do you
think that this they're still I mean
they're still it's still important well
for example it's still important for us
to deal with pain and death he mentioned
pain and death right it's still
important for us to contemplate that and
think about that right but perhaps not
use use use to not create pain and death
or not use violence like like I would
say a masculine person would have to
know that he's capable of those those
things and not use them and that would
be real you know manhood so to speak yes
what you know a model of the difference
yeah completely
in a model of the difference between boy
and man behavior a boy can't stand with
his emotion so if a six year old boy
doesn't get what he wants
he'll have a temper tantrum he'll try
and hit his mother and he'll tell he
hates her and you're the worst mummy in
the world and you know all of those
things and that's okay in a six-year-old
boy but for a 30 year old man or a 40
year old man it's not appropriate
you know we're allowed to be
disappointed and we're allowed to be
angry but we're not allowed to do is
then transfer that on to others
physically verbally or emotionally
that's not okay and that's that is
something that has to be taught and you
know work through in in a right of
passage and when you talk about the
grief and loss one of the key elements
of a rite of passage always was using
stories as a way of passing on wisdom
and knowledge so on our programs we'll
sit around everyday hopefully around a
fire man boy man boy man boil on a
girl's program you know woman girl woman
go along and so you know the the men
will talk about the first day we'll say
all right tell us the story about when
you're a boy the age of these boys and
what was your life like and what was
your relationship like with your father
back right and so that's the transition
right it's a transmitting between father
and son which is which is so important
yeah and I think what you're lacking is
this transmission and that's what you're
trying to provide right absolutely
and often the most important message
that the boy will get won't come from
his own father's story it'll come from
hearing the story of another man
[Music]
sometimes Tommy's but when they hear
from many men that's really important
and and you spoke about grief and loss
one of the circles we'll have as we have
we get the older men to share stories of
their own experiences of grief and loss
and the boys get to hear that every man
goes through grief and loss and and
actually by the time they get to our
programs at 1415 a number of the boys
have also experienced grief and loss so
stories are a key part of a right kasi
choke so when you asked about what we
actually do we'll go away somewhere well
we'll write a passage involves creating
a separation of the person from their
everyday life in their normal community
and ideally into a container and so when
we go away we begin we get everyone to
hand in their watches and their mobile
phones and all technology and reading
material and we go into a container and
our container is the forest
and everyday we'll share stories and
we'll get the boys to do various
challenges which may involve spending
time on their own in a solo in the bush
thinking about you know what behaviors
they know they need to let go of and
they know they all know yeah and we get
the boys to create a vision for their
future about what sort of men they want
to be and we do this process the
honouring that I described where each of
the the boys or the young men is
individually honored in front of
everybody else by their fathers and a
number of older men who tell them what
they're proud of about them what they
love about them you know what gifts and
what genius and spirit they see in each
other and we build community and that
combination of building community
sharing stories doing challenges
creating a vision and being honored and
recognized absolutely changes these boys
lives and absolutely transforms and into
young men which doesn't mean that
they've got it all worked out and
everything's all done but they get to
the beginning of their journey as a
young man great yeah just getting to the
beginning is very important isn't it
correct and then hopefully they have
older men who will mentor them and watch
over them that's that's so wonderful
well I I just thought of another
question while you were talking and a
more personal question I have a daughter
she's 10 and you do a camp camp between
fathers and daughters and I think you do
a camp also between mothers and sons why
is that important and then you know how
can you help fathers and daughters
well the father-daughter relationship is
so important and so beautiful yeah and
we find that many men don't get a lot of
all sorts of reasons don't have a lot of
time with their daughters
one on one and the daughters now most of
them have mobile phones at a very young
age and it's just a weekend where it's
an opportunity with no technology but
the father and daughter to be out in the
forest to sleep together in a tent the
fathers get to share some stories with
the daughters about when they were young
and they were that age what they love
doing what they got in trouble for you
know they do some adventures together we
teach the girls had a lot of fire how to
put up a tent how to make some bread on
the fire you know whatever you know
stuff which they just love and and they
love being with their fathers they loved
it so much getting that one-on-one time
no mobile phones out in the bush with
their fathers they loved it and then at
the end and we do some parenting
strategies with the fathers so we take
them aside and we say listen you know
the relationship you have with your
daughter as she becomes a teenager is
critical and we don't want to see it
break down and we don't want you to see
that loss because she needs you she
really needs you and there are going to
be some challenges and and these are the
things that you can be doing now which
will really support that relationship
later on and the fathers are so
appreciative of that now there's even
some research that came out in Australia
which says that the better a father's
daughter a father and daughter
relationship is the stronger and healthy
it is that it is the older she is likely
to be when she loses her virginity so
the father provides a certain protection
for her of course and Trust and all of
those things in any and if she doesn't
have a strong relationship with her
father and she has that hunger for that
and she's likely to go looking for that
somewhere else I see um so a strong
healthy supportive relationship has all
sorts of impacts in many ways for girls
[Music]
we want to see all configurations
happening we want to see father
grandfather camps and yeah you know all
of the intergenerational work when you
get multiple generations together
incredible things happen but we have
decided until now to put our focus on
the young because we believe that the
changes we can make with young people
will impact them for the rest of their
lives but having said that as the rites
of passage Institute a big part of our
work now is training people so that we
can be supporting programs to be set up
for people of all ages well I know that
I'm a teacher and I often teach like 20
year old son
one of the things I find now one of the
chiasm time Dustin the question is like
who are your heroes who are your models
for life who are you and often they
don't have an answer it's like they're
they're they're adrift right so so so
yeah your your work seems it's so
important and linking you know like at
least young people should have heroes or
mentors or you know people they respect
modems of course role models all of that
and so they have they're looking up to
somebody yeah that's that
intergenerational thing they absolutely
need someone to look up to because if
they're adrift and not only adrift but
don't feel any connection anywhere then
they're just gonna think about
themselves and they're not going to care
about the act of their actions on others
which is very different from a healthy
community you know when I grew up I grew
up in a community and every Friday night
we used to go to my grandmother's for
dinner didn't matter what you're doing
if you had exams if you're working if
you're whatever Friday night you went to
your grandmother's for dinner and the
whole family was there and everybody
would be saying I how you been going
what are you been doing what's happening
how you going at school what do you want
to do with your life you know there was
a we really knew we were part of a
community yeah and when they're young
now don't have that that creates a
completely different way of looking at
life
you know fragmented atomized view of the
world and and it's amazing how easy in
many ways it is to build community just
by getting people in circle or whatever
to share their stories the first step in
building community is sharing stories
you know we do work in schools where we
group get groups of school kids and
we'll set them in you know ten in a
circle and they each have two minutes to
share their story and things that have
happened in their lives and these kids
who may have known each other for ten
years
just keep sharing for two or three
minutes learn things about each other
that had no idea about and you you see
the community building happening right
before your eyes right that's very
interesting so what is it about stories
that creates community white wire story
is so important because stories are
they're like a fluid thing and they're
our truth you know when I sweat someone
shares their story then I have a chance
to empathize and relate and connect and
that person becomes real and and and
good stories are associated with
vulnerability and there's more and more
coming out about how vulnerability is
really the key connection and when
everybody's being vulnerable and
connecting that's when you start to Kay
community and the best way to do that is
through stories because the story is
your your truth story is your truth
mm-hmm yeah and how you articulate the
world around you right how you you know
cuz you have all this you have this
chaotic chaotic like a world and then
and then a story as a way of
articulating that and making sense of it
and making meaning out of it yeah yeah
and and and I've said in ten thousand
story circles 10 million story circles
in my life and every time I am astounded
by what comes out of people and when
someone else cries I find myself crying
hmm because you know Rio and I'd feel
them in that moment I feel yeah I had a
similarity I don't cry that much but I
had similar experience when I watched
your video with the Aboriginal kids I
just broke down yeah it was just it was
so wonderful to see and it was like ah
this is what people's essential humanity
is is really about right this is okay
people are sort of lost and then
somebody somebody comes to them and and
shows them you know just a little bit
opens the door just a little bit and
then and then suddenly suddenly they
have meaning again in their life we had
a boy come on our camp last week because
we ran a second Aboriginal we ran the
same program for the second time we had
a boy come from a very difficult
situation at home and and he was
suicidal he was openly suicidal and and
we talked about future and he said I
don't think I'll get that I think I'll
be around for very long you know all of
that stuff and by the end of the camp 15
year old boy on the last day I heard him
talking with other boys and he and he
was talking about what he was going to
do on his 18th birthday and and a party
that was gonna have at his grandmother's
and a boat that he was gonna get to go
fishing and you know in in a five day
period we saw a boy move from having no
hope for the future to actually planning
and being excited about what he was
gonna do years down the track you know
now that boy is still gonna need a lot
of support and help and that boy is not
out of trouble yet but just the fact
that in five days he was able to shift
from someone who is in a very dark place
to actually being able to genuinely
visualize a future for himself big thing
I wrote a book called the making of men
which is half about parenting and how we
parent in a healthy way just doing
things like spending time one-on-one
with our children and turning off our
mobile phones things like when they make
a mistake or do something wrong that we
don't shame them and
separate the person from the behavior
and user there's a learning opportunity
things like practicing acknowledging
their gifts and the things they do well
so that was quite a lot of the first
half of the book and also talks about
the different boy and man behavior and
the second half was all about rites of
passage and how we can create them and
the elements of a rite of passage and
some stories from our own rites of
passage that we've run and it's actually
become a best-seller here in Australia
and so it's quite a lot around the world
yeah and if anybody's interested in
getting a copy and says that they've
heard about it on your podcast very
happy to give them a send them over a
copy for you know I'd love to read a
note I'll send you a copy but if anybody
once when we're happy to send them over
one for data note $10 Australian or
something what does it mean to be a
warrior and and what is this association
with war and violence maybe we talked
about this already a little bit but I'd
like to speak to that because one of the
things we say to the boys we actually
say what's the difference between a
soldier and a warrior hmm and they
identified quickly that soldiers are
told what to do follow orders basically
whereas a true warrior is discerning and
a true warrior does not use violence
unnecessarily and a true warrior you
know is about protecting their family
and their loved ones and all of those
sorts of things and this notion that
boys are naturally violent I don't agree
with that I think boys are actually
naturally loyal or toxic masculinity
this terrible idea that has been
surfacing in the culture that that says
that you know boys are sort of you know
made to be but are all potential rapists
or something like this which is terrible
I like to think that we're right yeah
well the beautiful thing about our work
is we get to see the special and to
bring out the loving
side of boys and we focus on that and we
find that when they are in a healthy
environment that supports them that they
are you know fabulous and and I think a
lot of boys are lost a lot of boys are
heavily influenced from what they see on
the internet and and the marketing
that's all around and we could be doing
it very differently and by yeah even
things like we talked about before
bringing in the influence of elders
grandparents uncles or you know that
idea we could really change what's going
on but we as adults have to lead by
example as well you know you can't just
lay all the boys are the problem because
boys actually learn from the behaviors
they see you know that's a big part of
it and you know I think we need to be
taking in you know we're recognizing the
problems and once again the whole meter
movement has exposed a lot of problems
amongst men and we need to we need to
acknowledge that and then we really need
to be looking at what are we going to do
about this so that we don't keep
perpetuating something you know that's
unhealthy and really be working and
looking at you know what is healthy
masculinity and and you can't have a
healthy masculinity in in isolation
it has to be healthy masculinity healthy
femininity and the two of them very much
you know intertwined and even
intertwined in each person okay it's
been I think it's been very very
wonderful I shouldn't say I think it has
been very very wonderful speaking to you
and hearing about what you do I I think
we're going to meet each other in
Denmark if you're coming to Denmark
right I'm coming to Denmark and we're
gonna be running rites of passage
leadership training for men and women
from the 12th to the 15th of October
mm-hmm
we'll be teaching people about the
framework of a rite of passage and how
they can use that in their families and
communities and even workplaces and then
straight after that from the 15th to the
18th of October we're going to run a
making of men camp for thirteen to
seventeen year old boys and their
fathers or a male mentor and that'll be
a tremendous opportunity to support a
group of boys and celebrate it and
acknowledge the fact that they are
becoming young men great okay so is
there anything else that you want to
tell our listeners about or that you
want to put forward well I hope that
people will really explore this idea of
a rite of passage and recognize that
it's not just for our children but that
each of us is somewhere on this you know
on a particular step on the staircase of
life and hopefully we can all be
thinking about what's the next step for
me and where do I want to move to and
what behaviors do I want to let go of
and you know what you know what exciting
things are in store for me you know so
for me personally I'm becoming an elder
I'm 55 and at some stage I'm going to
move into that phase of my life so how
do I move there well and what do I need
to let go of and how do I create a rite
of passage for that and this realization
that we're all growing all of the time
and and we're all part of you know the
same community and hopefully we can all
support each other to do that as well as
possible okay I think that's a great
place to end with thank you thank you so
so much for it for this it's been great
let Sun come up getting down now Gopi
you're naughty what do you come on the
east day you'd be there to meet him and
you say gallon go with Charlie it's a
good morning to our son this is
[Music]
[Music]
in Butler country you know the last
initiation was about 200 years ago this
process is essentially one of the most
important things a young man
could experience like people think it's
only 12 boys but if you look at it from
long a longitudinal side of it that's 12
generations and you're gonna change
young boys that come through this camp
[Music]
there's still the same people but
there's a difference to them now
by a powerful strong
spiritual
respective young men men to watch them
coming in and to lean into this process
and trust the process to hear the
stories of men from all different walks
of life well you you see men tell things
say things that they've never told
anybody before voice suddenly are able
to talk about sexuality in a
constructive way to talk about
addictions in a constructive way to be
able to talk about deep emotions and
loss and relationships and fun and all
those things that make life what it is
as that whole is the community they need
to understand that they are very very
important
and they are a gained a valued and loved
because only then can they progress as
responsible loving young men
you are a very special group of young
man I want you to remember that you were
the first in 200 years time and time
again I have seen that this work is
healing and and this work changes lives
this work saves families from this loss
of passage camp they'll have an
association with this country that
they'll never forget and you say we
gotta follow my loop then you are
then that way that's our country all
together one people same color when you
close your eyes I've rediscovered that
we have more in common than we have
indifference
changing a generation is changing one
person at a time it doesn't matter where
they are they'll be able to come back to
this place through multiple ways ruse
smells through feeling through memories
through dreams it's very special I've
always wanted to come home the bachelor
country
but I've never had the opportunity to
come here
[Music]
this work on so many levels is so
critical and for me I believe is that
the big thing missing at the moment and
we have an incredible opportunity to
bring it back I'm gonna be a better
person
a better person for you and for myself
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]