[Music]
this is the intuitive leadership mastery
podcast what would it take for you to
double your profits and half your stress
with your intuition
learn how with your host Michael light
[Music]
welcome back to the show I'm here with
Jordan green whole 20-year entrepreneur
Victor in many successes in business
crashes when it didn't work out because
you didn't perceive what was happening
in the world and we're gonna have
amazing conversation about how you can
perceive what's really going on at a
much deeper level when you're used to
and Jordan wrote a article that went
viral called situation assessment and
I've linked that in the show notes and I
really recommend reading it and
digesting it might take a few goats to
digest it cuz there's so much deep
information in there and we're gonna
talk about Jordans creative process and
how he uses into his intuition but how
he also uses rational mind to make that
more effective and also we're going to
look about if you're competing with
other businesses how do you get in there
OODA loop what that is and why it's
important and we're also going to look
up means and why those matter in your
business and if you aren't using names
in your business you are not going to
win in business in this century we're
also going to look at why fighting the
last war is a mistake in your business
and also that there are some cultural
Wars going on now that could totally
change the whole business environment
and affect what you need to do to
succeed right now so welcome Jordan no
thank you Michael it's a lot of stuff
we're talking about well we'll do our
best and you know what would it take to
couple all those things in depth as I
said earlier we're gonna take people
from the shallow end of the swing Paul
we we are gonna go down to the deeper
into the swimming pool we're gonna hope
that none of the listeners drown at the
deeper end but you know there are some
show no lifeboat belts there to save
them if they you know get a little lost
but I like to take people deep so let's
do that
great fun so you have some really
creative ideas but how on earth do you
come up with these amazing concepts that
you you have um you mentioned the
notions like of being able to talk about
the intuitive method and the analytical
and irrational method and I use both as
I mentioned to you earlier
I was I was raised and trained in the
analytical and math mathematical
rational method but I'm fundamentally
intuitive and it's only been in the past
decade or so that I've really been able
to hone and honor the intuitive channel
and so what is it happening for me is
there's a constant back-and-forth of
trying to figure out different ways and
techniques to allow the intuitive to
speak to be heard to emerge the way that
it does as you know it it's not a it's
never obvious is never straightforward
but then when it does to really be able
to sort of feel into what it's actually
happening and then what I do is I close
it with the set of principles and
concepts that I am constantly gathering
and refining through the rational
Channel and I should mention by the way
this notion of principles and concepts I
think is particularly useful because
principle is at a high enough level of
generality that you can then use it to
make sense of something that is coming
from the intuitive Channel I mean we
maybe we can talk about that and work on
chr√©tien a little bit but that's that's
how I do it and I find by the way that
one of the best ways for media to suss
out the things that are happening
intuitively is in dialogue that just
having a conversation with somebody or
just begin to bring things up and it
will surface it's almost a synchronicity
serendipity in the dialogue and then I'm
like okay there it is that's the thing
that it was us trying to make sense of
it just somehow sharing in words with
another consciousness helps clarify this
later so that might be talking with
another business friend about the ideas
you're getting from intuition it might
be writing it down in an article and
sharing it out with people could be
making a video and sharing it many
different ways to yet share and get
feedback and get greater clarity and
just by the act of having to share
what's come to you I think for me it
helps clarify the ideas in my own head
yeah that's exactly right and it is
you're right even creating a video with
the intention of sharing it like if you
create a video without the intention of
sharing it I don't think it works but if
even if you don't actually get it
broadly shared
very little feedback the intention of
sharing it just requires a level of
demeanor and attitude and a level of
discipline that helps clarify this
there's more subtle element so this is
both a practical strategy but it also
comes back to you know we want to hear
these messages and we get from our
intuition to improve our business and by
taking action you know whether it's
going to have a conversation or making a
video or whatever it somehow makes the
intuition pay attention more and give us
even more information whereas if we do
nothing and just sit on it it seems the
intuition almost shuts down and stops
giving us the information so much yeah
that's absolutely right you know you can
just extend that that you know in the
case of this article that you mentioned
you also get the benefit of the larger
collective intuition or the act of the
feelings of a lot of other people can
then actually help point you in areas
where your intuition may be screaming at
you but you then get the signal back so
I when I wrote this article I had no
sense or intent of more than a couple of
hundred people reading it maybe a
thousand at the outside but instead it
it went viral a hundred thousand people
or more have read it and as a
consequence one that told me that there
was something there there was more
intense than I had anticipated but also
then floated a lot more energy attention
back at me which changes the state of
what I can do in the world I love that
and you mentioned someone miss Roy bit
I'm not quite hang on a first name who's
talked about what reality really is and
how this implies you're sharing new
ideas we get from our intuition can you
tell us a little about that and what
that concept is sure so her name is
Benita like little Bunney Benita Roy and
she has been thinking about the
metaphysical questions very powerful for
a while and the way she described it to
me is that it is better to think about
reality as a continuum from the
infinitesimal be really really not very
much real all the way to the infinite
that which is quite significantly real
and the continuum is measured by the
degree to which something is shared so
in your own sense they're going to be
things that you will intuitively feel
that they're very vague and very distant
and you could just barely even hold on
to them for a few moments and so those
are things that are not very real in the
act of gestures to give the tune more
clearly into them and and kind of play
with them and start to sort of get a
better sense of what is trying to show
itself that is an internal intuitive
process of realizing that which is just
a literally making it more real and then
what ends up happening is that as you
build techniques to be able to share
that more broadly the moment where you
can share it outside of yourself with
another consciousness that's a massive
increase and the realization of that
thing and then if it becomes shared even
more broadly like say in the case of
this article work some hundred thousand
consciousnesses are now beginning to act
on it as a significant realization of it
and then you can go further and further
and further now that's great
philosophically but let's deploy that's
business if you've got a marketing idea
or product or service and you're
positioning in a certain way if you're
the only person in the world who gets
your product no one's gonna buy it but
if you can get thousands or hundreds of
thousands of people to get the idea of
like why is an iPhone the thing to get
right because my phone's just a phone
and a computer right but really has a
whole bunch of belief systems about why
you should get an iPhone and not an
Android that get people to take action
and that changes the reality so it's not
just Steve Jobs thinking oh yeah iPhones
are cool he's managed to convince
millions of people iPhones are cool
they're useful I've got to have one and
that is a genius trick to pull a new
reality makes profits and what I'd like
to do is actually take advantage of one
of the other topics we want to talk
about which is the nature of different
kinds of Technology frameworks and maybe
then the notion of mean and do them all
at once because you may meant we're not
mean that spell em e/m it's sort of like
gene and this is critical for modern
business so tell us what a meme is and
why it
okay so a meme is conventionally thought
of as being an idea or an artifact
actually very specifically call it a
piece a shareable piece of culture so it
might be a song it might be a image it
might be a you know so just an animated
joke but it's a shareable piece of
culture is a mean by the way a scientist
named Richard Dawkins the person
actually conceptualized the idea and he
was trying to specifically talk about
would it be the intellectual or idea
equivalent of of Jean ideas having sex
or memes so basically it's an idea in
someone's head or a thought in someone's
head that then gets replicated to other
people's heads so it might be a popular
song that they're singing and then it
goes in your head and you keep singing
and sing it and you share it with other
people or it might be the mean the
iPhones are cool and you need to get one
or it might be them it may be the the
way that somebody holds a cigarette in
their hand and sucks in the smoke and
blows it out and it might be a cultural
artifact in the shape of behavior or it
might be a particular color of car that
is cool this year and so it it's
actually a little bit more abstract and
just it can be expressed semantically it
is the stuff that we humans observe in
our environment that we then use to
change our behavior in relationship to
other humans including ourselves so if
if we think of humans as as having these
things in their heads that cause them to
behave differently and let's call that
software just for the purpose of this
the memes are kind of like the pieces of
the software that get passed around
between the humans and causing them to
behave differently and why is that
important in business well I think the
the way of thinking about means and
being able to have access to the frame
of shareability and genetics is
particularly helpful right now because
effectively none of us are Apple and
what I mean by that is if you think the
way you're going to go
get your ideas out in the world is that
your going to buy a Super Bowl ad and
get a lot of attention in that faster
you're probably wrong but in a
contemporary environment of social media
the power of a Super Bowl ad is
catastrophic lis declining and the real
way to go about getting people to care
about and engage us what you're doing is
in the fine art of mimetics which is to
find ways to craft and shape the the
essence the importance value the sense
and value of the theme that you want to
have shared in a fashion that even a
very small group of people and hopefully
over time a much larger group of people
connect with and for the reasons of
their own decides that they want to
share it even better to add value to it
and share it then you've got something
very powerful so idea that is it's free
Wow so this is free promotion for your
business idea or the mission you have
for your tribe or whatever in change
you're trying to achieve in the world
whether it's making profit or getting
people to change their behavior which
usually the two go together and but in
the old fashion marketers used to call
it word-of-mouth a sort of a cardboard
way of talking about what we're talking
about right but marketing move beyond
word-of-mouth you know now we have all
kinds of you know different
advertisements different copy you know
content marketing press you know PR
manipulation yeah you know the dark arts
of copywriting but this memetics is is
an actual scientific theory of why this
works and how it works is that right
that's correct so it combined so for
example the dark arts and popular
writing you can either get there through
trial and error or you could just learn
it through the sheer practicality of
trying to see what works and what
doesn't work or you can tap into the
various disciplines of cognitive science
psychology neuroscience human motivation
and understand why those things work and
of course if you can jump to the end and
get a much firmer grasp on why certain
kinds of ideas are grasped and shared
with certain kinds of energy and
motivation then you
are able to delete way ahead of the game
so that lets you you know I think we've
all experienced this sometimes we we
want to get our product out into the
market and there's traction and everyone
wants to share it and use it and other
times it seems like we're we're pushing
a noodle from the wrong direction and
nothing's happening and this helps
explain the difference indeed yeah and
you know what are the key ideas one of
the key motifs is the world wants to
hear what the world wants to hear and
that's going to change based upon the
state of the world so for example if I
have written my article a year ago I
probably would have gotten about a
thousand people to read it but in as of
November 2016 this particular kind of
idea and this particular framing of that
idea so both the way it's being told and
the thing that it's talking about
suddenly has a whole lot of attention
that's ready to interact with it and
that of course is crucial timing matters
I don't know how many times and how many
different kinds of businesses you've
been involved in but the degree to which
timing matters is actually again with
more and more and more because our
ability to force the universe force the
world to listen to it is decreasing so
you know and that's that's coming back
to that phrase the zeitgeist you know
what's happening in society and you know
what is the right time and how can you
tell what the right time is does
intuition help with that at all well I
think import in fact the intuition is
the only thing can occur really help
because quite often the things that
change in the zeitgeist just things we
can't actually make any sense of and
that's that's that the idea of the tide
catcher there were the guys part of site
descent happening in a level where our
conscious semantic rational mind by the
time we've made sense but it's already
too late
and I'll kind of give you an example I
actually had a business was a public
company in 2006-2007 timeframe and I
began to notice a number of
conversations happening among people in
the financial role bankers that were
troubling but I didn't have any
expertise might caught my rational mind
and understand finance and understand
languages like inverted yield curve but
they were using but my intuitive mind
and my body were noticing that they were
very nervous and if I had been able to
be more effectively tuned into that
they've started being able to say hey
something clearly important is happening
here what might that impact might that
have in my business I would have been
able to be more effectively prepared for
the financial crisis that they were
aware of or at least David themselves
intuitively aware of which of course
made a massive difference in my business
and everybody else's business
oh yeah I mean fortunes were made and
lost in that crisis so if you were able
to pick a timing on that you'd have done
great or protected yourself and it'll
get wipeout
and that he is it's in the is in the
water in the air you'll be tuning into
it it's the intuitive but what's
happening right now everybody is feeling
like something is going on but we can't
name it yet and so the process of being
able to allow those feelings to point
you at least you'll give you just allow
yourself to allocate your attention to
the things your intuitions are pointing
yourself towards and not try to hold too
tightly because the thing that holds
tightly is the thing that's becoming
obsolete I love that if you're holding
on too tightly to some business model or
way of doing things or you're used to
making money through print ads in
newspapers and then social media comes
along and you don't do anything you know
you're gonna have problems in your
business yeah you you will be dead in a
thumb time so people want to learn more
about means I'm gonna suggest a book
called the meme machine by susan
blackwell as a good introduction to that
you've got any other resources you think
are good or I'm afraid that is not an
area of my expertise almost every idea I
have is the scope or stolen but I don't
have a whole I don't read a lot of sort
of business oriented books well I guess
you're a good meme meme replicator then
yeah and that's a great skill to have
the person who spreads the meme is the
person who gets rewarded not let's
starting the person who invents the mean
mmm it's actually the the second or
third up regulators to work who seems to
get most of the attention right now but
that may be just a nature of the
environment that were in serves as
opposed to invents the mere air to get
them to work yeah so you know we we
talked earlier that you know if you're
fighting the last war in your business
if you're using old technology when
there's a space shift in technology that
you know you're not gonna win tell us a
bit more about that and and how the the
phrase the medium is the message is
actually a really important business
concept all right Wow okay so that's
very powerful so it behooves us to take
a little bit of time to get it right
eventually
in my experience shocking uncommon the
health and very deep so the metaphor of
fighting loss to work for anybody for
them that makes me sense I think is
quite useful because this didn't happen
over and over again so we can just use
the classic example of the Maginot Line
in World War two so the civil or the
First World War was a big deal and
people work really really hard to figure
out how to be very effective at winning
the First World War and so techniques
technologies processes methodologies
concepts and frameworks went through a
very rapid iteration process at the at
the actual edge right because getting it
wrong killed you and they got good at it
and so then they became experts at
fighting World War one and so what they
did is they they formalized that
knowledge in for the French particular
in this thing called the Maginot Line
which is the the best trench ever made
unfortunately it was met in the tire
stretch no people know they spent
billions of dollars building this
Maginot Line and it was supposed to be
the right impregnable star wars of the
1930s that would stop the Germans ever
invading ever again exactly it was it
was the categorical answer to the
problem of trench warfare but
unfortunately when the Germans is they
just obsolete a trench warfare
completely and a number of different
technical innovations were part of that
obsolescence of the old approach they
invent the invention of the aircraft as
a tactical weapon
vention of armored warfare and the speed
at which gasoline powered tanks could
run and the invention of radio and the
ability for tactical troops to be able
to communicate fluently and change their
where they were going in their
coordination without having to be next
to each other that those three in
particular changed the state of the game
it was a different game that's what end
up happening is that the the French had
become exceptionally good at winning a
game that the Germans weren't even
playing and then Germans were playing a
new game entirely which completely
obsolete of the old game now this sort
of thing happens all the time
and the Marshall McLuhan who was a
Canadian philosopher had this phrase
called the medium is the message what he
means by that is that when you've got
something like let's say television
which is best understood at the idea of
broadcast audio-visual media broadcast
meaning one person creates a broadcast
we don't all have TV broadcast towers
there's a couple of them two or three
and it conveys audio and visual
information citizen can base smell or
text or just post beaten once you have
that as the form of medium that you're
using then a whole bunch of kinds of
things are going to be given an
opportunity to spread but the kinds of
means are suddenly going to be
flourishing
kind of like you know the jungle will
help all sort of things would flourish
in the jungle and don't flourish in the
desert the television is a niche for a
whole bunch of different kinds of meme
the thing when you shift she's just a
technical framework from broadcast
audio-visual to interactive digital
which is what now the internet and the
all the differences of children of the
internet like mobile Internet have
created this doesn't just mean that it's
not it's not a linear a simple
transition like from black-and-white
television to color televisions a simple
transition from broadcast audio-visual
to interactive digital is a is
equivalent to this shift from the jungle
in the desert and a whole different
ecosystem is going to be selected for
and if you're the kind of plants that
requires a lot of rainfall like the
jungle plant and you're moving into the
into the into the Internet into the
desert you're going to die on the other
hand if they're sexually good and
thriving and surviving in the made
the medium that you're in when you will
naturally thrive and so being able to
tune into that which by the way that
kind of transition again is the sort of
thing that the rational conceptual mind
just can't grasp because the concepts
that we build are actually based upon
the medium in which those concepts are
generated only the in Tudor channel
realistically can actually begin to have
some sense of tuning into what this
transitionary threshold looks like and
then of course the rational mind comes
back behind it it begins to iterate an
experiment and learn now I want to make
some I think that is an incredible
concept in the applies to business
because these shifts in not just
technology but also organizational and
societal shifts because one of the ships
the German army made there helped them
win the blitzkrieg in you know against
France at the beginning of the Second
World War was they had a different
organization they impaired lower level
officers to make decisions on the fly in
the field without having to go all the
way up the hierarchy so it wasn't it the
were technological things but there were
also organizational shifts and that
applies to business - and let's some
businesses win and others lose because
they have identified the new environment
the new technology the new
organizational ways of dealing with
things and they are leveraging that and
their opponents are fighting the last
war and they don't have a chance you
know this is quite exactly right and
here's the other thing that as we go
swimming out deeper into the swimming
pool the deeper water these changes in
our society with technological changes
and organizational changes and belief
changes they're not like happening on a
you know quick click every 10 years
there's a change they're happening
faster and faster so you can't you know
just sit there and say oh well no we've
made the change for this decade we don't
need to change your business anymore
those changes are happening every six
months now and then it's gonna be every
four months there'll be every month
yes this is some it's an entire
discipline in the Silicon Valley you
know the folks who have so far been the
most successful in doing this
specifically trying to figure out how
does one deal with accelerating change
because during the the 19th century in
most of the 20th century the slope of
the curve of accelerating change was far
enough apart that we could largely
pretend the change was happening in sort
of decade long cycle so we could you
know pretend that that was the case but
as you say now that the slope of the
curve is getting steeper and steeper
relative to our our agency and when
changes happening in six months cycles
we really have to begin formalizing
entirely entire approaches around what
accelerating change itself actually mean
and to me this is one of the key reasons
why we need to use our intuitive mind
along with our rational mind in business
because the rational mind is great at
dealing with changes that only happen
every ten years you know you only have
to rebuild your factory every ten years
that is not true anymore you've got to
rebuild your processes every six months
every month it's always changing and the
only way you can tell is by pulling in
your intuitive thoughts as well as your
rational rules in the end this is
absolutely correct I mean we may even go
a little bit further and talk about the
fact that you have to begin building
your organizational framework around
that sense of intuitive sensibility I
think man is really important it's not
just that someone in its the quote
strategy department of your startup or
your own enterprise needs to pay
attention everyone in the organization
needs to be aware of this and I think
just like how the German army impaired
lower-level
troops make decisions on the battlefield
when you're in business you can't have
like just the strategy department figure
this out you know you can't have the
strategy department in in kodak but you
know business which was a you know a
fortune 100 business that went out of
business cuz their strategy departments
sort of new digital photography was
coming along but that the individual
people working in it weren't empowered
to do anything about it and they went
out of business
Sonia is funny we're using the world
wars and metaphors but in point of fact
we know that it wasn't just a metaphor
it's a set of techniques the
organizational methodologies that people
like IBM and Kodak used were listed
directly from the set of techniques that
won World War kit and the organizational
approaches that were developed in the
process of fighting and winning World
War two we then applied across the
entire social field it was used to build
the interstate highway lead system is
used to build NASA is used to build IBM
and Kodak but but since then we've had
you know the Vietnam War where the Viet
North Vietnamese you know used you know
guerrilla warfare techniques and
distributed attacks and and they used
you know they managed to get inside the
American decision loop and you know they
even though they were losing the last
war they won the current war yes quite
right yes this notion of a position that
were or as a the John Boyce the American
strategic theorist who came up with the
concept the OODA loop OODA loop is I
think the concept is that it's going is
very timeless and I think more and more
people are going to begin grasping it so
would it be useful to try to define it
more rigorously right now absolutely
what does odor stand for for those
who've never come across it alright so
this is actually as I mentioned I think
is a very very deep concept and frankly
I think even the practitioners in the
military who tell you that don't
understand it well enough so the ideas
that you the first Oh is observe and we
can think of observe as your capacity
which might be your organization or your
team or your individual capacity to pull
information in from the universe and by
the way your intuitive channel is part
of that methodology the more you're able
to actually process things intuitively
the more bandwidth you were Oh has the
second Oh is orient the idea is that
just being overwhelmed by a flood of
information is not helpful you have to
actually be able to take that and turn
that from information into meaning
so orientation is your capacity to make
sense of what's coming in and so if
we're going to be tuning into our
intuitive channel we have to get better
and better at listening to it and using
it as a guide to then be making
decisions which is the third the D
decide as the decisions is taking sense
and connecting sense to our action
potentials it's the bridge between what
we perceive as being going on and how we
are going to actually respond to it
deciding is the is the narrowing
function that then hands out to act and
the action piece of course is the
agenting the actuator the the refined
ability that we have to express our
energies into the world with the the
most impact with the least effort and
with the least amount of externalization
effects these sort of unanticipated
consequences so and you deploy and I
it's a loop so what's the loop where my
observe orientate the side act and then
you repeat it all over again right
because it's sort of reality or the
universe outside of you comes in through
observe and then exits through some kind
of expression some action or some change
of behavior that you make in the world
which changes the state of the world
which then you observe and and
interesting enough the the common
knowledge has is that the the fastest
OODA loop wins and this is actually
not true the the better understanding is
that the the OODA loop of the highest
bandwidth win meaning that the one that
can handle the most for Rou it the
fastest will win certain circumstances
having a very narrow band it'll look
very rapid is highly effective but
generally speaking what you want to be
able to do is be able to perceive
process decide on and act with the most
potential in the shortest amount of time
and at the same time you want to slow
down your opponent and cut their
bandwidth oh yes so then in the game of
strategy if you are in fact interacting
with other
which we generally are if you can do
things to slow down or reduce the
bandwidth of your opponent to the loop
then that's the other side of the
equation right so net net the OODA
loop with the highest bandwidth will win
in any strategic contest I survive you
can increase yours or decrease your
opponent so in business you know we're
observing what our competitors are doing
we're observing what is shifting in the
technology and organizational technology
we decide you know we're orientating
ourselves as to where we're going to
focus with the citing what we're going
to do we're taking action you know
changing a product launching a new
service reorganizing our business a
different way and then we're repeating
it and doing it over again and then if
we're a little devious we're also trying
to slow down our opponents or cutting
down their bandwidth by cutting the
amount of information they have
available or or exploiting the fact that
they just don't process information so
quick because maybe they have a
hierarchical structure and they you know
only the top people in the organization
do any of this and all the bottom people
don't worry in our organization
everyone's empowered to observe
orientate and decide and act and take
decisions and move the business forward
and get feedback and and that ability
for the organization to to make
decisions quickly and change and and
maybe not have a coherent strategy but
like you know in Zappos shoes you know
the customer service representatives are
impaired to decide what's best for the
customer right they don't have to take
it up a hierarchy to find out what to do
you know they have a faster route loop
just so I got to do that and then this
is part of the you know the fact that
the organization doesn't seem to have a
consistent you know strategy but they
make fast decisions that are good for
their customers could be confusing to
the opposition because they don't quite
know what they're doing but they seem to
be doing it better right that's a way to
slow down their bandwidth because you're
giving off so many different signals
they don't know what to focus on
so there's a couple of interesting
things that are put it because you use
the phrase not having a coherent
strategy and what's funny what's amazing
about that is the degree to which we
have because we knew it grew up in the
latter half of the 20th century broadly
we have mapped the word strategy to
actually mean a strategic plan in the
bureaucratic hierarchical mode and the
kind of thing that a strategy planning
organization creates which has been
disseminated or exploited that is how
World War two was one right that's
exactly that all the big companies cup
copied out of World War two that you
haven't hierarchy you have a strategy
use operational research techniques to
optimize your strategy but the
individual soldiers just follow what
they're told to do right boys pointed
that if you understand that OODA loop
the band the engineering a higher end
with little loop is strategy that
actions which strategy really is and
that the approach that you just
described quite well is a an approach
that optimized an OODA loop for the
environment of the 1950 to the 19th mid
late nineteen seventies eighties back
that's the deep insight and so now that
we're not in the 1980s using the seconds
the nineteen eighties in fighting the
last war so the rat the question is what
is in fact the nature the essence of
actual strategic thinking and planning
that is appropriate for a network gate
and in my view it's probably more
distributed it's probably people using
accessing their intuition as well as the
rational mind yeah and probably some
other things I haven't even considered
yet well we could take a couple of
things that are more legible which is
for example in the changing nature of
supply chain the ability to do logistics
outsource logistics the ability to do
very very rapid experimental marketing
through digital marketers social media
is just very tactical handheld
techniques it effectively everybody is
familiar with and what these do what
these changes in the economic framework
have done in the past several decades is
they've enabled and also forced a
ranking of the nature of what the firm
looks like so instead of having to have
ownership of my logistical function to
be able to ship from where I am to where
my customer is I can outsource know
majestical function to an H at this
point how loads are almost a cloud
logistical punks don't even know who's
shipping my Stephanie more I just
provided to a shipping service he makes
sure that he gets to the end to the end
customer and effectively commodity cost
I no longer have to have an IT a giant
IT department that builds out my my
hosting and bandwidth function I just
outsource that to Amazon Web Services or
Google and they and they optimize that
but as it happens that my firm is
empowered to shrink and become more and
more focused on a smaller core
competency which then becomes a fluid
component of a different kind of
marketplace and if I don't do that if I
sort of hold on to competencies that are
not my core I'm actually a radically
less capable but everybody around me
which is to say that my little loop is
very slow because now I'm doing things
that are obsolete you know the Google
has already fully optimized and why the
hell am i doing that they've already
done it perfectly we just plug into that
what they're doing and take advantage of
that so in this notion of the
organizational structure as you said
like the way the Wehrmacht's we were
organized and pushed authority out to a
different class of soldiers which left
the higher ranks also had a different
way of doing planning you the new
organizational structure is going to be
oriented around smaller groups that have
very intense core competencies that find
ways to then ally with and link with
other equally small groups who have
intense core competencies and actually
share their their energy and their
resources in a very fluid and very
rapidly changing global marketplace and
those teams may be fluid themselves you
know it may be there's a team this month
deal with the particular issue and
succeed there and then it disbands or
reorganizes and the people move to
different teams you know it may not be a
permanent structure yeah I'm gonna clean
that my own company oh well cool I mean
it and and this is actually an idea that
was used in I think it was Lockheed
Martin in their skunk works which you
know they they wanted to come up with
some new tech
to sell to the army or the Air Force and
the traditional big hierarchical
organization wasn't coming up with it
and they locked up these really clever
engineers and gave them some budget and
and they came up with some really new
technology because they were were
separated from the rest of the
organization but I think that idea is
gonna in you know invade the whole
organization you know we're gonna have
everything is going to be a skunkworks
everything will be creating amazing new
inventions but doing it in a temporary
way for whatever needs doing in the
moment yeah I think that's right I think
the you know the challenge that people
who think organizationally is going to
be figuring out where the efficient
frontier is so it's unlikely that we'll
be in a position where everybody has to
be a stem cell meaning that everybody
has to sort of carry the full portfolio
of capacities and skills this doesn't
seem likely to be efficient there still
needs to be division of labor and
specialization but it's certainly the
case with the amount of division of
labor specialization is going to be a
lot less than it was actually 50s and
60s and this notion of fluid
recombinations of groups of individuals
that go here around some particular to
the function optimized for it in a time
frame where the optimization is valid
produce an artifact flow it into the
marketplace and then maybe even
disappear Rico here more studio model
that's certainly being explored quite
rapidly and of course you know we're
living in an environment that while it
is changing very rapidly there are are
also sort of forces of viscosity
companies like say Microsoft or Lockheed
and who because they control enough
power they have enough of resources and
enough influence over the environment
that they are trying to keep the niche
they're trying to keep the world
conducive to their way of being that you
have these very interesting dynamics
between the rate at which the past is
fading and the rate at which the future
is emerging and as an entrepreneur being
able to flow in there you know if you're
a business is going to be interfacing
with healthcare companies like health
insurance companies that's going to be
required
very unique dynamic of connecting what
you and I are talking about with
Dinosaurs a caddy how do you actually
interface with Dinosaurs when you're a
mammal or conversely do you just go
ahead and send it to committee sure play
mammal and just launch something like
23andme or Fitbit that go to the
end-user and completely routes around
the legacy or legacy infrastructure and
this may be excellences all the way back
to the the initial conversation which is
the you know the situational assessment
where the state of what's happening in
the world right now well and I want to
recommend people read that because
although it's written geared towards
political talk you can reread the whole
article as applied to to what's going on
in business and there's you know just if
we're okay swimming a little bit deeper
in swimming pool of ideas here into deep
water I hope we haven't drowned too many
listeners so far and then I promise
we'll come back to shallow water too for
some actions that would make sense is
that okay with you Jordan so I think one
of the things I got from your
situational assessment is that there is
a world culture war going on and I kind
of label it you know world culture war
two a bit like world war two but the
thing is unlike World War two which you
know in the 1940s I think most people
knew World War two was actually going on
but just imagine you were an
entrepreneur back then and you didn't
even know there was a war and you had
your factory or business and you were
going along and you're wondering well
why aren't my employees working so good
and and why why is suddenly half my back
Creed disappeared I didn't even know
bombs existed you know can you imagine
how this robbed it that would be for
your business if you didn't even know
the war was going on and on the flip
side what an opportunity suppose you
knew oh there is a war going on and I
could retool the business to help out my
country in whatever way that could
happen or however you adjust to it maybe
you decided oh I'm gonna relocate my
business to Latin America because I
don't think that's gonna be involved in
this particular war many ways you could
take it but if you don't even know the
world culture war is going on you're
kind of screwed yeah well if you
the example that just keeps him with him
for me because I have lived it was I
didn't know that a global scale
financial crisis was going on in 2007 I
was along the run with virtually
everybody else and it was and if I had
known obviously I was a video faster
better decision so so the notion that
we're currently immersed deeply in a
culture were and I think it doesn't say
world culture war and then it's very
difficult understand because it's not at
all like the culture world in cities
some of it is over
these were world culture war one in this
terminology yes it's a great way of
putting it yeah in fact it may even be
that there may actually be more than
just a metaphor that may actually be a
very close map the the 60s and 70s was
world culture war one it and you know to
a greater or lesser extent certainly in
the West in Western Europe the United
States Japan China the Middle East so
there were a little bit shifted on that
and what was happening now is that
there's kind of the ripple effects of
what happened in the West what happened
to the rest of the world are beginning
to realign in what seems like a single
world's culture work to and what's
happening is a number of different
elements are all lining so the if we
think about culture it's not just being
stuff like and this prosaic stuff like
their you know fashion or the ideas that
are having balance or politics so we're
really thinking about culture is the
nature of how we go about as individuals
and groups making sense of the world
making sense of our identity who we are
making sense of who we work with and how
and why in terms of purpose and then
asking your culture is a big piece of
the framework of how we go about
building our individual group OODA
loops and what's happening right now is
that big waves are pushing through
global cultures and they are disrupting
all the old ways of doing them and they
are giving rise to entirely new ways of
doing it so it's very akin to a very
rapid shift I'm going to jungle to a
desert and so what's happening is that
the there are so
this artifacts like for example in the
United States we have the surface sense
that there is some kind of red
Republican Trump thing that we may map
saying oh it's the Republicans that we
remember from the 1980s versus the
Democrats remember from the 1980s but
that's actually not I don't think what's
really happening it was really happening
I think is that there's more profound
transitions that are going on under the
surface and that what I call the the red
religion or the insurgency the Trump
insurgency have began to form entirely
new OODA loops entirely new forms of
collective intelligence that are more
closely in alignment with the nature of
the transformations that are going on
below the surface and in many ways only
superficially resemble the Republicans
of the Reagan era if you actually saw
just did a straight semantic mapping mmm
it's not particularly close they just
you're kind of wearing those that
clothing because that just happens to be
where they're able to get above the
surface but they're pulling some other
new kind of cultural coherence driven by
a more adaptive response to what's going
on underneath the surface and then so by
contrast this this thing that I call the
establishment and the blue church which
are related to not exactly the same
which the Democratic Party certainly is
still closely connected with they're
fighting the last war and this is one of
the reasons why they're losing in spite
of the fact that they have a huge amount
of resources that they're doing
something which is in some sense
swimming against the current of these
big changes that are going on underneath
the surface and one of these big changes
is technical their shift from television
and newspaper to the Internet is a major
shift and the blue church is perfectly
optimized for television and newspapers
and is completely now adapted to social
media
by contrast the red religion which is
again not the Republicans of the Reagan
era is in many ways the consequence of
social media more so than even adapted
to it is expressionist social media but
it's begun to grasp mean
and Cohibas means intuitive into what
feels a little bit like something like a
narrative that is now beginning to
out-compete the bleed Church in this new
emergent environment and this is
somewhat analogous to the Vietnam War
where the American and South Vietnamese
were fighting the last war they had
incredible you know superiority in
numbers of bombs and tanks and
what-have-you and you know it had a
organization based on the World War two
kind of model that won World War two but
the North Vietnamese and the Viet Minh
they had a more nimble approach that had
a faster OODA loop and you know they
were able to totally destroy that even
though the establishment looked like
they should have won yes that's exactly
right it's important to recognize for
example for anybody who wants to kind of
get deeper into the actual history the
degree to which the the vision in the
Vietcong were able to play with and
connect with disruptive forces inside
the American social cultural fabric
right because that was degrading the
OODA loop of the establishment is also
very much an important piece of the
story when you're when you're playing
that kind of game
so that cultural war is happening right
now in America and in Western society
because it's not just in America this is
a symptom of the Britax and the other
things going on in different countries
right and you know you if we don't
understand this war is going on it's
entirely possible our business might
guess you know collateral damage from
what happening yes I would say with
absolute certainty the magnitude this is
way too large to not have collateral
effects on all all businesses certainly
business is above a certain order of
magnitude in size what's interesting is
because this is so big you will actually
tend to affect really big companies like
say Google who otherwise have been
largely unaffected because they're
strong enough to kind of hold even the
biggest companies are going to be
affected by this which is one of the
reasons why they started to get very
nervous
I think this is something really
important for people to grasp let's go
back to the shallow end of the pool what
are some concrete actions you'd
recommend people taking to take
opportunity from this cultural war or to
protect their assets well I mean a lot
of that of course depends on a weird
position in the world we can say for
certain is a couple of things the first
is that people are going to be attending
to these issues so if your business is a
business that relates to individuals
psychology their sense of safety this is
it well-being the sense of being
empowered it is sense of obvious
opportunities that emerge there so which
are going to be sort of unfortunate
abilities to exploit people which I
would recommend people avoid but many of
which are exactly one to be absolutely
necessary mechanisms to help people find
ways to respond to it is absolutely
going to be an increasingly chaotic and
increasingly intensely distressful
environment things are going to make
less and less sense seem more and more
dangerous over the next several years
and so if your business is something
that can help people respond to that and
it can be anything it can be Yoga it can
be you know personal development
techniques it can be ways to get people
to interact with other people in
physical goods space it can be more
effective pathways to personal nutrition
which makes the body were able to
respond to its environment the very
large number of ways that you can tap
into that that's one set of vectors
second because we can say with some
confidence that the macro environment is
going to become more turbulent so think
it's like boiling water and turbulent
being able to construct your business
organization deeply around fundamentally
to respond to increasingly wrap it in a
predictable change will enable you to
radically out-compete even vastly more
well resourced businesses that are slow
to respond so really being able to go
off this I did what it means to have a
high bandwidth little loop which has for
for example load
tendencies so having a limited amount of
commitment to cash floats so if you have
for example a choice between hiring a
full-time staff or enabling it to you
know connecting with some studio model
or you have some sort of expertise that
can comment if you have to turn it off
tomorrow you can the latter is a more
rational choice than the former to the
degree possible allowing the ambient
environment to give you a very rapid
feedback so the there's a premium and a
contemporary environment to not being
delusional and by that I mean it's so
for example Special Forces people who
are day traders certain emergency
physicians tend to be the kinds of
people who are actually rather quite
aware of what's going on right now
because the business they're in the
lifestyles that they're in requires them
to to not make a lot of up and
believe their own nonsense
it just happens because reality will
very quickly tell them they were wrong
being able to build in yourself a
capacity to very rapidly be able to just
test experiment allow reality to tell
you what's happening and then respond to
that as opposed to trying to create a
narrative that makes sense of reality
which may in fact be a delusion and
distract you from reality it's a deep
core competency so for example this
might mean instead of investing in a
long cycle marketing plan that is based
upon a whole bunch of untested
hypotheses that may may take a year
before you get any signal back and the
world it may have been a perfectly valid
plan but the time you launched it by the
time the signal comes back the world may
have changed focus on language in a very
rapid iteration you can use a very rapid
feedback back from the world to tell you
what things are going in certain
directions and then respond to that and
then iterate again quickly would for
example be a way to be adapted to the
contemporary environment and a perfect
example is the seven-day Startup
movement where you know you get the
whole startup and get to approve concept
with a prototype within seven days in
order to get feedback as to whether you
should modify it and continue it or
whether you should scrap and do
something else so you know yeah yeah oh
by the way
if you if you're in the if you're in a
spate East we're putting a very
effective activist is calm with the most
fish to clean the teeth of the Sharks
because of the big guys are not gonna
get shaken up like crazy and they're not
going to be able to respond effectively
internally because it requires a change
in the nature who they are there will be
a substantial amount of opportunity that
opens up around facilitating bigger guys
so b2b plays that help large companies
be more responsive to contemporary and
browser and home fashion consulting gigs
or finding places with big tough dude
but is they're not doing a good job in
tents you know tool around that they
will be opportunity there as well for as
long as those companies survive and
being positioned to actually eat market
share the falls off of large companies
that are becoming less and less adapt to
the environment is a fundamental to that
energy well this has been an amazing
conversation Jordan I'm going to include
the link to your article errors there
any other way people can find you if
they're more interested in this stuff
right if they're if they're all
interested I actually have co-founded
Apple companies the ones that I'm in the
offices in right now it's actually
called the neuro hacker collective and
frankly its premise and one of the ideas
that we're talking about it might be an
interesting case study to see how I
myself go about trying to execute on
some of the edges that I'm talking about
fabulous well good luck navigating all
these changes in the culture wars and
all those other loops and accessing your
intuition as a way to get faster on the
decision making in your loop and I look
forward to seeing future situational
assessments as all this unfolds
beautiful thick River
[Music]
get strategies and show notes at
intuitive leadership mastery comm what
would it take to see you here next time
on the intuitive leadership mastery
podcast
you