[Applause]
[Music]
hey folks welcome to the Dark Horse
podcast I have the great pleasure of
introducing you to dr. Mike mu who is I
believe the most famous orthodontist in
the world also the most hated person in
his field am I correct about that Mike
I would worryingly think that may be
correct yes and I must say I know why it
is that you're hated and as much as they
hate you I feel very much the opposite I
think that you are a courageous man
doing important things and it is an
honor to be able to bring this to a
larger audience so thank you for joining
us cool sometimes I just think that I'm
very stupid well I haven't been the kind
of stupid that you are I know what you
mean it's definitely not a great
strategy for life but it is an important
strategy it's necessary that some people
do what you're doing and very few have
the the characteristics to allow it yeah
I think the I I don't I don't you know
one in their right mind would actually
put themselves into the position that
I'm in right now
so do you want to say a bit about what
that position is so I'm in an
interesting situation where I why so
initially I realized the issue when I
was at university studying orthodontics
so clearly I you can do dentistry
without an orthodontic qualification but
I thought for me to do what I wanted to
do it was vital for me to have a good
puck or orthodontic qualification so I
went to our hoose University in Denmark
one of the top ones and what I observed
when I was chatting to the staff and my
colleagues and peers who were studying
is that the big gap was the etiology the
why and it's always been my question I
was a kid the one of the kids always
used to ask why and you know what is the
cause of things and then often I asked
the why
to the response as I get and another
wire in another way and I worked out
this was the weak link if you don't know
the cause of the bottom you know should
we really be getting involved in any
sort of treatment because in medicine
treatments supposed to be about
affecting the causes of a problem so I
then had a letter-writing campaign in
the UK where I started with an editorial
called the Black Swan so you can look up
British dental journal and Black Swan
and like me that was the article that I
started with the editor very kindly gave
me the of the editorial and I wrote that
now I then had about sort of best part
of five years of hard letter writing
about say why he's crooked what's going
on you know we're treating all these
people I mean really go anywhere and
then I started by almost by chance so I
became an internet success I wasn't
really expecting it but I had several um
YouTube videos up people started sending
me emails and I was just so he was quick
rather than responding to emails to put
another video up another explanation and
this court of thing called mewing
started now it was it kind of surprised
me that people would go to what is
extremists eclis an incredible effort
you know to change your habits and
craniofacial structure by exchanging
habits Matt it's hard work however why
not the benefits that you can achieve by
doing this are incredible you know
basically it's like saying get fit you
know it's a tough thing to do mmm it's a
tough thing to maintain but why not well
let's let's orient people a little bit
has been saying for years where the hell
is evolutionary dentistry I know where
evolutionary medicine is and it is
almost nowhere but at least there is a
formal recognition that there is
something wrong with teaching medicine
outside of an evolutionary context
molnar people get that message when it
comes to dentistry I have to almost
literally bite my tongue when I go to a
dentist or an orthodontist because what
they say about what's taking place just
simply doesn't add up it would take
about ten minutes to explain why the
stories that we apparently tell
ourselves about teeth are not plausible
from an evolutionary perspective and so
therefore this raises a tremendous
question for all of those of us who have
been exposed to dentistry and
orthodontics how much have we harmed
ourselves by accepting these narratives
and then following through two
treatments that then have downstream
consequences it's just mind-boggling
aye-aye-aye aye-aye-aye will almost hold
back on saying what I think is the full
extent of the harm that we've caused
ourselves either by inaction or by the
actions that medicine has been taking
though those two things and I think that
it has affected an entire generation
although well I can say just so my my
viewers know why this is personal to me
now this year I had three teeth removed
I had two more that are scheduled and
was postponed by kovat 19 and the reason
for this is something called root
resorption now I had never heard of root
reserves until I had a tooth shatter on
me and then I had x-rays taken and it
turned out that I have this condition
well it happens that this condition
lines up with aggressive orthodontics
which I definitely had as a young person
so almost you know Bret I'll take that
back when you put fixed braces you know
with orthodontist appliances it will
cause root resorption on almost every
single tooth and that's just without
aggressive mechanics right so apparently
I had no choice in the matter as a child
it was simply my parents doing what they
had been told was necessary for my
well being that cost a tremendous amount
and then downstream I'm now suffering
massive consequences right just terrible
stuff where I'm going to have implants
put in which is a an awful process and
you know that does to say nothing of the
financial costs which are through the
roof
certainly far exceeding what my parents
invested in braces in the first place
and all of this is because orthodontics
doesn't have a correct story about why
the teeth are crooked in the first place
and therefore doesn't take the right
approach to treatment I mean it thinks
that I have some sort of genetic
predisposition to crooked teeth no no
that doesn't make sense so when I saw
one of your videos explaining that you
had also deduced that the story makes no
sense and going through all of the
evidence I was just I was gobsmacked to
use the the British term yeah so do you
want to tell us a little bit about why
the evolutionary explanation that some
of us just have a genetic predisposition
to crooked teeth is wrong well I mean I
couldn't tell you if our ancestors had
um cardiovascular problems where they
had diabetes or sleep apnea we don't
know I we think less however I know
where that Heath were or still are you
can go into museums today you can look
at ancestral material you know only a
thousand years ago from all the
Scandinavian remains recovered everyone
that had wisdom teeth had them working
in in function and that was most people
now today having a wisdom teeth in is a
rarity we almost think that is an extra
tooth I mean yeah the idea it's an extra
tooth or we evolved out of this I mean
where does this fit with Darwinian
evolution he doesn't you know it's
survival of the fittest is death of the
weakest unless you go round killing
people whose wisdom teeth come in it
ain't gonna change and you'd need to
kill a lot of people you know you have
no idea how many times I've sat in a
dentist chair and tried
to raise the point that the idea we have
extra teeth that are in need of surgical
removal is preposterous and I just can't
seem to make the point all my fingers
seem to fit on my hand just fine that's
that's so odd I was just lucky I guess
yeah so it's but people like simple
explanations and of course as I say for
my frequent you might of my catchphrase
is who makes money a dietitian or a lipo
surgeon because fixing things you can
charge for preventing things
particularly trying to change people is
not as billable
yeah I mean there's a perverse incentive
that comes from economics and then on
top of that if there were to be
widespread acknowledgement of how much
damage is done to people buy things like
braces a there would have to be a
massive course correction in what we do
I mean we've got lots of people running
around with braces right now and I don't
even know what the liability would be so
once you're down this road with a
garbage explanation like bad genes are
what causes crooked teeth then it's very
hard to get back to the right road and
to treat things proactively by if
essentially restoring the natural
condition that causes teeth had
developmentally arrived in the right
place is that fair
yeah very value medicines very good at
making all course good directional
changes if the course directional
changes don't exceed a certain
percentage you know a few degrees
medicine is very bad at making a 180
degree turn and it seems you know with
the hit the history is littered with his
events where it was screaming that you
needed to make a 180 degree turn
but people have got to admit they're
wrong and there's implications to that
and that's not likely to happen
without difficulties
so how much can you tell me about about
root resorption well I mean I can tell
you that it seems to happen on almost
every tooth that are fixed to plus it's
bonded to a wire what seems to be the
problem is that the brace is dictating
where a tooth goes artificially and the
mouth wants a tooth to go somewhere else
through physiology this is different
feedback to some some types of mechanism
that is trying to determine where the
tooth should be and of course most vases
seem this is my ballparking it seems to
be there's a bit of flexibility between
the brace and allowing it to move
between two positions and of course also
when you put braces on you the way your
teeth bite together seems to be
disrupted and you're now biting in
strange different ways that's causing
strange different movements of the teeth
and you know when I want to get a steak
out of the ground I rock it backwards
and forwards mm-hmm then it comes out
you know and if you've got these strange
motions on teeth you know the bolted in
places you know I think we're we have
the potential for running risks here so
let me let me deploy the model I've got
I have happens I have a skull here it's
I don't think it's human no one operated
I promise you know this is actually a
seal scale but it'll it'll do so there
what I did not know what I think of as
the real story of teeth is that our
teeth are not directly bonded to the
bone in our jaws there's a ligament that
attaches them so we have we have what's
called a gum photic joint
Conforti joins the gold FATA joined is a
very tight joint so it's not like the
joints on my fingers that have a great
range of motion agon 40 joint is just
where you have a fibrous connection in
this case sharpie fibers
the that um basically that is what we
refer to as the periodontal membrane so
the paralleled membrane anchors the
teeth into the bone with a little bit of
flexibility a little bit of flexibility
and people who are listening to this
will almost certainly have had the
following experience they will hit a
tooth not hard enough to dislodge it
they will detect that it is loose and it
Wiggles and then it will tighten back up
so bases of orthodontics exactly so the
point is we have built in a mechanism
that actually detects where the tooth
should be based on you know if a tooth
is bumping up against another and
there's pressure it can be moved
slightly but in general it's it's in the
right place with feedback from chewing
and other such things and only when it
has been dislodged does it reattach and
so what orthodontics does is it takes
advantage of this system and it puts
pressure that's directional and what
happens is the tooth actually moves
through the bone breaking down bone
ahead of it and building bone behind it
this is how your orthodontist gets your
teeth to move and position and line up
which and it's very effective
if you won't perfectly straight teeth
and you don't want to do anything
also that orthodontics will achieve it
for you well but apparently not stabili
apparently it comes at a cost
well there is that so
all right so something about taking a
tooth and moving it through the jaw I
believe is very likely to turn out to
expend this capacity basically I was
told the question I asked my
orthodontist at were my dentist at the
point that it became clear that some of
my teeth needed to be removed and
replaced with implants was well I have
my wisdom teeth can't we move my teeth
forward now and fill in the gap and I
was told no it's too late at the point
somebody's your age the capacity to move
teeth like you could do in youth is
largely expended is that fair I mean
yeah I mean it's just Dee
creasing is an exponential curve that
goes down you could do it but if you
need to move a tooth decent distances
you're going to lose a lot of the route
so if you're moving a tooth the distance
we talked earlier on about the jiggling
sort of motion causing root resorption
there's another way to court root cause
root resorption the fact is that as the
tooth moves through the bone the bone
dissolves in front of the teeth and it
reforms behind the teeth but to a small
and lesser degree the root of the tooth
will also dissolve the bone is much more
dynamic the bone has a far greater
capacity to correct rebuild itself and
the tooth has a lesser capacity so you
have a net loss of substance on the root
of the teeth so this is where your work
and my work intersect because there is
in these tissues certain to be a counter
at the ends of the chromosomes called a
telomere that sets your lifetime
capacity for cellular replacement yeah
and if you expend that cellular
replacement as you move teeth along the
jaw then it won't be there for
maintenance later and so I don't know
exactly how that's gonna play into root
resorption but my guess is my
orthodontist who was apparently too
aggressive with my orthodontia spent my
lifetime capacity for tooth dynamics and
I am now faced with having inert
substitute teeth swapped into the places
that my teeth were artificially aged
an interesting concept I've have not
really coronated it from this angle
before but yeah well I let's take it
let's put it this way that's a
prediction I bet you look at people with
tooth resorption that you will find in
the place where the teeth are resorbing
that their telomeres are also short
relative to people of the same age group
who did not have orthodontia right
that's the prediction that's a
prediction well we will I will wait
eagerly to see if that
true as is many things in science where
you make a prediction and it can take
some time sometimes boy I've noticed
that pattern alright so I think we
haven't fully filled in this picture
though your model which I found quite
compelling when I saw you run through it
at length involves a change in human
behavior especially around diet that has
caused a developmental program that in
our ancestral environment would have
made us have very straight wonderful
teeth and it has caused them to come in
in ways that they do not align properly
that's called malocclusion is that right
you're correct okay so can you describe
what has happened to us what you think
the causes are and what it would do to
correct it all right well there's two
principal things that have changed when
we're talking about the structure of the
whole facial complex the first thing is
we've gone from being sort of having an
incredibly rough tough hard low-calorie
diet you know populations were
controlled by calories you know how much
food bad and people had to eat anything
they got hold off and often those things
were really tough
we've moved across to this incredibly
soft very rich calorie rich diet you
know you could have so I'm quickly over
so today was my starvation day so just
before I had this I have to quickly have
a little bit of drink with a little bit
of sugar in it now I don't know how many
calories I'm consuming in a relatively
large cup but the effort that I do with
my chewing system to gain those calories
is next to nil so we've gone from this
tough diaper very soft dark we're not
using our tools use it or lose it
now I've got a strong jaw huh how do you
get a strong jaw from using it from
chewing now at the very same time
that we've had this gross reduction in
usage use-it-or-lose-it
we've also had this change in our
posture so most children now in the
first year of their life will have
several episodes with blocked noses now
that kind of is normal now and often
that's several days now either you're
going to lower the tongue off the roof
of your mouth
separate your lips and breathe through
your mouth or you're going to die
there's no other way now if you do lower
your tongue open your mouth and all the
rest there's a good chance that you're
not going to go back to perfect oral
posture afterwards hmm what started as
obligatory need has become a habit
so effectively what's happened to most
of modern humanity is it we've gone from
beautiful posture lips together teeth
near in ear contact tongue on the roof
of the mouth but good body posture and
good strong killing muscles to weak
chewing muscles and hanging our mouths
open now if you've ever seen someone
who's had a stroke what you notice is
one side of their face will drop down
now what I'm saying is modern humanity
has had a mild to moderate bilateral so
we're talking both sided stroke so
everyone's faces have dropped down and
as your face has got longer its got
narrower and shallower simple reducing
the cross-sectional area and that's
where your teeth are on the cross
section so less space for teeth but of
course less space for the airway as well
and that's the real crux I mean root is
orbitons it's annoying it's it's
treatable you can have those implants
but if you've got major sleep out here
at a young age it can it's damaging you
know what way is it damaging
sleep apnea so let's say if you're face
down swings carrying your tongue that's
attached here into your airway you it
ages everything you know you Eve is
linked to cardiovascular disease is
linked to diabetes it's linked to
cognitive impairment it's even linked to
ADHD and when you talk about all of
these everybody's at lots of modern
diseases mm-hmm and so you know me
saying saying listen we my profession
the orthodontic speciality has does not
acknowledge any cause it just doesn't
know what caused the problems in nearly
all of the cases so why can't we engage
in debate about this what can we talk
about it why can't we engage in the
scientific process you know you know
I've got you know this I can call all
around the world with one of these it's
amazing
how was that achieved the scientific
process it works why can't we use this
in medicine when we need to do why the
doors get closed because people don't
want to hear yes I have been saying for
I don't know a decade maybe almost two
decades that medicine is taught and I
could say the same thing about
psychology these things are taught as if
Darwin had never lived and there's no
reason for it they're both fundamentally
about an evolutionary system and yet we
teach it as if Darwin had never
published the Origin of Species and the
same thing is clearly true in dentistry
yeah but what's difficult to understand
is that I'm seen as such a charlatan
within my profession and it's almost
acknowledged you know I went to a
lecture and a senior professor who's
deciding the curriculum of the largest
dental school in the UK gave a lecture
he said many controversial points he
gave a good lecture actually at the end
of it I was fascinated by some of the
things he said so I went up to him and I
said look have you got some evidence for
the points you've just said
now what he wanted to say was well
actually we don't have very much
evidence and dentistry for anything
really
however he thought he'd make a little
quid a little joke so what he actually
said is well we don't even have the
evidence to prove that John Muse wrong
my father who came out who came out with
us his start of these ideas so in a way
he's using my father and affect me as
the gold standard of bad science yes he
started with the conclusion which is
Dalton with the conclusion and this is a
guy he sets the syllabus at the largest
dental school in the UK and that's just
how deeply ingrained it is um and you
know it's difficult to know where to go
from that position yeah so again I've
seen the same behavior in my little
quadrant of the world with telomeres and
the damage that has been done by
allowing Mouse evolution in breeding
colonies to affect our models so that
our models are all distorted in the same
way and therefore even the progress of
science even a well-done experiment
doesn't tell us the right thing because
it's using an animal that has evolved in
response to very unusual characteristics
in the laboratory breeding colony so my
guess would be there are hundreds of
stories like yours and mine things we
are doing wrong because there is some
school of thought that cannot consider
admitting that it doesn't understand
what's going on but these things stand
in the way of progress it's very
difficult medicine and an evolving
science a very difficult bedfellows I
found though things got harder when I
got near medicine because there was
money right you can do evolutionary
science much more fluidly if you're not
near the money but as soon as you
approach anything where money is
being made suddenly it's it's a
upside-down world no no we own people's
careers their status and their you know
their their income and don't get between
a man and his wallet yes
although the thing that I naively
thought before I had been put through
the wringer myself was that although I
could imagine most of the people in a
field deciding to ignore some glaring
damaging error I always thought there
would be renegades who would respond to
the fact that they could make a career
by revealing what we were doing wrong
and making people better they could be
heroes and those people don't show up I
mean they end up you they end up
dismissed as a charlatan yeah I mean it
is thanks to YouTube Facebook all of
these crazy things that have repaired
out of nowhere that is the only reason
that I'm still working that is the only
reason you even know about me and it you
know it were the wars previously this
chokehold that medicine was able to put
by being the by controlling what got
published by controlling what
information most individuals will gain
and I I give great credit to social
media for at least in the short term it
has broken the stranglehold well the the
name of this podcast is the Dark Horse
podcast for a reason which is that now
we can bring to light all sorts of
things that would have been true and
would have been known by a tiny number
of people before but now we can actually
bring attention to them and those people
like you like me weird Dark Horse's
we are yeah I guess I mean it's it's the
reason I chose that name so well oh go
ahead I was just gonna say that it you
know for me I you know I I think what
one of the turning points for me to
really focus I mean I was
oh just completed a marriage
so I was at the end of a fascinating
phase of my life and it was seeing my
father and the rejection he'd got and I
just decided you know I'd had one foot
in
Offutt robux what I was doing and I had
more time doing conventional
orthodontics mainly on adults so that I
wasn't hypocritical within my soul and
then it was what to my father and the
difficulties he was had made me said
well you know even if I never make any
money even if all I do is make a few
people a little bit better I have got to
focus on doing this something I don't
know I don't want a call you know I
think is probably the same as what
people turning to the cloth centuries
ago would call a calling when I you know
and you both for that and at the time I
didn't know YouTube was going to come
along I didn't know yeah I still I'm
only just turning this charity into a
business and it takes you know I did
what eleven and a half hour a day
yesterday
straight through lunch that not uncommon
and today I will be the same straight
through lunch again today
so going from what I've heard you say
elsewhere if you walk into a public area
a park or something and you look around
at the people what do you see
disasters what is that my see car crash
off the car crash after car crash and
that's another thing that really really
gets me going you know if you so take it
go and look you know go and look at some
sort of David Attenborough in BBC
documentary where his with some
relatively indigenous types people and
remember they're only 50% what they
would have been in the in the glory days
of hunter-gatherers and they nearly
every single person every single
tribesman or woman has really nice
facial form you know almost exclusively
all space for all their teeth space
behind that teeth I
walk into a park anywhere Europe the
States you know any any developed
country and I see these sort of
distorted craniofacial forms I see
people who have all kinds of forms and
shapes and I know how badly that is
affecting their general health and that
that just it actually scares me because
I know that every year this is getting
worse
again in my opinion I have to say this
all the time because I said anything
wrong people are out hunting so you're
talking about an incalculable level of
harm did be really know calculating if
you think of them as know calculate the
degradation okay inquire yeah I wonder
what percentage of the health care costs
are from a downswing and facial form and
the subsequent so quale as other effects
of that on the general health over
particularly over a period of time so
that is a I have to say there there is
something tragic about the idea that you
walk around and can see this in each
person that you pass and you know I
think your analogies are very apt you
say you see car wreck after car wreck
like bad reconstructive surgery you see
people who have the downstream effect
that would be caused by a stroke right
these are not so much yeah so what I'm
saying is that as your face drops down
on back it's gonna force you into a
forward head posture yep I think that is
yes we are spending a lot of time on
these devices
all right we're spending a lot of time
on screens yeah and I'm sure that's not
good for body posture but a lot of this
is the fact that if your face has
dropped down on back and almost every
single person
listening to this podcast has been
affected and probably to quite a
significant extent uh and so as your
face drops down a back you have to hold
your head forward you are reducing the
cross-sectional area you're increasing
your chance of sleep apnea George oink
problems most of the ENT problems are
worsened because you know a structure
that does not have the right
architecture does not work correctly
crooked teeth are just one of the signs
of this underlying distortion but
there's lots of health problems and you
know it's the is the sleep apnea is
always going to be the biggest one but I
I have suspicions about several other
things that I'm not making public I'm
not shouting about it because it just
sounds too incredible it sounds too
ridiculous is there any chance that you
want to quietly and privately share with
me and a couple hundred thousand people
who are gonna see this it's a little bit
it's it's what I'm not concerned about I
call this the name I came up the other
day is carotid constriction so it's
related to the carotid sheath so I'm
just saying that you know my concern is
that as the face drops down and back see
it's a little bit like a waxwork model
you've got too close to the fire and
you've just and as it occurs yes your
tongue moves closer to your airway and
yes you're leading to more sleep apnea
but of course also your this bulk is
squeezing the carotid sheath now I was
fascinated by a an Italian chap I won't
even try to say his surname who was
treating ms by putting stents in the
jugular vein and what he was saying is
that blood is pooling in the lower brain
hindbrain and
it's unable to get out of the hindbrain
as well as it should be able to do and
by helping this blood to drain he was
putting a multiple sclerosis into
remission Wow amazing and I like that
and that's that interested me and I was
looking at the work of someone called
Brendan stack and because what medicine
loves to do is ignore outliers it takes
them as oh well that's a random event
and well if you stop to look at some of
the random events sometimes you know
there's a whiff of something interesting
in many of them and you don't ignore
them try and make sense of them but what
I'm Brendan stack was doing was taking
people who would arrive in wheelchairs
he would build them up with appliances
in the mouth that opened their mouth up
and they would get out the wheelchairs
and walk and I thought wow I hear from
other people that this effect wasn't
permanent however in the short term it
was fantastic now I was sitting there
trying to make sense of this when I
heard of this Italian doctor and these
made sense because the types of that the
delay that Brendan was seeing was just
about right for a blood effect and a
blog neurological effect and so my idea
is that what's happening is particularly
in the people who were attempting to use
certain muscles in this area to swallow
and maintain an open airway who lacks
space because their faces drop down
they're constricting the internal
jugular and that is leading to this is
with the suggestion where this is I
think the link between Alzheimer's and
sleep apnea they're both related to the
same facial distortion it's also the
suggestion with some of these tics you
know these takes people have you know
when you're swearing in the supermarket
because you've got a tick you know those
are any suggestions um
and also one of the things that really
fascinated me was you know
I remember going to Thailand years ago
where I first qualified and everyone had
beautiful skin and straight teeth then I
went back a few years later on I noticed
a few people had braces and it was just
amongst the few people with braces that
he also had some facial acne and the
facial acne was limited precisely to the
drainage of the lymphatics from the face
now that lymphatics is also going down
that same carotid sheath so my
suggestion is we've got this
constriction on the carotid sheath
that's leading to other problems but
again you know I want to hold back
because you know I don't want to sound
like I've got the cure to everything no
no you don't worry you're among friends
here this story makes a great deal of
sense to me which doesn't mean that
you've got it right or wrong but I know
this style of thought is the one that
solves big problems lots of stuff is
going to be downstream of the same
single error and trying to listen to the
outliers will tell you how it works yeah
and also the other thing going down this
carotid sheath of course is the vagus
nerve and of course if you squeeze the
vagus nerve you're going to ramp up your
sympathetic system and what do we notice
and so many people today they ramped up
their sympathetic system the
parasympathetic calming effect from the
vagus nerve all the way they call it the
vagus because it's the Vagabond it's the
travel it just goes off all the way
around your body particularly to the
internal organs calming them down and I
think that and the problem with this
whole thing is that if you put someone
in you lie them flat to put them in a
scanner you ain't gonna see it because
it's only affecting when you stand or
you're supine and you're engaging these
muscles to maintain an airway that story
also makes sense to me that there's a
bias in the way we study things and it
is predictable that anything that runs
afoul of that bias will be mysterious
for much longer
right anything you can see lying down
will not be discovered by this method
that's what we sometimes don't stop
there seems to be a lack of rationality
when you look at um astrophysics
astrophysics is divided into two sort of
groups you have your experimenters and
your theorists and it's a wonderful
science where people are pushing
forwards ideas ideas change is amazing
what would from this tiny little speck
in the back waters of one galaxy we have
managed to work out an incredible amount
about our galaxy well we've done that
with this mixture of experimenters and
theorists when it comes to medicine
where are the theorists well you've
probably worked this out yourself or
Alan tiny in my field there are no
theorists and the reason that there are
no theorists is pure economics right
theorists are the key to moving
evolutionary biology forward but what
we've got is a system in which the
incentives inside the university
prioritize expensive experiments which
require big grants because the overhead
goes to the University and it builds the
buildings and all of that a theorist who
basically needs pencils and access to
the library doesn't bring in big grants
and so the university doesn't want to
fill a spot with them so what we've done
is we've had a kind of a coup where the
empiricists have taken over and there's
nothing wrong with empiricists we need
them but you need them paired with
theorists and so instead of doing that
we say well theory is something you do
in your spare time once you've done your
empirical work which of course turns the
philosophy of science on its head and
there's nothing that says a good
empiricist is gonna be a good theorist
so you're gonna be you can't be someone
else on your part time right it's not a
hobby theorist is a hard job it just
doesn't look the same as running
experiments so it sounds like but go
ahead
what we do we've got so many
facts you know III I'm not saying that
research is coming up with the wrong
answers I'm saying we're just not
reflecting on the facts we've got and
trying to make sense of them there's a
lack of discussion there's a lack of
logic and the problem as you said you
know this is this empirical basis of
evidence as being above it's just not
was not being reflected on it's not
being considered you and that's what we
need badly yes we need so the way I
think of it is synthesis right synthesis
is the act of taking data generated in
experiments and combining it with theory
and figuring out what the new model is
and when you so these phrases like well
what do the data say right our data is
king these things sounds so right
because they sound like an embrace of
the idea of empirical science but
they're actually part of an overthrow of
theory by empiricism which is not
science that's just observation so
anyway it's a chronic problem and its
route is so mundane that nobody even
notices it which is the way we've fund
universities is about experiments that
cost money and so the administrators
have gotten so efficient that we can't
think clearly anymore it's it's a
disaster yes I mean we do have slightly
different structures here in the UK
probably not so much in the university
but when it comes to providing
healthcare but you know I think we've
got a lot of we're not which is we're
not questioning things enough people
aren't questioning everything you know
the you cats I think therefore I am
that's all you can say you know
interestingly a one of the famous armed
scientific philosophers was Karl Popper
and he lived literally if I point my
finger he lived about two miles if not
less over there
actually he claimed to be in the town
next door but was I think this town and
he you know he he set the point that you
know you can't prove anything you can
only disprove things and trying to make
certain that this never escaped medicine
medicine never went back to prove it he
put the null hypothesis so I'd be his
group made the null hypothesis and they
put the null hypothesis so whenever you
make a scientific paper you try to
disprove the null hypothesis yeah you
try to falsify the null hypothesis
however of course we now just have the
null hypothesis and we have completely
forgotten why we had the null hypothesis
it seems an almost an irrelevance you
know I asked sometimes you know tom has
done some research if I'm at a
conference and I'm walking around
amongst the posters and I will do my
sort of annoying spot conversation with
someone on what was a null hypothesis
for why did you do that what's the
history of that what well how did that
come into science hmm right they've
skipped the philosophy of science and
then they've told themselves lies about
why it's no longer necessary and we've
got more sophisticated methods it's very
dangerous
yeah I mean I think that you know I you
know we will look at the world for what
own position now I think that the
medicines lack of how do we say this so
the craniofacial dystrophy and its
effects and the fact that from inaction
and from the wrong action has possibly
caused a issue of historic significance
you know I see this it's just it's
utterly incredible in my viewpoint the
sequence of health effects that have
been caused that I think are completely
preventable completely convertible
however
in my viewpoint this is going to rattle
on getting bigger and bigger and bigger
and from this it's going to give the the
ability or the the the the the situation
where we could gain some real change and
I mean I guess that's what Karl Popper
was thinking when you put the null
hypothesis in however I really look
forward to the ability of trying to gain
some good proper sensible change in
medicine so let me ask you about a
couple things
one I have a hypothesis almost certain
to be wrong but you're probably the only
person on earth worth running it by I
was wondering one of the things I don't
think we have great information on is
how our ancestors slept we have some
information on how people sleep even
hunter-gatherers in modern times but a
lot of the information I believe has
been lost I'm wondering about the effect
of sleeping on pillows with your face
down potentially or your head cocked to
the side is that having an effect on
malocclusion yeah I really and I would
suggest that if you have an asymmetric
position where you routinely sleep yes
it could have an effect however is one
of those things where I don't have
enough information and I'm sitting on
the fence processing at the moment you
know I'm seeing some of those Egyptian
things I mean it would you know you
these Egyptians have these ceremonial
things that were a bit sort of like this
a little bit shorter about like that
fight I think there were cut on one side
that they would put behind their heads
when they slept that was emulated in
quite a few different cultures and the
idea of a pillow and resting your head
on something
seems to be really deep in literature
you know really quite deep in ancient
literature and and fables as well which
is interesting my sister is a physio
when she says to me that one of the good
things of sleeping on a hard surface is
how you have to move around so you're
not you're not in one position you're
physically having to move then I'm
looking at the you know you go into
ancient churches and kneel or even
fairly modern churches in India you'll
have these reliefs of people so these
are mortals or statues of people lying
down often with their sword right down
in front of them suggesting you're lying
on your back I remember going to I had
the the chance to go traveling before
the internet and before everyone else on
their dog decided to go traveling and it
was a fascinating period and I remember
going to this particular event I was in
South America and I was amazed how
people would just lie and sleep
sometimes across their goods so if you
had a bag of stuff you wanted to take to
the market you didn't want someone
nicking your stuff while you're asleep
so you would sleep on it in a sort of
bent fashion or a twisted fashion and I
couldn't get over how these sometimes
relatively mature people were it seemed
so flexible by they slept and it just
didn't seem to fit with the sort of
pattern we're seeing where Mannion if
you don't have a beautiful mattress
you're gonna throw your back out well
these guys were sitting bent over
backwards with their legs twisted norm
one side and their head like that and
seemed thoughtful asleep perfectly fast
asleep and I didn't see anyone wearing
neck braces yes their muscles are
protecting their skeletons whereas ours
have atrophied because our sleeping
surfaces are too soft yeah well I mean
there was a distinct lack of mattresses
mm-hmm yeah mattresses oh yeah frankly
you're trying to make life soft because
you've got a problem
from being soft I had a similar
intuition and at one point considered
whether I would just simply be
considered crazy if we got rid of our
beds and moved to hammocks because once
you figure out a hammock it's actually
quite a good way to sleep I mean from a
lot of perspectives from a thermal
perspective it was interesting but
remember when the sailors used to use
hammocks they would have a cushion that
would be semicircular to sort of flatten
it out a little bit and I'm not a great
deal I don't know but so they were
trying in that era to sleep on a
slightly flatter surface yeah well more
yoga like my thoughts would be sleep on
the floor well the thing about a hammock
is Anna may not be as easy on a ship I'd
have to think about the geometry but the
way to use a hammock is actually
diagonally right so you are flattered
you'd you know that you say it isn't
quite right but if you sleep kind of
across it it works out very well it
takes some getting used to but there's a
lot to recommend it yeah but but I I've
tried with patients getting them and I
always say you know I have to caveat all
these suggestions before everyone
listening goes out and does it that with
some supervision so preferably some
professional help you just start
sleeping on the floor you know you start
by going down and we call them carry
mats the sort of things you would go
camping on you know get three of those
maybe four stop with that then gently
take them away um you know a lot of the
time it's because your skull your is
what your vertebra have become so
distorted it's going to take time to
unwind that and level everything out you
know if you see someone who's hunched
over all the time their vertebra will be
wade shaped and that person can't
suddenly sleep on the floor it's gonna
take a little bit of slow manipulation
to get your vertebra fairly square again
and that you know a but a floor is an
excellent way
to start exhibiting change so if you can
sleep on a floor then you've got in
eight hours of training every day every
24-hour period you've got a third of it
based on training to be straight and a
bread one one other thing you know
either this when we're talking about
prevention um you know the exercise I
try and get people to do a mealtime
exercise and I say that we want a
positional exercise because a
situational exercise sorry because it's
great year you can go to my function
therapists uh or or mammalogists and
they'll teach you how to do a perfect
swallow but most kids learn the perfect
swallow but they never really do it
because it's an it's almost
compartmentalised these exercises so
what I'm suggesting is people have a
mealtime exercise because that's
situational they're going to be sitting
on a meal and the exercise I recommend
and this works its elbows off the table
sit up straight
eat with your mouth closed chew your
food properly don't speak when you're
eating and take your food food comes to
you not you to your food the only other
thing I add is you've got to throw a
chin tuck because most people have got
forward head posture so I make them
turned up when they swallow now not much
of that is new and when you stop and
reflect almost every single culture on
the planet recommend and has recommended
exactly this for generations and there
is a reason for everything
and because it works and I think we we
had this period between the end of
hunter-gathering when we became
subsistence farmers before we
started to really civilize I mean really
the industrial ushion when things
weren't so bad you could go wrong but if
you followed some simple rules some
dictums then you could gain him you
could make certain that your child would
grow to be straight and before we had
modern medicine you you didn't have
anything to fall back on so you had to
do it yourself for your child because
your child was going to be your pension
so you know you made your your child sit
up straight and of course you still have
that possibility that things would go
wrong now we talk about the the village
idiot right
who was the village well we've got this
idea of in eight years and sort of with
the ear sticking out that's the classic
adenoidal face hmm here the tongue
attached behind the mandibular symphysis
you know this bit has swung down to
alter airway will we know that one of
the most sadistic significant
measurements for sleep apnea is the
distance between here and the back of
the throat short of that distance the
higher the chance you are of getting
sleep apnea we know that if you've got
an abnormal face that distance reduced
we know that people with significant
sleep apnea when their children are
affect their brains don't grow as well
and that's well shown hmm so here we
have the village idiot someone that
didn't do the right thing and it won
today you don't notice the village idiot
because almost everyone looks similar
but a couple of hundred years ago they
stood out like a sore thumb and there
the parents could go I don't want you to
end up like that the wind will change in
your face will set like that mm-hmm
right these are
so I have a category that I call
literally false metaphorically true and
these are beliefs that are not accurate
but if you behave as if they're accurate
you do better than you would if you
behave according to the fact that
they're false and so the idea that your
face will freeze in this position isn't
mechanistically right but it means that
if you keep doing that it becomes
habitual and it's the equivalent yeah
yeah you know I mean it's you know there
is there is wisdom in certain cultural
things I am saying little more than
stand up straight and shut your mouth
look well you're saying a couple things
you're saying the way to avoid this
problem in the first place is to behave
in a way that your
great-great-grandmother would have
understood to be the right way to behave
in the first place but you're also
successful at treating people who have
quite distorted faces I've seen the
before and after picture pictures I have
shown you have not seen anything yeah
I'm holding back evidence for the right
moment I mean I'm getting much better
I'm constantly getting better and better
and I got some adult results so did I
put them out I'd be just I'd be a riot
well I'm there Bobbi were yo because we
are achieving things that people just
didn't think was possible it's almost as
if the world doesn't want to believe
that their facial form is malleable you
know that image that looks back to you
from any mirror in the world I mean who
are you back you know
if someone asks to meet you who are you
you'd have to produce evidence of who
you are which would be a document with
your image on it the image of your face
that is in many ways the definition of
who you are and people just don't really
want to believe this thing that they
think their identity it's an insult to
your identity for this thing to be so
malleable so
changeable and in a way is not that it's
not changeable it's that you and your
parameters and posture and function
that's not changeable your habits are
less changeable than your form I've
heard you say that people are resistant
to the idea because if they are just
simply stuck looking the way they are
then it's not their fault but yeah if
they could change it and don't then it
is their fault and I have to say that
that resonates yeah but it's a double
whammy isn't it the your face didn't
grow well and is your fault yeah you
know shouldn't this change where we come
to our children the fact is maybe you
can't do anything about your face at
some advanced age but this the the
really difficult thing to think about is
your children at the point that they're
born aren't damaged yet all you have to
do is not screw it up
okay but a little caveat in that I'm
surprised how many newborns I'm seeing
that have that are correct
to what degree at that well I'm
fascinated about that I think that a
couple of things first of all well the
average woman giving birth is now
considerably older you know yeah I don't
I would be fascinated to talk to her a
proper someone who probably knew but I
would imagine that in prehistoric so I'm
in Paleolithic periods you would have a
partner within a distance maybe six
months a year after your first period
III would have no idea but I would
imagine this was a marker within the
cultural society but basically if a lot
of people were dead by the time they
were thirty you have to get cracking at
a much younger age although clearly it's
it's an it's an emotive comment to
suggest young girls should be having
babies but certainly women are having
babies older now that's certainly true
and you're on the right track women
would have matured later that
his move to an earlier point in life
because of the plentiful resources that
we have but you are on the right track
most women would have had very few
periods in life because they would have
been in a state of amarant amenorrhea
for much of their lives are there
because they were pregnant because they
were lactating because they didn't have
enough resources to produce a baby and
so yes there would not have been long
periods of fertility in which women were
not engaged in some part of reproduction
you know so family planning is a
wonderful thing yes since that it
liberate liberate swimmin from this but
it it does have consequences like being
able to put off childbearing till so
late in life that your body may not be
up to it in the same way but also in
these people wouldn't be as fit well
they all you know modern mothers are not
going to be as fit as their
hunter-gatherer ancestors because the
hunter-gatherer ancestors were younger
and more active absolutely so you've got
you know I would imagine that the in the
fetus the child is resting far further
down in the pelvis because of that so
that's my one then mothers aren't moving
as much that's number two then they're
sitting which was you know I'm sure
people did set but he also squatted and
they were on the move whereas you know a
lot of working people now are sat in one
position for long periods of the day so
that would be number three and then
we're going to get onto some of the
modern diet effects and things like this
that I'm not as familiar with but I've
been trying to throw ideas to suggest
why would we be having babies born that
how having really in a great form and
great a situation a fight a good
situation so that's one can amend my
point from before it may be true it may
not be true that you can protect your
children completely by just after
they are born having them behave in a
way that will not cause these problems
but you could protect your grandchildren
right if your children behavior will
stay with children for second practice I
think the 90% of the population
we're spot on here and what it
interested me is I often see people who
are born with like fetal molding so you
know you're molded as a fetus in the
womb particularly if you've got twins
it's very common and spontaneously
correct to a huge degree in the first
three years so at the moment I'm not
making comments below three years old
I'm just leaving it blank and I'm saying
I don't know it's a little bit like
sleeping position I'm saying you know
I'm gathering information I'm fascinated
I'd like to learn more I'm not gonna
open my big mouth till I've got a few
more facts and I'm a bit more certain so
now you're born distorted you're still
likely to correct if you have there is
the right influences there is good
evidence and I've seen anecdotally some
really nice improvements particularly
with asymmetry mm-hmm from fetal
moulding so but but you know there's a
lot of things you can do I mean I do are
you familiar with the baby led weaning
movement I don't think so okay so the
baby led weaning movement is that pure
Rayz came around during after the
Industrial Revolution when women started
going to work and course it was
important we have equality and we engage
the full labor force however all of a
sudden women not being at home no
mothering or or a nursing their mothers
with breast feeding as we would think
what 24 36 months you know this is a
sort of numbers of a thrown around if
you're gonna stop that early the sort of
natural conclusion was you've got to
give baby something soft that they can
eat hmm and I think that's kind of where
baby food came from but I think that I
just I kind of think it's his assumption
we all have the assumption that these
poor little darlings are so delicate
they couldn't survive you know they
can't miss a meal they've gotta have
clockwork bedtime you
what those humans they're pretty Hardy
animals they've done rather well
actually they're not that delicate um
and so the idea was baby led weaning is
you go directly from breastfeeding to
solid food mm-hmm so you um you have
this transition phase when you rely on
breast milk for nutritional value while
you start ramping up hard food and you
start giving so if anyone's listening to
this you know a good way to start it is
you cut the veg that you're going to eat
up into chunks one and a half times a
baby's fist length so that a bit so if a
baby picks it up a bit will stick out
one side of the other side and they can
nibble on it so you're not you you're
not and this is important to understand
you're not expecting the baby to get
their full nutritional value you're just
expecting baby to enjoy the food and it
should be the same types of food that
you've got on your plate because that's
what the baby wants to do and baby's
gonna have fun with food you're gonna
use the breast meat for nutrition and
you're gonna watch in the nappy that you
might call diapers but the correct name
is nappy and you're gonna look in the
nappy to see what output is going on so
that you can gauge how much of nutrition
is now from milk I know how much is from
solid foods and then you make a progress
straight through to solid foods and you
never give slops makes perfect sense yes
it was a when we're a baby so when I
looked at my nephew who was a classic
example he had two big cheeks he would
cry he would poo he would eat and sleep
and that was it and when I watched him
feeding these muscles the cheek muscles
what basically is they they're the most
important and powerful muscles
his body that's did everything getting
food on board was his goal in life at
the time and I was amazed with his box
inators and they these big cheek muscles
now babies and cherubs should have big
cheeks anyone over the age of four
should have hollow cheeks hmm
and again I think that we accept this
chubby cheeks and they're not it's not
fat it's muscle because if you don't
have to do something it's unlikely you
will yeah we're lazy well so let's let's
do that part right our ancestors were
deprived of food almost all the time
they didn't have enough yeah and because
of that there is a strong desire to
limit the use of calories that can be
preserved right because the calories
saved is the equivalent of a calorie
found so we are wired to do all kinds of
foolish things on the basis that we are
preserving calories that we actually
don't need and would be better off to
burn
that's over from evolution yeah yeah yes
yeah absolutely true I mean you know
we're we're programmed to be lazy in a
certain way so but an infant's have a
very different suckle and that's a very
different packing from an adult swallow
and if you don't have to make that
transition you probably won't
I remember suckling in the days when I
was still eating wheat I remember
suckling a Big Mac it wasn't very pretty
it was a bit messy but I managed it and
I suck called the Big Mac I just you
know used a suckling time action til
I've got the whole Big Mac in it took a
bit of fluid but you could do it and I
think that most people still suckle you
swallowing so use this musculature when
they swallow and we've never made the
full transition so that's baby led
weaning let me let me understand what
you're saying
you're saying that because we skipped
this phase where babies should be
learning how to deal with solid food
yeah that we learn to eat solid food
with the mechanical approach that we
would take to a liquid food in other
words when somebody purees the carrots
they turn it into what we would eat as
as we would breast milk the suckling
reflux continues and it gets developed
into a kind of what to say a kind of
chewing that is effective enough to get
the food ground up and digestible but it
does the wrong things to our faces yeah
so you know we're supposed to move from
the infantile circle to an adult swallow
and I think we get about 40 50 percent
of the way there we modify when you need
to bring the teeth into action usually
but we're using our facial musculature
mm-hmm so we're using the facial nerve
not the trigeminal nerve that we want to
get complex to in our swallowing process
and I think that's causing deeper
problems than we would otherwise imagine
but particularly it's upsetting the
balance so when I do and I'm not the
best sometimes I do a bad swallow I do a
little bit of yeah but if you do a
proper swallow
there should be nothing where's you see
so many people doing this sort of thing
now if you're sucking like that multiple
times a day every day eventually you're
going to pull everything back and most
people if you take a ruler and you line
it from the tip of the nose to the tip
of the chin a huge number of people have
sucked that whole segment back you're
sucking the teeth back what you wonder
why you don't have enough space for the
teeth or your wisdom teeth then you suck
your your the tongue space so the tongue
now has to rest closer and closer to
your airway and that that's just endemic
when I walk down the high street again
victim victim Vic
and they're not even aware of this
parents think it's like puree food it's
the go-to you know when are you gonna
get pureed food you know when we had our
first child
several people gave us some old bottles
of organic puree food type IND good man
alright so let me ask you a couple more
questions don't mean unless you had
something you wanted to well I was just
gonna say that tipped a couple of other
things that I've noticed is that we've
now got sugar and everything now if I
want it you either put on weight you
lose weight or you stay the same now if
you're gonna stay the same or the same
trajectory and your percentiles as a
growing child and you start you start
having someone gives you a sugary snack
so they give you your sugary snack you
eat the sugary snack know you're gonna
eat less of other things so in the net
effort you're gonna go to is now
decreased because you've had some easy
calories and I think that's endemic now
in society that we don't have to make as
much effort to gain the calories that
we're consuming to survive and and then
the other one was well when I was at
school and I would be walking along the
street with my hands in my pockets you
know like this a teacher would come on
boom smack me around the head hard say
hands it behind your back stand up
straight get going they would now get
sacked for doing the same thing when I
was young you went into class as you all
sat up straight now you go in and these
kids look like they're having a Sunday
afternoon movie session and no one
saying anything no one's saying stand up
straight yeah you know and you're and
only a hundred years ago people were
growing with far straighter teeth and
better facial form go and look at the
moon go and look at you know em
Duggal Beach and 1960 people were
slimmer they had better facial form and
I mean we're watching everything just in
front of our eyes it's one of a dozen
pieces of evidence that this can't be a
genetic problem it can't have it since
1960 no way
so okay where are we I want to ask you a
couple things one I am now in an
uncomfortable place with my children's
orthodontia my children have been told
they need braces mice my younger son
actually is about to have his braces
removed and we have had the idea sprung
on us that he needs a permanent retainer
in order to hold the teeth in place talk
to me doctor might ah this is well the
ones I don't like talking about very
much okay um so I get so many people
from around the world saying um who's
doing what you're doing and the answer
really is no one's doing what I'm doing
my father noticed these bond so my
grandfather bought Western prices book
on you know nutrition and whatever it
was I can't remember but Weston Price
had an interesting book he made some
great observations my father can
remember the place in the road where
they were when my grandfather told him
about the book and this was before my
father had even finished school so my
father knew about it and my grandfather
did some little bits of orthodontics
kind of based on this concept which my
father was interested in and my father
then he came up with this idea bought
the tropics he came up the idea of it
being a not a genetic it was an
environmental condition and how you
could affect it but remember back then
people stood straighter people were
educated to stand and sit better
food was a bit tougher there was less
refined carbohydrates so I inherited
this system that was starting to
struggle and to rule it you needed
an incredible patient and you need to be
an incredible orthodontist and when I
committed to coming down here I thought
right how can I make this simpler
because it's not swinging you know you
can't do this you can't expect everyone
to become superhuman and of course you
don't make money if you need to see
people that many times now that's I saw
I now have I I'm getting now I'm really
have I've made big big moves and you
know might as I said my results are
getting better a lot better but then how
can I apply this for other people around
the world because people are constantly
asking me might
I live in bloody birdie birdie is there
someone round me who can help I've
looked on the orthotropic map there's
this person I was it no one yet is doing
what I'm doing and I have literally
risked everything I've sold the house
taken inheritance burnt the lot risking
my life and skin but I can't I don't
know why you do these things but you get
you get a passion you head off on his
passion and I've more or less got there
however I'm worried about everything I
really worried I'm really worried about
all the people around the world now
coming back ok the story of that
preamble now let's come back to your
child ok ok now the problem is that if
you have the structure that was informed
by your posture and function maybe a
manipulated by orthodontic slightly it's
very hard to change your posture and
function in the structure that was
informed by your posture and function
because it's reminding you to have the
same posture and function so reinforcing
self reinforcing so you what you've got
to do is get people to change their
habits now one of the simplest things to
do is chew gum I know it's not what it
is not it's not fancy it's not
attractive it's not you know it's not
this wonderful treatment I can offer
people but chewing gum builds up the
muscle tone in time it works
also of course trying to get your tongue
up on the roof of the mouth and this is
so I gave this lecture um and people
started the mewing movement based on
that lecture and the information I gave
out it works but it takes a huge amount
of personal commitment however your son
now is been told they need permanent
retention now let's think about its
dissect those retainers for second so
the teeth the bone and the gum rest in a
balance between the lip and the tongue
great well we know that that's system
that we the most bill are the other five
thousand four hundred species of mammals
be using to get straight teeth as we're
ancestors used to do the same thing now
if you need a retainer that retainer is
going to hold the tooth out of the
balance zone and you can do it that's
what a retainer does however you can't
hold the bone and the gum out of the
balance zone hmm so in time what's going
to happen the teeth are going to be left
without the bone and gum now that's not
going to be good and so I've been
waiting over the years I was waiting for
para dontist a gum expert and an
endodontist someone who works with the
roots of the teeth to contact me now
about four years three years ago a
periodontist contacted me saying I can't
believe that you know I'm looking I'm
doing surgery on people and they've got
damaged gums and bone all over the place
I met a girl so I went and went for
drinks after work and a friend came
along and he bought his dental nurse
with him and we're having chat and she
said that she was doing weekend work
with a forensic dentist and the
dentist is getting to look in places
where most people don't so this is
someone who identifies dead bodies and
we frequently identify dead bodies if
you don't know by looking at their teeth
because clearly your teeth is a really
with someone's very badly decayed teeth
is a really good way to identify someone
and he is looking at these dead bodies
and of course it's gonna be a selection
of people you know of different ages you
know you're going to get lots of young
teenagers as it happens and he'll be
looking and he said it's almost like
these skulls a completely different
species than the skulls I did my medical
training on and he's seeing what we
refer to as the essence and
fenestrations that's where the root is
bulging out of the bone all over the
place
and that's from holding the teeth out of
their balancer and of course lots of
parents will go to their orthodontist
they'll say I don't want you to take
teeth out so you're on John said that's
fine we've got lots of methods so we
don't take teeth out and though widen
the dental arches and they'll take them
out of the balance home and then you
have a retainer that holds them out the
balance zone now I don't want to
criticize people not taking teeth out
because I believe in not taking teeth
out but if you going to expand and move
someone's teeth out the balance zone
you'd better get that person to change
so better change that balance and here's
the thing the child in question I've
become very attached to him it's not
like I can just go get another so what
can I do for him what what what should I
say to this orthodontist and then what
should I say to this kid and if I need
to make him change his behavior in order
to rescue his denturri I'm gonna do it
um it's just I mean okay stop in change
the easiest thing to change is your
function okay I could if I go that you
I can pick up my gym bag I don't have
one I can go to gym I'm not a member
however in theory I could do that and I
would program myself to go and do some
function yeah so example I will ride my
bike home because if I'm first to take
the bike home I force myself to do a
function all right
functions you can force yourself to do
posture is you it is very hard to change
your posture now you've got to change
posture and function so what I do here
in the clinic is i widen people's jaws
so I gain structural change to help them
to change and then I put in feedback
mechanisms simple Pavlovian feedback
mechanism if you drop your mouth open it
hurts now pretty soon you start to
change it's a little bit like I lent you
a big belt buckle with a spike that came
to here you're gonna stand up straight
sure you are but hopefully you can learn
a lesson to be different and a lesson
learnt can last a lifetime because if
you do someone's homework for them
you always need to do it if you
straighten someone's teeth you need to
hold them straight forever if you do it
artificially you've got an artificial
retainer now for your son simply working
on
stand up straight shut your mouth to
hard food however it's just I find it
very difficult to really embody this
message upon people you know the phrase
um give me a child to lay off seven and
I will give you a man under seven you
can change people they're very malleable
do you know contains habits you can
change patterns you can hate change
behaviors seven eight nine ten it's
getting more difficult try and change my
habits and patterns of behaviors now
that's hard work um so may I ask how old
your son is he's 14 yeah you see it
becomes the hot the what you got to
change now is not here it's here mm-hmm
you've got to change his desire to
change
if he gains a desire to change then
he'll do it you know look at these
Muir's you know is all there I have
provided enough information for anyone
to gain significant health benefits for
free so I meet you know if I are you
telling me that the right course here is
to tell the orthodontist to get stuffed
not go with the retainers and get my kid
to do this mewing movement stuff that
that's the right the right if he if he
doesn't okay but that's what I want to
know because that influence if you could
if you could engage him so I frequently
say to people if I could plug into you
like they did Keanu Reeves in the matrix
and I could plug you into my computer
and I could rub date your parameters
that is oh I would do no more no less
remember I could uh I could upload
French and Latin and Russian and you
know the history of antiquity if that of
life was that easy and in a way us
growing up is about us learning those
things agreed so here's the thing
fortunately my son is like a proto super
genius all I have to do is om this
podcast and he will understand what he's
being told and he's dreading this
retainer so if there's a melted my
suggestion is yeah that Walt sort of
retainer of one fix behind the front
teeth a one that comes like it's the
lower one they want to do fixed in the
upper one they want to do removable
which I'm afraid he won't even use well
okay get the lower fixed because that
will keep the aesthetic gain long enough
for him to engage properly with the
mooing okay and what do I do with the
upper I so my if you wanted a perfect
result you would go one or two
weeks with no retainer it's just let
thing set a little bit because one of
the most important things is that your
bike is comfortable if your bite is not
comfortable
you won't engage your full muscles and
you're not engaging those full muscles
well those muscles are the single most
significant important fact in facial
change so if I understood you correctly
you leave it for two weeks because
actually you don't want to hold it in
the position that the orthodontist moved
it to you want it to find the most
natural position nearby clothes exactly
then you can take the mold then you make
the retainer and then what you do is you
slowly wean yourself off that retainer
while mewing while mewing and as a top
thing don't get a retainer that covers
the teeth because that layer of plastic
between the teeth is jacking them open
preventing all night that comfortable
bite it's the comfort might but the what
the big word I've got to now is comfort
people will do things that are
comfortable redirect comfort and you're
in with a chance okay
now I have another son he's about to get
braces I should just call that off and
go full force on the mewing am i right
yes what means that again it's getting
people to actually enact change you know
the number of people who come to me say
although I do I've got online
consultation and they go yeah I'm my lip
so together all the time my tongues on
the roof of the mouth I've got beautiful
body posture I'm chewing all the time I
start talking them and I go lips were
part carrion lips were part lips were
part and when they realized as I'm
saying this is that they haven't really
changed you know right they've changed
when they're thinking about it when
they're observant about it but you we
just need a deeper level change than
that
right but in the case of my older son
I'm in an even better position because I
can tell him he needs to do this and if
he doesn't do it I'm getting embraces
you see what I'm saying yeah incentive
yeah I mean you can't I mean there are
other system
that are simple um you know there's many
different systems that will simply widen
the dental arches give a little bit more
tongue space that can help you to change
one of the big so we make certain
compensations
so once we've reduced tongue space we
make a range of different places where
we place our tongue up and that gives us
a types of crooked teeth so when we talk
about a class 1 class 2 class 3 or deep
bites these various different things our
orthodontist talked about I believe that
that's not genetic it's more likely to
be comfortable a range of comfortable
places where you can place your tongue
after you have a reduction of tongue
space now there may be some genetic
tendencies in how you respond to this
problem which of course if you do your
numbers you'll start seeing genetic
shadows the other thing is you've got a
forward head posture so now if you bring
your teeth together force the tongue in
the roof of the mouth you're making a
compensation or you're unwinding a
compensation if you put your chin back
you know you're unwinding a compensation
well of course it's going to be
uncomfortable to maintain this because
now your tongue is bolting back into
your airway that's why you made those
compensations in the first place well
you are not going to sit in discomfort
particularly discomfort that affects
your airway us do that so widening the
2/3 is reconstructing an ancestral state
in one dimension in a simple singular
dimension it's just helping to create
more tongue space so that you can unwind
those compensations comfortably without
this huge desire to return ok so you're
not arguing against all appliances your
are knowing no
for some and against others on the basis
of ultimately trying to restore this
ancestral condition yeah you just need
to think to work out what you're doing
and why before you blindly just sort of
wrap braces around everyone you know as
a zealot you're disappointing me that's
sounds very moderate well what I don't
like what I really think is a problem is
when you have braces on the top jaw
braces in the bottom jaw in whatever
types of braces the preventing the teeth
meeting together comfortably because
then you you you are dissuaded so you've
got a negative feedback - biting hard I
mean I don't my uncle used to go
shooting pheasants you know with with a
shotgun would you go with buckshot I'd
call it and I remember going around for
dinner once and killing away on a bit of
pheasant I don't love a bit of pheasant
and all of a sudden boom I just froze
solid because I've got a little pellet
of buck a buckshot between my teeth and
it's amazing that you're exerting big
pressures with your teeth and all of a
sudden they stop you know because you've
got an inhibitory feedback well if your
teeth don't meet together well you've
got inhibitory feedbacks what I was
saying earlier on if you get a stroke
your face is going to change because you
change your muscle usage well
slamming some inhibitory feedback
mechanisms on all of your masticate weak
muscles well it sounds a very similar
game to me so where we wait let me
understand what you just said we have a
circuit that protects us if you bite
down on something hard you'll crack your
teeth that has big implications for an
ancestor who cool broke it to go back go
back to that para don't--all membrane
that GaN photic socket we talked about
early on gone photic joint in that joint
if you excessively stretch the know that
the tissues you know the fibers they
will send a feedback mechanism a pain
feedback mechanism straight through to
the pain centre and that will inhibit
what you're doing and has they work very
quickly in order to protect your teeth
from breaking exactly I mean
how many - I know I burnt my fingers on
hot things you know what I avoid doing
it now mm-hmm
I've learned now it's a trainer yeah
yeah it's a trainer so what you do is
you very quickly bring your hand back
because you've burnt it right so the
second part of what you're saying you've
got this thing that protects your teeth
if you bite down on something hard which
our ancestors would frequently have done
a little rock here there yeah yeah they
really did too hard and hold things I'm
hard and look at the surface of their
teeth yeah and they have to do odd
things so if your teeth are such that
they don't occlude properly yeah then
you're sending that signal
you've just bit down on something hard
which arrests proper bite and prevents
the whole thing from giving proper
feedback yeah you're just not using the
muscles yep
and of course half of the cause of the
problem in the first place is you
weren't using the muscles and so many
times when we're focused on trying to
arrange the as we say we're trying to
rearrange the deck chairs on the Titanic
you know everyone gets a nice view of
the band but mmm it's the fifth movie so
you rearrange the teeth and you're
focused on this and you you you you're
not through you know if a patient comes
to me halfway through orthodontic
treatment one of the things I will
always do is feel that the biting
muscles you know and I've got to tell
you if you've got a child in
orthodontics now try it put your fingers
on the biting muscles like there's four
fingers horizontally on the occlusal
plane bite hard together and see how
much of that muscle is activated and I
frequently find that half the muscle
won't activate there you can feel the
muscle mass but it won't fire off
because it's being inhibited because the
teeth don't meet together comfortably
all right well I'm getting the picture
so I have a last question for you
I understood you to say in one of your
talks that your license is jeopardized
tell me about this okay so it was I was
putting up informational videos on
YouTube you know people were asking me
and I was putting the videos up and I
was giving my opinions and it was
becoming very very popular and it is now
very as I said I don't know how many
orthodontists get stopped on the streets
but I get soft on the streets a fair bit
so this was upsetting the status quo so
the British orthodontic society have
referred me that they're their club
they're a club you know they're your
third antic club they're they're not
important they have now thrown me out
and they've also referred me to my my
official body the general Dental Council
on a number of these videos and of
course of course it's a problem here
because I'm going to be when you go to
court when you go to general dental
council it's like a court and so I have
a expert who's in prosecution and I have
an expert who's in defense who's armed
so you have a prosecution defense expert
well the prosecuting expert is an
orthodontist who's very very certain I'm
very very guilty and a very bad man and
the defense expert will clearly he is an
orthodontist because you don't have any
other dopest experts and he thinks I'm
pretty bad and I probably am doing all
the wrong things as well so you know and
it's a strange and interesting situation
um I also have two clinical cases one is
a mother that thinks it was he thinks
what I've done is incredibly good for
her child she's absolutely singing my
praises and they're taking me to court
over it I mean it's a bit strange I know
one is a child I didn't actually treat I
set her up for someone else to treat so
they're having a go at me about the the
objectives of what I wanted to do so
it's not about whether I did the
treatment right or wrong it's about the
the the philosophy so what they're
trying to do here is they're trying to
get me on that I'm doing the wrong thing
and it's it's interesting you know it's
rattling on three years now sort of when
the first thing started going and I you
know it's it's it's silly how much of my
time energy this takes it just it's it's
it's silliness it's craziness I mean you
know you were talking as if no idea what
the cause of this is and yet both
experts are throwing in comments that I
mean really strong wording you know like
I know this is wrong it's been proven
it's set and I yeah I will have to see
how this goes but it's um I hope I'll
get a fair shout I hope I get a chance
to say what I think what happens if they
rule against you bye bye
really mmm I can't practice anymore it's
of course what the annoying thing is I
having just you know invested everything
that I have into a treatment method and
making it better I would lose all of
that so here's the thing Mike that can't
happen and what's more I have listened
very carefully to what you've put online
and I was expecting to hear kind of
cruddy evolutionary analysis I expected
based on what you were saying that you
would be right but a lot of what you
were gonna say was gonna need cleaning
up that's not what I heard I heard
somebody who nailed the evolutionary
analysis thank you very much so in some
sense I think you need a witness on your
behalf who's capable of saying that
credibly because like it or not they are
engaged in malpractice if they're coming
after you not only are they
wasting your time but they are
threatening to harm your patients if you
can't work on them yeah that has been
that is a suggested argument by one of
my patients who's saying you're gonna
take away my right and my choice to have
what you're providing Mike if they
stopped you from working and if you have
you contacted you said you had some
contact with evolutionary medicine do
you know Randy Nessie I've heard of him
but he's slightly I'm slightly down the
food chain should we put it from
Randolph Nessie well I don't know about
that I know Randy he was a mentor of
mine when I was in grad school I think
he would find this fascinating and I'm
almost sure he'll end up seeing it so
Randy I'd be very curious what you hear
in this discussion and I think it's
about time that evolutionary dentistry
was born and you seem like the right guy
to Harold in that era thank you very
much I do think as as I have mentioned
before I think that evolutionary
medicine is woefully and I mean woefully
under recognized yeah I said so ago
slight slight detour for a second I
think that if I was run over by a bus
tomorrow I would want modern acute
medicine on my side if there is no
shadow of a doubt that it's incredible
yeah however if I have a chronic illness
I think we could almost say by
definition that modern medicines failed
at least not for the aging ones you know
for a good chunk of the middle ground
chronic diseases modern medicine should
really say hello has anyone got any
better ideas and most of those chronic
conditions are related from the mismatch
between how we evolved to live and how
we do live we all know that if you know
if you're unfit you get fit and
work to get fit if you've got type 2
diabetes there's a good chance as
related to what you do your diet and
this goes on all the way through chronic
medicine chronic medicines about you
know you can't change people you can't
make them change themselves a pills
aren't gonna work and we need to really
learn the lessons that evolutionary
medicine can tell us on a broader
perspective Oh across everything we have
an iPod everything of evolutionary
novelty and it's kill yes yeah literally
killing us literally killing us and your
distinction which I love between acute
medicine and chronic condition medicine
is right on but it extends across a
wider range civilization makes us very
very safe from acute hazards and any
sort of subtle hazard that can disappear
into complexity it just throws up its
hands it's it's a it's a chronic problem
across the way we analyze yeah III need
those beyond the diseases that we're
talking about I mean you look at stress
levels we look at patterns of work we're
looking at relationship between families
and groups you know it's a huge chunk of
modern society would benefit from the
lessons of evolutionary medicine 100%
nikasha now and support more I believe
that a great poster child for
evolutionary medicine is this particular
issue I agree because in a way it
affects more people than most diseases
because almost every household in the
modern society will have at least one
child that needs orthodontics the
probably has sleep apnea tonsils
adenoids other entity problems so it's
how it affects everyone and the gross
mismanagement in my opinion brings it to
the fore brings it to the light but what
we have to do to over
come this issue is consider the fact
that our faces haven't grown to their
full potential well I think that's an
excellent place to put a bookend on this
podcast I think it's been eye-opening
even though I had seen a great many
things you've put out I learned a lot
from this I would like you to come back
and keep a surprised of developments in
the story and can you tell me for my
viewers if they want to dive in right
away into your material what's the best
video for them to look at I'm well I
think the one that gives the best
overview would either be modern melting
faces at the ancestral health symposium
or growing your face on the 21
convention remembering that the 21
convention I did that video for young
people so that's aimed at a specific
target so my youtube channel is called
ortho tropics if you want to engage with
us our meal my father or many of the
other people within this field and
you're a professional so you're a
medical professional venue description
you can go to the Facebook page called
Facebook group called orthodontics if
you're a patient or not a medical
professional and you want to engage with
us you can go to the Facebook group
called the craniofacial action group and
if you simply blog my name I mean the
concept so I did not come out with the
term of mewing that has grown it's
organically grown and I want to keep it
as something that is a movement of its
own I don't I'm not interested in
controlling it I do want to try and push
it in a scientific direction
because I think that I need people to
take good records I need people to
really analyze use use a scientific
process Gantt it works and trying to get
the most because we can help people be
so far a lot of people so far the mewing
community the advice they give looks
pretty good to you I mean I I haven't
been keeping abreast of it of recently
but generally so be careful look at the
warnings I've got a video out there
called warnings on mewing warnings and
yes I mean people are doing good things
I'm seeing some incredible results from
people
I mean shocking changes in facial form
and if you're under 25 it's amazing what
you could do and you're over 25 you
might not get the changes in facial form
but remember that there was a Stanford
meta analysis looking at swallowing and
chewing exercises showing a 50%
reduction in sleep apnea in adults and
over 60% in children and that I think
that those exercises were less effective
than most of you so you can really make
some health gains real big health gains
and again what I'm saying boils down to
little more than stand up straight and
shut your mouth
well this is terrific Mike I feel that
you are a gentleman a scholar and a
patriot to humanity and anyway I
appreciate what you've been doing and
that you've been sticking your neck out
on our behalf so thanks so much for
visiting the dark horse podcast well
thank you very much for taking time to
help raise awareness of these problems
wonderful be well Mike okay thank you
very much right ciao
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]