to what welcome to meditating with John
for Vicki we live stream this every
weekday morning at 9:30 a.m. Eastern
time with Mondays alternating between a
new lesson which we called on a day and
a review of the whole ecology practices
which we call the poly day before I go
any further I want to make an
announcement about next week due to
ongoing struggling issues there will be
no live stream next Wednesday next
Wednesday don't be no live stream I hope
that the sign-out will hope and
encourage the Senate to again meet on
the discord server if you're joining us
for the first time for pre defense
lessons and sits I'll see the
description in the video you'll find
links to previous lessons and sips
please continue to meet with us but what
I recommend is that you go and do lesson
one immediately and then every week do
one or two more lessons at your
discretion and you'll very quickly
integrate with us please like the stream
to increase its invisibility on YouTube
algorithm trying to reach as many people
as I can
I'm not deriving income from this I'm
trying to help in these difficult and
challenging times and I think we are
going to be in challenging times for the
foreseeable future so it's important
that we keep trying to build up a
community of practice that can afford
people as much help not only help in
terms of what we're all wrestling with
but also aspirational help so that even
when things get back to so-called normal
if they ever do people can still have
the resources and tools to wrestle with
the perennial problems and our current
historical problems that beset us at the
end of every sit we typically have a Q&A
it varies in length depending on how
much time
thus it is for those for the questions
in that period please limit the
questions to anything from this entire
course this
entire ecology practices is fair game
for more general questions please come
to the general live stream on YouTube
Q&A that we do every third Friday of the
month it will be this Friday the 17th at
3:00 p.m. Eastern Time I think that's
everything we need to do right now I
hope that the Sangha found it enriching
to meet I hope you guys did meet and I
hope you found it in reaching to meet on
the discord server the previous two days
so we will begin as always with some
chanting so please get yourself into a
comfortable position and then set your
phones on do not disturb and we will
begin when I say again
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
begin your salat
you
[Music]
slowly come out if you practice trying
as best you can to integrate what you
cultivated in you practice if you ever
did consciousness cognition character
and communitites perhaps by reciting the
five promises to yourself
focus wait a minute or two for a
question and observation sharing these
are all things that we should be doing
together in this Senate time
christine is sharing that she had a
difficult sit monkeys I think I think
that to me monkey mind it is tears so
Christine you're here with you I have
what I'm sure everybody else will at
some point or already has Innes it have
such difficult sits one thing I've
learned about doing this over a long
period of time is that looking back
retrospectively I find that the
difficult sits were the ones where the
most change was actually happening those
wonderful sits are wonderful and they're
encouraging and they're motivating us
and they give us a taste of what it's
like to see from our Buddha nature of
what it's like that had the presence of
our inner teacher and so those are
important but the difficult sits and
again this was not something I would
ever realize in those sits but I would
realize it typically after those sets
that the difficult sets especially
they've been a sequence of them where
the ones where something was shifting
something was changing I was being taken
out of a comfort zone I was being
exposed to material that needed to be
integrated I was dealing with some very
automatic habits to which I was strongly
identified and so I'm not trying to in
any way say oh give you a hallmark it's
all good agree they are difficult sits
they're just as difficult as the
wonderful suits are wonderful but just
as the wonder of the wonderful six is
powerful and indicative of something
happening in us the difficulty of the
difficult sets is often also at least
for me retrospectively and aware an
indication that powerful change is going
on I sort of frame it this way that the
difficult sisters were I am going
through the process of breaking it
inappropriate or maladaptive or
or no longer relevant frame II and the
wonderful sits are where I'm sort of
making a different kind of like you know
for pasta and meta so I hope that's
helpful to you that's been the case for
me and I've noticed in other people
writing in these traditions a similar
thing about the difficult times they
don't seem the dry and difficult times
don't they seem the most empty the most
challenging sometimes the most futile
but they're actually the time is where a
lot of really necessary frame breaking
is going on
so mark hi mark it's good to have you
here as always are there more questions
we can ask for meditative questing yes
so beyond Who am I you can also ask what
is really happening right now what is
really happening right now and so that
one director once you've got you need to
sort of do the Who am I first because
that sort of it it it gets into the
attractor space of sort of egocentrism
and then it works it works with it once
that's been loose enough of it try right
what's hot what's really happening right
now what's really happening right now
what's really happening right now so try
that and see if you notice both
continuity with who am i and also
differences and perhaps share with the
sena any differences that you might have
noted so thank you all for joining i
want to thank my dear friend and
Technovation are my beloved son jason
who's always in the background of
pinch-hitting please subscribe to this
channel to be notified of the next video
you'll also find links to the lecture
series awakening for the meaning crisis
the dialogo series of voices with Rob a
key where the themes of this course are
put into relationship with related
themes and situated within a more
encompassing framework invite others
please who might benefit by sharing this
series please join the discord server to
chat with others there's a
in the description discord servers and
overlapping and more encompassing and
wonderful and truly welcoming and
nourishing community we're doing this
every weekday morning at 9:30 Eastern
Time next week we are not doing it on
West day I heard you to once again go to
the discord server and home the Sangha
practice for that day there please so I
will see you tomorrow morning for the
Sangha and I hope to also see you on
tomorrow afternoon at 3:00 p.m. for the
general monthly Q&A please remember the
continuity of practice is more important
than quantity of practice there is no
enemy worse than your own mind and body
no Fred how Ally no two companion on the
path better than your own mind and body
Elance are to yourselves and to each
other take care everyone bye bye