[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time we took a look
at the advent of the Scientific
Revolution and we looked at the work of
Copernicus and how the important advent
of a scientific description of reality
had with it the consequence that most of
our experience our sensory experience
was questionable as illusory in nature
galileo also developed that idea of the
math as the language of reality and use
that with the new experimental method a
method also born out of the idea that
most of our cognition is deceptive and
biasing in nature and he used that to
discover inertial motion and that and
change the notion of matter into
something that exists and resists our
will but that had the effect of killing
the universe and making it purposeless
in nature and thus we become odd islands
of meaning and purpose in a vast ocean
of meaningless purposeless material
motion so all of that of course is gonna
have an impact on people's self
understanding their their the meaning
that they're using to make sense of
their existence and look what's
happening here that Aristotelian idea
that the structure of your experience
and the structure of reality conform has
been radically undermine and now you are
trapped within your own mind behind
veils of illusion disconnected from the
world and God has become progressively
more and more a matter of will there's
an individual that takes all of this up
and he does more than just think about
this or speak about it or write about it
he's one of those really Titanic
individuals who exemplifies the chaos
and the anxiety of his time this is
Martin Luther
he's definitely
deeply influenced he's German he's
deeply influenced by the Rheinland
mystics he's influenced by that growing
tradition of the self as radically self
negating inner conflict being at the
core of spirituality
he's an Augustinian monk he's deeply
influenced by Augustine's ideas of self
depravity and our inability to achieve
mystical union with God unaided and
through Augustine Luther of course is
deeply immersed in and impressed with
Paul's ideas about our inner conflict
and now that parallels a conflict within
God between God's love towards us and
God's justice driven anger and wrath
towards us and Martin Luther is very
terrified of that wrath he's very
terrified of it and he has taken that
notion through Tyler of mystical self
negation and it has become radicalized
because of the influence of Augustine
and Paul and his own inner conflict so
that the self negation in Luther's
psyche has become self-loathing he
experiences the self as radically folded
into itself obsessed with itself in a
completely immoral self-centered fashion
so the self is this radical self feeding
self negating because as the self is
unfolded and obsessed with itself it is
simultaneously being cut off from God
and cut off from reality so it is very
much a self-destructive process and I
really want you to hear that self
destructive process that he sees as the
essence of the self so this is Luther's
interpretation of the biblical notion of
pride and rebellion against God that we
are
intrinsically self-obsessed in this
self-aggrandizing self-destructive
fashion so try to try to think of
moments in your life that will give some
substance to what Luther is saying you
have discovered a pattern of behavior
self-destructive for example perhaps you
keep dating the same kind of person and
you keep going back to this and it keeps
turning out to be wrong for you and
perhaps also wrong for the other person
so you step back and you've talked to
friends and you reflect it and you make
a deliberate conscious effort oh no no
I'm not going to date this purse this
kind of person anymore I'm not going to
date that type of person I'm gonna date
this type of person and that will change
things I'll break this pattern and you
go in and you find somebody they seem to
be totally different and you start
dating them and then lo and behold
against your will even though it seems
to be something that you willfully
brought about you find yourself caught
in the same destructive pattern again
and of course Freud and Jung and the
whole psychodynamic tradition very much
part of the legacy of Luther by the way
are gonna make much of that fact that we
keep repeating even in our conscience
efforts to change our behavior we keep
repeating these self-destructive
patterns so although I'm critical of
Luther there's a deep truth here in
Luther right there is the touching of
the group the way in which our
unconscious processes or unconscious
cognition can be beset with these we've
talked about these parasitic processes
that have a life of their own and can
consume us so Luther is convinced that
he cannot do anything to save himself he
takes Augustine's notion right that the
Neoplatonic mystical ascent is
insufficient on its own and has to be
supplemented with
you know the love of God through Christ
he takes that and he radicalizes it in a
very powerful way because of his own
personal wretchedness he comes to the
conclusion that there is nothing he can
do and that leads into a startling
interpretation of Paul an interpretation
that is going to put him at odds with
the Catholic Church and this is the
interpretation that we are saved by
faith alone where faith becomes nothing
more than a complete acceptance of God's
saving grace so let's unpack this very
carefully because it's become so
immersed in our way of thinking and
being the idea here is that faith has is
right it notice what's happened all that
sense of part participatory knowing the
sense that we're participating in a
process remember the Israelite notion
that we're participating in our cultural
history were participating in the
creativity of God all of that is now
gone it's gone and your sense of what
it's like to be you your sense of self
is completely twisted and illusory so
all the prospective of knowing all the
participatory knowing is being
eradicated it's being reduced down to
the acceptance of a proposition and an
acceptance that is cannot in any way be
based on evidence or argument because
that would be your mind participating in
your salvation it has to be a radical
pure acceptance so that the self
negation of the Rheinland mystics has
come to fruition in Luther's ideas here
now what does that mean
that means that you have to what you
radically radically have to accept is
there's absolutely nothing you can do
and even your affirmation of the
proposition of the Creed of Christianity
is something that has to be given to you
now what does that mean from God's side
of this equation it means that God's act
of saving you is completely arbitrary
there is not B since there is nothing
you do there's no thought word or deed
that you perform that in any way earns
or has any causal effect upon God's
behavior and you and I'm not over
representing this look at the debate
between Lutheran Erasmus Erasmus tried
to propose what he called synergy that
the human being and God were working
together in a participatory fashion for
salvation with God of course having the
bulk of the work and Luther rejects that
utterly God saving of an individual is
completely arbitrary so God has become
right remember what we talked about an
ahkam right that God's will supersedes
his reason
God's reason is now not involved at all
it is just an arbitrary act of will that
saves us and we have to radically accept
that arbitrariness now think about what
that means and there's a weird there's
an irony here there's an irony here and
it's it's almost a self-referential
irony because Luther is trying and I I
think he's he's very sincere but he's
trying to rescue us from right the fact
that we are obsessed with ourselves in
an idolatrous fashion and that we that
that obsession is one a source of deep
suffering from for
for us we know that that self-obsession
cuts us off separates us but the irony
is in his endeavors to deal with that
look at what Luther is teaching what
he's what is he what is he putting into
our cultural grammar that we are
inherently worthless and that our inner
life is one of self-loathing and the
only solution to that is arbitrary or
betray unearned regard this is the
cultural training for narcissism
narcissism is to be trapped to be
self-obsessed
within self-loathing and that what you
want to alleviate is unearned positive
regard not for any reason not for
anything you've done completely amoral
unearned positive regard that's
narcissism so the one of the deep
ironies of Luther's revolution is that
and I think this says something about
what's going on at the time what are the
deep ironies is he actually lays the
grammar for cultural narcissism we are
all being trained to experience
ourselves as wretched self-obsessed and
that the only solution is unearned
positive regard and so we can see we can
see the spirit of Luther in our
obsession with Instagram and our
obsession with snapchat we constantly
want unearned positive regard now
there are other consequences of this
radical change of course immediate
consequences Luther comes into conflict
he protests against the Roman Catholic
Church that's what Protestant comes from
because the Catholic Church has a
different doctrine of salvation right
that it's one in which the human being
has still has a participatory role and
because of that the church also thinks
that its cultural history think of how
this is still an Israelite notion the
church still thinks that it's tradition
matters for human salvation that
participating in that tradition the
tradition the cultural history of the
church is also something is that is
needed now I'm not advocating for
Catholicism here over Protestantism I'm
trying to get you to understand what the
two sides were standing for so Luther is
attacking all of that he's attacking the
authority of the church he's attacking
the authority of tradition so history
and tradition an institution don't
matter why because Luther is a child of
his time he is trapped inside his own
mind he advocates that all that really
matters in matters of faith are with
individual conscience and please
remember what this word means it means
knowing yourself science kansai ins
conscience knowing yourself the one
thing you know is yourself
and so Luther refuses to recant he
refuses to change his interpretation to
be in line with the church and he
valorizes individual conscience as the
final authority over a person's
spiritual life
this lays the foundation so do you see
what's happened here this withdrawal of
meaning into the individual mind
isolated individual mind is now being
appropriated as well that must mean that
the mind the individual conscience is
the final sole authority of what matters
it's a radical idea many other cultures
find this a bizarre idea that we possess
in the West and so of course there's a
lot of discussion nowadays about
individual responsibility individual
authority we have as Adorno talked about
it we have a cult of authenticity that
being true to yourself and this is
Lutheran being true to yourself is the
ultimate authority by which you should
judge and evaluate your life now notice
what has happened the connection to
reality being true to reality has been
superseded by being true to yourself and
it that is also emerging with a cultural
grammar that is training us in
narcissism
now because of this Luther Luther was a
monk and yet he comes to the conclusion
that the monasteries should be shut down
why would he why would he come to that
conclusion well right the West for a
long time had these paired institutions
he had a knowledge institution that has
already emerged and is being developed
right you know in the Middle Ages and
this of course is the University we're
supposed to get a universal education
come to understand right as much of
reality the universe as you can and that
was paired to a place where right you
have to go through transformation in
order to acquire wisdom and this is the
monastery and so this is the idea here
right that here you're seeking that self
transcendence this is this is right this
is the legacy of the axial revolution
this of course is a response to the
emergence of first Aristotelian science
and then the new science of people like
bacon right Copernicus Galileo and the
two are supposed to represent an
important synthesis of how human beings
are to make sense of themselves and to
find a meaningful life but this
institution places a huge premium on
self transcendence as we've seen
and for Luther this is the grand
illusion the idea that human beings are
capable of self transcendence is
something he thinks is the greatest lie
that our self tells us he sees that as
the greatest instance of the sin of
pride see as if you lose the
perspectival participatory sense of
faith if faith just becomes assertion
born out of radical acceptance then the
idea of this being even possible to you
disappears and so what happens is that
these institutions are being shut down
now that means the university now needs
something else in order to take this
knowledge and give it existential
transformative relevance to individual
lives the university has to be attached
to something else that transforms
people's lives gives structure and
purpose to their existence and of course
we know what that's going to be that's
going to be the state and knowledge is
not going to be linked so much to wisdom
it's going to be linked to politics and
of course that is going to be supported
by the new science people like bacon
famously arguing that knowledge is power
the forerunner of the work of Michel
Foucault and others so we get the loss
of all the psycho technologies of wisdom
of cultural communities that are
committed to providing guidance and
support to people who want to cultivate
wisdom of a historical tradition that
can relay to us this the patterns of
success and failures and give us
practice
that we can use to test out and try for
transformation all of that is being lost
so you know where to go for information
you know where to go for knowledge but
now today you do not know where to go
for wisdom
we have Sapienza obsolescence of our
knowledge and we have knowledge being
inextricably bound to the machinery of
the state and to politics such that it
is becoming increasingly difficult right
now for us as a culture to distinguish
politics from knowledge from the willful
assertion of things that we must simply
accept because of an arbitrary will
wielding power so
the Protestant Reformation is Titanic it
is really inappropriate if you're trying
to understand the advent of the meaning
Christ is to only look at the Scientific
Revolution you must look at the
Scientific Revolution and the Protestant
Reformation together they are conjoined
now there are other important aspects of
the Protestant Reformation that come to
the fore because of his attack on
tradition and institution Luther
advocates what he calls the priesthood
of all believers there is nothing in
between there is no mediator between you
and God there is no church
there's no priest right there's nothing
here
there is just a direct personal
relationship again this idea of your own
personal spirituality has its root here
now because of this Luther argues that
for the priesthood of all believers
everybody has an equal spiritual
authority because of course learning
processes of growth and self
transformation those are no longer
important criteria all that matters is
the degree to which God has saved
someone now we've talked about some of
the negative consequences of that but a
positive consequence for that is that
Luther argues for a complete form of
democracy within the church everything
should be decided democratically because
there should not be any significant
Authority or hierarchical structure
because Luther is rejecting all of that
this of course is why the Catholic
Church is so like resisting to him like
why they are so inimical to him they
just want this idea eradicated because
it
Minh the very structure and existence of
the institution of the Catholic Church
now Luther doesn't propose political
democracy
he only proposes democracy within the
church but nevertheless that is going to
give people in their day-to-day lives
experience with democratic processes
democratic decision-making in fact in
the areas that they consider most
important about their lives they're
going to be acting democratically now
Luther thinks that there shouldn't be
democracy in the world outside of the
church and when the peasants revolt in
Germany because they're being influenced
by this idea of the importance of the
individual individual conscience and
authority Luther does not side with the
peasants he sides with the princes he
sides with established authority he has
a two worlds doctrine there's a doctrine
within the church and that's a world
that is remember how God is divided
right that's the world of God's love and
that's where we act democratically but
outside the church we don't know who's
saved and who's not saved we'll come
back to that point and because of that
that's the world under God's wrath then
that's a world that has to be kept in
check by political authority wielding
the sword of power again that's a that's
a dark aspect of Luther
it also brings with it the beginning of
an idea of the separation of church and
state radical new idea now Luther of
course is proposing it because he's
proposing it that within the church
under God's love people should be
treated one way and outside of the
church which is under God's wrath there
should be a different way in which
people are treated and politically
operate and they then the state should
not interfere with the church so that we
get the beginnings of separation of
church and state which we take for
granted but this is going to further
drive the secularization of the culture
it's going to further drive the
secularization of the culture because
more and more people are experiencing
the sacred as something private
separate secluded unto itself for a
separate from the state in politics and
of course also science and the
University
now that not knowing who's saved of
course also brings with it terrific
problems this was made into a classic
argument which has come under some
criticism but I think the core insight
is still a value by Max Weber the
problem with Luther's model right is you
there's nothing you can do to know that
you're saved because there is nothing
you can do to bring you have no causal
role which means there's no causal
evidence there's no evidence how do you
know if you're saved because God chooses
people arbitrarily so this provokes
terrific anxiety right there's
tremendous anxiety about whether or not
you're safe yeah you have your own in 2c
and Luther gives you there's this
dramatic tension and Luther he gives you
this this this double boy double bind
right he tells you that what you
ultimately have to rely on is your
individual conscience but he tells you
that that inner world is one of
overwhelming self-deception and so what
do you do with this anxiety well you
can't do anything officially but what
you can do is you can work hard to make
your life good because if you're
succeeding in the world especially
socioeconomic success that surely is a
sign that God has chosen you that God
loves you so what I'm going to do is I'm
going to develop what becomes you know
called the Protestant work ethic because
my right my only way of knowing is this
unofficial way this relatively
unconscious way of knowing that I'm
saved is if I'm succeeding well so I'm
gonna work hard to succeed and I'm not
going to use my wealth in any way to
promote myself right I'm not going to do
any what would later be called
conspicuous consumption because
that would be a sign of pride so I work
hard and in order to avoid pride I'm
gonna plum I'm gonna push that the the
money the wealth I acquire back into my
business I'm gonna get the Protestant
work ethic and the IND
and this is gonna align so well with the
emerging corporations we talked about
the immersion the emerging ascendancy of
the commercial class and we get the
advent of capitalism as vapors book
famously puts it the Protestant work
ethic and the spirit of capitalism and
you see and and this worry this worry is
a real worry and look this is the like
what she watch happen and and this and
and what's amazing is how Luther was
surprised by this right for a man who
has in many ways brilliant he translate
the Bible into German into German by the
way he makes the Bible readable for
everybody because of the priesthood of
all believers and he's a brilliant
translator many people consider him as
one of the foundational figures of
modern German but what he doesn't he
honestly he honestly thought that
everybody would read the Bible the same
way he did so he thought we've gotten
rid of the Pope but there would be right
there would be some a unifying thing
that would hold Christianity together
which is the idea of the Bible so the
Bible becomes very holy and many people
have said that what Protestants have is
a paper Pope the Bible takes the role
for them that the Pope does for the
Catholic world and of course we are
facing struggles right now in our
culture because we don't quite know what
to do with this terrible and awesome
book in the Bible what shocked Luther
and shouldn't shock us is that
Protestantism quickly fragments because
when you give people no authority other
than their own
individual conscience when you separate
them from any claims upon them of
tradition any claims upon them of
history or institution and he claims
upon them of knowledge the idea that
they will all agree is actually a
ridiculous idea and so what happens and
continues to happen to this very day is
the huge and ongoing and accelerating
fragmentation of Protestantism into
denomination after denomination after
denomination and you get what has been
called in in other quarters but can be
applied here the narcissism of small
difference right there's you have to
find that piece of evidence that shows
that you are unique that shows that of
all out of all of the damned masses God
has elected you your uniqueness your
specialness your unearned unique
specialness has to be guaranteed and if
the more I'm like these other people the
more that comes into question so not
only am i driven by my own radicalized
subjectivity in my interpretation I'm
also hungry for a spark of specialness
for me that will show that I am saved
and so the narcissism and the
fragmentation of Protestantism walk
march in lockstep together mutually
accelerating
so notice what's happened take a look
like right you're getting God is
withdrawing God's withdrawing by the
time of Luther God has become very much
this arbitrary will in a world that is
nothing but a battle of wills think
about how not that long after Luther you
have Shakespeare Luther is the great
writer of German Shakespeare's the great
writer of English and notice how
somebody who is plumbing the depths of
the human psyche Shakespeare in a way
that of course has struck most of us as
perennial II profound how absent God is
from that world of Shakespeare there's
supernaturals there there are the
witches in Macbeth there are ghosts in
Hamlet but God is not ever present and
the supernatural is absurd and arbitrary
and largely an agent of chaos and a
destiny that thwarts people in their
endeavors
it's telling how much God has withdrawn
into being an arbitrary absurd
supernatural agency that largely thwarts
and undermines human activities so the
Protestant Reformation is fundamental to
our grammar of how we understand
ourselves and the problem is even though
we are many of us are children of the
secularization that is accelerated by
the president Reformation we still carry
that grammar around in our head we have
to work hard we have to work very hard
and if we don't work hard there's
something where it's gonna be revealed
how worthless we are and that we hunger
for that unearned positive regard we
need to find that mark of our uniqueness
that shows that we are chosen from the
Damned and that we will not disappear
into nothingness and meaninglessness but
instead we will be adored or simply who
we are now all of these factors the
Scientific Revolution the Advent night
of the beginnings of capitalism
especially corporate capitalism and the
Protestant Reformation are all mutually
reinforcing each other they're giving
people tremendous anxiety so the
Scientific Revolution is basically
cutting you off from the world and the
Protestant Reformation is basically
orphan a--from the mother church and
tradition and history you look you look
you have to bear at all your individual
you alone by yourself you have to bear
it all while simultaneously
being told you don't have the resources
or the capacity within you to do it
you're a nothing that has to bear it all
you cut out from the world you cut off
from reality behind illusion there's a
restless battle of wills you're cut off
from instant wisdom institutions with
sappy uncial obsolescence so this is a
time of a lot of existential dread you
see the very thoughtful response of
people like Pascale who's now
experiencing the cosmos not as a cosmos
remember what cosmos means a beautiful
order that we can participate in and
that will afford our self transcendence
no Pascal who's a mathematical genius he
gets the new math he looks out at the
cosmos and he says those infinite spaces
terrify me the cosmos is now cold and
terrifying its vastness is inhuman and
crippling of the human spirit there's an
individual who arises same time and
wants to address this anxiety and we
will talk about the comparison between
Pascal and this person this person is
Rene Descartes Descartes wants to take
this grammar of the Scientific
Revolution about math as the marker of
reality and he wants to use it to come
up with on his own like a good
Protestant although he's Catholic but on
his own from his own individual
conscience he wants to come up on his
own forget the history forget the
tradition this is Descartes going to use
the new math to come up with a saloon
to this emerging meaning crisis now
Descartes so genius and what he does is
he invents a new psycho technology one
of those powerful psycho technologies a
psycho technology that has been so
internalized into our culture and our
cognition that it is almost transparent
to us we do not realize it is the lens
by which we see and understand the world
take I'd like to sleep in it's probably
led to his death because when he was had
to go to Sweden he they didn't let him
sleep in and he got it had to go Anna
cold air and that's probably what led to
his death so he'd like to sleep in so
one day he's laying in bed and it was
the fashion at the time the
architectural fashion further to be
tiling on before and tiling on the walls
there's a fly for flying around the room
now for most of us that's where we spent
that's it that's all we got fly in a
room the Descartes notes that he noted
that if he counts the number of tiles
along right these three axes he can come
up with three numbers that will plot
wherever the fly is in the room
Descartes invents Cartesian graphing the
system we use today the XYZ system he
takes the new algebra the new way in
which write the new way in which Galileo
had been using math and he pushes it
even further he invents graphing and
what what psycho technology because
that's what it is this is a standardized
strategy learn from your society a
socialized standardized strategy for
information processing what psycho
technology more means science to you
than a graph
when I'm going to make a graph I'm doing
science when I can think graphically I'm
thinking scientifically this is one of
the most powerful and pervasive psycho
technologies and he invents it and this
brings with it a powerful idea because
he invents analytic geometry any
geometrical shape can be converted into
an algebraic equation equations capture
reality because remember what Galileo
has done math doesn't have to look like
it doesn't have to share the same
Gestalt
as what it's representing that has now
been taken to its fulfillment in
descartes the equations are not in any
way like what they represent but
nevertheless following up on Copernicus
and Galileo they are what cut through
illusion in into reality now this is a
radical idea because of graphing and
analytic geometry we get this idea that
we can grasp the world with equations so
you think that this captures something
deep about the world e equals MC squared
and you should because when you really
understand this you can take a paper
clip worth of matter and you can smash a
city to the ground men and women like
gods
that's intoxicating the power that it
puts at our fingertips it seems to
provide overwhelming evidence that this
way of thinking puts us deeply in touch
with the fiber and fabric of reality
we are in fundamentally in contact but
it's not a contact of experience it's
not the aristotelian conformity it's not
participatory it is purely propositional
it is purely abstract it is purely
symbolic now that's gonna bring with it
a radical idea Descartes thinks well you
know what this is how I can understand
the meaning crisis all this anxiety he
didn't of course call it the meeting
crisis so that's anachronistic on my
part but I'm putting words into his
mouth so that we can talk to him across
space and time there's all this anxiety
there's all this sense of disconnection
so Descartes understands the meaning
crisis as a lack of a search for
certainty
conformity in the aristotelian the
Neoplatonic sense right participatory
perspectival conformity has been
replaced by propositional certainty and
of course the thing about math for
Descartes is it gives you certainty
that's why math cuts through all the
illusions that's why it allows us access
to such power so Descartes thinks the
answer to the crisis is to change
transform our minds not in any kind of
spiritual transformation but to
transform our minds into machines of
certainty Minds that will only work
mathematically and logically in terms of
equations the way to get certainty is to
turn myself into a machine that
represents the world through abstract
symbolic propositions and then
manipulate those propositions in a
purely logical mathematical function so
what Descartes is proposing is that the
way to address the anxiety of the age is
for each one of us to adopt a method
that will turn us into computers that's
what a computer is
peter is originally a word applied to
people by the way in the 1930s or 40s
you could have a job as a computer that
was your job you would be given the task
of taking equations and prop and
processing them in a logical
mathematical fashion so reasoning is
being reduced to computation we'll talk
about what that might mean in a minute
the idea is if we can make our minds
into purely computational machines then
we will achieve certainty certainty in
our beliefs right will give us what
Descartes thinks we need in order to
alleviate the anxiety that we're
suffering and of course we we do that
right we we are still business so we on
one hand we have the cultural grammar of
Luther and the narcissism and the
radical self-doubt and on the other hand
we have the Cartesian grammar we seek
certainty we don't we won't believe
anything until it's certain and of
course we vacillate between I must
accept it without any evidence or reason
Luther I could only accept it if it's
absolutely certain then beyond question
Descartes and both of these of course
are pathological the first is
pathological because if you completely
remove people's agency in how they come
to their beliefs then you radically
undermine any meaning in life they might
possess the other one the pursuit of
certainty and there are individuals who
seem to speak as if mathematical science
will still give us certainty that's an
illusion part of what we discover after
Descartes and they Kurt was also
surprised and that people ended up
disagreeing with him is that science
doesn't and can't provide certainty
these two equations I put up on the
board this is from Einstein this is from
Newton what Einstein showed is things
that Newton thought were certain
absolute space and time these kinds of
formula actually don't possess the
certainty that Newton thought they did
we'll talk a little bit later about why
we can't except in very limited context
there are deep deep reasons why we can't
pursue certainty and therefore we can't
seek certainty as of the solution to the
loss of connection connection to ourself
connection to the world connection to
other minds now why does Descartes it's
like this again this radical irony it's
very similar to Luther why does de
cartes attempt to address this
burgeoning loss of connections why does
it actually result in exactly the
opposite an increased sense of
disconnectedness well part of it of
course is the failure of the project of
certainty so you can understand the a
the 18th and the 19th and especially
right the 20th centuries as scientific
historical histo and philosophical
undermining of the idea that we can
achieve certainty of course one of the
great principles of modern physics is
the uncertainty principle but let's go
back so Descartes right proposes that we
should do this but there's an individual
at his time there's a contemporary of
Descartes who makes it explicit and
radical and then challenges Descartes
with with that radical derivation Hobbes
says well you know all of this what this
means is that cognition is computation
Hobbs says that he uses an older word he
says ratiocination what we would now say
is cognition by ratiocination I mean
call computation cognition is
computation now there's a lot of people
who were going to disagree right with
this model of computation there's a lot
of discussion right now Brian Cantwell
Smith a colleague of mine at the
University of Toronto does a lot of
important work on the metaphysics of
computation I am NOT trying to state
that this is the absolute truth about
computation that of course would be
ironic given what I just said about
certainty all I am arguing is
historically this has been the
interpretation of what computation was
for people like Descartes and Hobbes
that's all we need for this argument but
Hobbes says cognition is computation and
then here's the radical idea he proposes
he takes a new idea current at the time
remember the idea that matter is a
substance remember the old Aristotelian
idea is matter is pure potential but
with Galileo matter is a reality right
in the sense of a substance it resists
and it's good that it resists because I
need something that resists my will in
order to help me with my biases so
matter is inert it's resistance it's
really there I push on it notice that
again all that's left of Conformity is
resistance of will Hobbes says well
matter is real and what if I built a
material machine
that did computation if cognition is
just computation and I can build a
machine that does computation and some
of the first automatic machines are
being built at this time calculating
machines if I can make a material a
machine that does computation I will
have made cognition I will have made ant
mind right there at the heart of the
Scientific Revolution Hobbes is
proposing artificial intelligence
notice how artificial intelligence Oh
artificial intelligence is a child of
the advent of the meaning crisis and the
Scientific Revolution it's not a modern
idea
artificial intelligence goes back to
this time and see what is Hobbs doing
with this so you know think you know I
said Galileo kills the universe and
Copernicus right kills the reality of
our Sense experience but Hobbs is doing
something way more personal because up
till now
like you've been isolated inside your
own mind but at least still there I
still have something special unique
something spiritual Hobbs kills the soul
so soul because if artificial
intelligence is right if I can build a
machine purely material machine that is
capable of computation then I will have
made a mind and I didn't have to involve
any soul stuff any spirit stuff in
making it and that's radical we'll take
a look at how Descartes responds to that
and how deep that response is woven
into our culture and the meaning crisis
and how we move between AI and Descartes
even today thank you very much for your
time and attention
[Music]
you
you