welcome to meditating with John robic II
we do this every weekday mornings at
9:30 a.m. Mondays we alternate between a
new lesson called the Dharma day today's
a drama day and next Monday will be you
PI a day in which we review the entire
ecology of practices if you're joining
us for the first time
please continue sitting with us but what
I recommend you do is immediately go to
the description in the notes for this
video and you'll find links to previous
lessons and preview sits immediately do
lesson one and then every Saturday or
Sunday or whatever day you happen to
have off I'll do another lesson and
you'll very quickly be integrated with
the rest of us I would ask you all
please to help me reach as many people
as possible by liking this this video
and this like liking the stream
courageous visibility in the YouTube
algorithm at the end of each sit we have
a question-and-answer please limit your
questions at time to questions about
this course that we're all on together
for more encompassing questions please
come to my general Q&A that's livestream
on YouTube every third Friday of the
month to 3:00 p.m. Eastern Time that
will be July some teeth I think that's
it for announcements right now and so
let's get into the Dharma practice for
today this is another layering practice
and it's also a linking practice you'll
see how it layers are I think of aspects
of Praja
but you'll also see how it links again
between mindfulness and more
propositioning based processing and so
in a similar way you'll find that it
sort of resonates and the pun is kind of
intended with lectio divina so the point
about chanting is we're going to be
trying to do something that's more a
little bit more musical and why that
matters is the
music is one of the fundamental ways in
which we play with how things are
salient to us and and it's also how we
play with the machinery by which we make
sense of things how things are
intelligible to us so it's getting it to
the root and chanting because it is
linguistic of course we'll engage the
left hemisphere but because it's also a
musical pattern open-ended engages the
right hemisphere that's very conducive
as you can imagine for increased insight
because instead as a boat by getting a
dynamic integration between the left and
right hemispheres chanting is also
important for what Winkelmann calls
neuro neural axial integration so this
is integration from sort of the higher
cortex areas down to the basic areas of
brain stem music has that capacity to do
that music as a capacity there because
its resonant to integrate the inner and
the outer this is why we have this
notion of enchanting something doing
magic and chanting it filling it with
power or meaning so there's a lot to
bring to mind in your intention to chant
so the difficulty with chanting this
well the line lane why are you giving me
all this theory I'm laying all this in
because not because I want you to oh I
want you to build a very sophisticated
intent for chanting because chanting the
the setting scent of chanting is to fall
into sort of ball we just saw you do
that you can do that very easily but if
you remember everything you're trying to
activate and access and accentuate with
chanting then it'll go much more
transformative for you
so it's very important that you let your
stomach be open and belly breathing it's
also very important that you don't
hyperventilate so again try to keep your
breathing now you're gonna be breathing
differently than you normally do that
you're going to be taking in breaths and
that uses your out-breath to chant but
make sure you're not getting that sense
of of a thinness to your breath and a
lightheadedness you don't want that you
should always feel that you're
well-rounded
so typically we won't do this right now
but typically where I find chanting to
sort of fit in best is not all my moving
practices of the cheek on Dee John John
Dee chuan I saw a gun the sitted cheek
on I done the routing I've done flow and
then I go into chanting thought I go
into chanting so what you're going to do
is you're going to inhale and then as
your exhale you're going to chant now
when you do so that in order to
emphasize for me and I'm just going to
introduce something to you again it's an
integrative practice and it's designed
to also bridge between the eastern
course that were on and the Western
course we're going to take up with it
the way the wisdom of Hypatia so that's
where I have chosen this one and it's
also one that for me it resonates with
the two symbols that I carry around so
we're going to use from the eastern
tradition ohm as one aspect of the chant
and from the Western tradition one
because the one the oneness of things is
right so the epitome of the Neoplatonic
wisdom tradition Oh has to do with the
grounding the emergence the flowing into
existence of things one has to do of
course with the oneness of things the
oneness of things ohm is chanted lower
so it sounds like this
Oh
and notice what I'm doing so sorry my
mouth is sort of rounded sometimes one
was actually spelled a um oh and you
want a bit of that rounding in your
mouth and you don't want the chance to
end with your mouth coming closed right
if that's half way through the chat so
it's oh so I take a breath um see I'm
I'm rounding to closure sorry I have to
talk and interrupt the chair I can't
I need a hand puppet or something over
here champion taught you something
but anyways right when I get here I want
to continue on with them so the AH part
is out right and then the mm is in and
you want to feel the vibration in your
chest and your abdomen as much as you
can and you're trying to get it's it's
like the vast night it's like it's like
the it's like the centering and the
grounded
it's very energetic but it's very much
like getting that's why it's a deeper no
mmm it takes you down into the depths
all right
takes you down right to the DAO where
everything emerges from flows from then
an in-breath and one is higher because
like this is supposed to pick up on the
I notice how everything is an enacted
image everything is it's symbolic
because this is like the ascent we're
going to learn about the an agog a
that's central to the Western tradition
and so this one's hard
when when I when I'm pronouncing the M I
try to feel I try to feel sort of help I
try to feel all at once the one is that
everything and how everything is one
that n is like the pronouncing
pronouncing of everything's
determination see there's a lot
happening there's a lot happening so one
cycle would look like this sorry inhale
Oh
[Music]
what I tend to notice when I do this is
that my home tends to get deeper also I
need like in pitch as I get further into
the practice and the one gets a little
bit higher and what you also you can
feel the progeny so all the present
tends to me to be more in and out this
is also not and not just in and out it's
up and down so you've got the emergence
from home and the emanation from one if
you want to think about it that way so
there's this creative tension the Greek
word is tone us and and so what you're
trying to do is you're trying to enact
in the chanting you're trying to enact
sort of the fundamental grammar of beer
we're trying to enact it symbolically
but it's not just a symbol that refers
you're enacting it it's a symbol that
participates and that's where you get
the transformation because you're doing
something that has this conceptual
aspect to it that has this linguistic
aspect you can see how it's bridging
into the propositional but the musical
the coordination with the music the
coordination with the breath the rhythm
the the actual way your metabolic energy
is being aroused all of that is also
moving it into the participatory and of
course the the up down and the in/out is
transforming the perspective and so all
of this you're trying to do this and
I'll review this again with you on
Wednesday but we're trying to do all of
this in chanting try not to try not to
have chanting just be there's other
things you can be doing like other
things you can chant with I'm just
giving you an example and I'm trying to
give you one that will fit the course
that's why I've chosen this one it's
also the one I tend to prefer in
practice because like I say it will
bridge between the the Easter traditions
we've been making most use of right now
Buddhism and Taoism and it will bridge
into the Neoplatonic tradition which is
as vs. argues it's is the spiritual
grammar of the West okay so how is that
for everybody
that makes sense I'll do it one more
time all right sway in breath and
throughout right and this is part of the
feeling the flow in my body I'm not
losing my flow and not losing my route
and I this is really important I'm
feeling again well it's the tenor of my
mind
is it getting kin and wispy and starting
to race those are feeling rich and
rooted oh it's rich and rooted I can't
you well it's getting thin and wispy I'm
starting to hyperventilate and spin off
but it's getting dull and sort of
closing in then I'm falling into sort of
just a rhythmic like a almost like a
lullaby and lulling myself lullaby
lulling lulling myself towards sleep so
you don't want the lowing and you don't
want the Wis penis you want that sort of
rich rootedness right and and you know
for those of you who can sing well you
want that sort of rich tone allottee to
be a way of embodying that richness
China to think of this as a musical
performance even though there is a lot
of music going on my hope is that we can
figure out some way in which we can do
this and we can hear each other we can
do it collectively because that then
brings out the final dimension that on
chanting brings to it which is the deep
integration between individual and the
group because what happens when you're
chanting especially when you don't try
and make it a musical performance is
that the various chants take on a life
of their own and start to spontaneously
harmonize with each other that's it
that's it people don't really try to do
it okay so I think that's it so what I
recommend we'll do that is the following
I recommend we what we'll do is the
following
I'm going to do the moving Qigong
exercise just to act as
that bit of a bridge right and then do
the open and closing motion that I've
taught you then they'll be science for a
bit all right as you find your center or
find your route why'd you flow find your
focus then I'm sorry I'll into right and
will chant for a bit and then we'll go
when they will go into whatever sign up
practice you want to engage okay all
right so let's set the timer begin
let's begin chanting
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
now begin your solid practice
[Music]
slowly come out to be a practice trying
as best you can to integrate with your
cultivated in your practice with your
everyday consciousness cognition
character and communitas perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
so we have a couple questions one
question is what schedule do you
recommend doing all of these different
practices so every day there should be
the past note or matter I like a three
cycle you know the past not Mehta prana
but you may only want to do present once
a week perhaps maybe only twice but
definitely you should be alternating
every day there should be met up or the
pasta I remember always do a bit of a
pasta to get into another before the
practices afford the other meta or the
past note or khazneh I recommend that
you do all of the moving practices all
the cheek on practices both the standing
ones and the sitting rooms so do do
those and then go into your practices
here's you see to practice I would like
to incorporate the chanting into every
time we sit I think it's good it's a
good practice that also helps some
people who are struggling with sleep
it's a kind of energizing practice but
if you find it's getting you a little
bit too racy then maybe hold off on the
chanting for a bit but I'm gonna as we
met me to sit I'm gonna always do a bit
of chanting every time so once I got
sort of the core four set up chant do as
I said either the past not or meta or
however you cycle in proj mode maybe
once a month do the meditative
questioning just to remember sati the
five factors and especially vigilance
lectio divina I practice at the end of
every time I sit on my own we don't
practice it that way I accept on your
piety if
can I recommend you do Lexie Oh Davina
after whichever sit at practice you do
so I think of chanting as going from
conceptual propositional into
mindfulness and I think of Lexi Oh
Davina as a helpful way of moving out
from mindfulness back into more
propositional conceptual thought so
chanting chanting in and poesis the
making it's at the root of our word
poetry the making poesis coming out and
of course there's deep connections of
course between chanting and poesis
poetry so I recommend that I'm going to
teach you also walking next time of day
a walking meditation and I recommend you
use that in conjunction with the
standing chicon practices and before you
sit again that one i I do Tai Chi every
day you could do the walking every day
if you wish or I recommend doing at
least two or three times a day because
it's also an important bridging practice
between being seated or standing and
moving around to the world and taking
mindfulness into motion so I hope that
answers your questions now I want to be
very clear about something you're not
going at some point there's going to I'm
gonna have offered you so I don't take
this the wrong way I'm gonna have
offered you too many things again
because I'm not it's the expectation who
cares what I expect the expectation is
not that you're going to be doing all of
these things the expectation is again
you're going to cultivate and curate an
ecology of practices that is based on
the you know the principles we've been
talking about we want some core
mindfulness core movement and some core
right bridging practices we want
practices that will layer
with practices that have a complementary
relationship to each other like meta of
the pasta or moving and sitting and
write or speaking and silence notice all
the tone Oz right we want all that
complementarity we want the layering and
we want the linking but you're going to
ultimately this is like this is like
evolution evolutionary adaptive 'ti all
creatures adopt and they adapt to who
they are and where they are so they're
all we're all going all of us all
sentient beings all of us together are
doing this but that doesn't mean that we
all do the same thing we all have to
adapt to who we are and where we are and
where we're going so I hope that answers
your question I hope that's helpful
I'm going to give you like so you have
to especially remember this when we move
into the wisdom of Hypatia because then
there's gonna hold me a whole
independent tradition and you're gonna
how these are going to sing together and
work together for you I can't tell you
other than giving you these basic
principles that help to set up the
appropriate system of constraints so
that the evolution will happen and it
will take on a life of its own it will
become a dhow to you away self rolling
wheel so Brett
pleasure though when rooting can you
please elaborate the listening part what
does this mean when the part of the body
we're focusing attention on makes no
sound the listening is being used
metaphorically there I'm trying to
connote there the difference between
hearing and listening you're not a party
and you hear your name and then you
listen to it that active it you know you
can convert hearing into listening you
can convert seeing into looking you can
convert touching into feeling that's the
Melua
that move where you instead of things
are just sort of like this I'm speaking
metaphorically and hearing they go like
this they're sensitized they're
coordinated they have a kind of mold
called a cognitive unison to
Ward's the area that's what I'm talking
about what I'm talking about listening
I'm using it metaphorically I could get
right like I'm using it metaphorically
because the other the other words are
already being used like looking is
already being used but in the looking
you're supposed to not just be seeing
again you're supposed to be looking
you're supposed to be getting into that
Co presencing with something but the
listening is designed to get you to like
you've already made that contact and now
you're trying to make them pick it up
another notch you're really trying to
not just hear right or touch what's
going on here you want to listen to it
you want to feel it you really want to
taste it with your mind so I hope that
helped
Rohan yonis I can't wait to start
learning about the cognitive biases in
AI ideas when we start with that yes so
the the Hypatia course was probably
spend a couple weeks so it goes through
Epicureanism into stoicism they're
layered onto each other and then in two
Neoplatonism and we will be doing the
bar the cognitive biases when we get
into stoicism so that should probably be
sometime in mid-august I'm not sure so
hang on like I said I wish I could do it
just teach you all of it right away but
everything has to be done in its due
course Kelly Meyers
welcome again Kelly this week I've been
experimenting with hand drumming in a
similar and integrated way to the
chanting fetish you just taught any
thought about using non-english chanting
I I don't have any experience or
expertise I have sat in a Sufi chat that
is a company by drumming I found it very
powerful so it's it seems to me like it
should work I know that shamanic
practices often incorporate drumming
with chanting so yeah but I don't I'm
sorry I don't have any particular
experience or expertise other than just
being a recipient of somebody else who
knows how to practice that integrated
thing
the integration of the drumming and the
chanting so I hope this is helpful to
you that's always my my intent I want to
thank you all for joining I want to
thank my dear friend and Techmeme Jamar
my beloved son Jason is always here
pinch-hitting for me please subscribe to
this channel to be notified of the next
video you'll find links there to the
lecture series awakening from the
meeting crisis and to the dialogo series
of voices with Rob a key that will
develop some of these themes that were
developing in this course and situate
them within a more encompassing
framework please invite others who might
benefit by sharing this video
Brett is here he asked an excellent
question
please get involved with the discord
server the link is in the description
normally I would be on the the discord
server tonight because I do a biweekly
Q&A at 6 p.m. Eastern Time but tonight
I'll be on peter lindbergh stoah with
the cure of the dawn he has taken some
of my work and created a meaning wave
which is a sort of musical production of
genre of music that he has I think
mostly invented so that's there's sort
of a launch party for that so I'll be at
that tonight but I strongly recommend
you go on the discord server you'll find
people here are doing these practices to
find people who are involved with more
encompassing framework that I've talked
about please it's a great community is
taking shape in a wonderful way we do
this every weekday morning at 9:30
Eastern Time please remember continuity
practice more important than your
quantity of practice there's no enemy
worse than your own mind and body no
friend no ally no true companion on the
path better than your own mind and body
he lamps unto yourselves and to each
other
take it care everyone I'll see you
tomorrow