[Music]
on our channel we we often try and talk
about really difficult subjects and it
seems that the subject of race in
America is just about as difficult as it
gets
you've written quite a few pieces for
kulit and you've also been on the Sam
Harris podcast you've been on dave rubin
the pieces that you've written have
taken what you might call it kind of
heterodox approach to the issue of race
in America how would you summarize that
perspective well first thing I would say
is I think the word heterodox is
overused because by definition a single
take can't be heterodox I guess it's
heterodox relative to what one generally
hears about race if you read mainstream
media if you read the New York Times if
you purchase books on the bestsellers
list if you watch CNN you'll generally
get the sense that what it means to be a
person who is seriously grappling with
the issue of race in 2019 is to
understand that what we should be doing
now is trying to correct for the power
imbalance that has historically
characterized America what that means is
we should be open to and very
encouraging of race conscious policies
affirmative action reparations rather
than policies based on socio economics
which in my view provide a better signal
of actual privation what you're supposed
to think nowadays is that we haven't
seriously grappled with the legacy of
slavery Jim Crow redlining
lynching and what it means to grapple
with these things is often left unclear
but it means that you're supposed to
read Tana h√∂ssi Coates between the world
and me the case for reparations and not
along and signal in ways
you know signal with the way you talk
about race that you're not one of those
white people you're not one of the
deplorable --'s
you're in the know you're woke if you're
black the way one is supposed to talk
about race is to emphasize whatever
uncomfortable experiences one has had in
virtue of one's race because mo you know
many or most black people can point to
something in their past some situation
that would have gone more favorably had
they not been black so the idea is to
zoom in on that make that seem
representative of what it's like to be
black in America signal that you know
concepts like systemic racism racism is
not merely the KKK guy in the hood
burning crosses on lawns it's subtle
it's systemic it pervades the healthcare
system the education system criminal
justice system these are the things that
you're supposed to believe and you're
supposed to signal that you believe them
affirmative Lee lest you be considered
racist or naive the concept of
colorblindness the rhetoric of Martin
Luther King these days is generally a
no-no you're basically the quickest way
to signal that you don't know what
you're talking about on race is to say
well didn't want Luther King say and
then just quote Martin Luther King
saying something that you actually can't
say nowadays so the lines I've taken on
race have tended to be critical of the
concept of systemic racism critical of
the what I would call the anti-racist
consensus that we ought to be discussing
the ways in which race is meaningful
words like blackness and whiteness the
idea that these are substantive concepts
that people should see themselves see an
or an aspect of their identity as being
race so I tend to push back against
these notions and emphasize what you
might call a more humanist or colorblind
perspective in the sense that ascribing
meaning to your skin is a kind of
logical error and it's it's a shame that
we've lost sight of the fact that we are
all human beings and that the project
should generally be to use policy and
conversation to make as many people
flourish as can possibly flourish
regardless of the way they look and the
census category they fit in do you
accept the idea of systemic racism I
think systemic racism ever since the
concept was born in the book black power
in 1967 has always been has always been
confusing because it was originally
called institutional racism and it was
created in contrast to what was called
individual racism so the idea was you
have individual racists these are people
who have bias in their minds or hearts
and you have racist policies like Jim
Crow policies in the south but then we
have this other thing that's much more
subtle
it's called systemic racism and it's not
located in the individuals or the
policies but in the quote/unquote system
and even if you read the first
articulation of the concept it's clear
that there's some confusion behind it
because if it's not in the individuals
and it's not in the policies it's not
clear that there really is a third place
for the racism to be located so I would
argue that there's a conceptual problem
with systemic racism to begin with and
aside from the conceptual problem
there's an empirical problem
there are several empirical problems one
is that generally the studies used to
justify the notion that the US has a
systemic racism problem are taking big
categories like blacks and whites
comparing them on some mean statistic
finding some difference and then
ascribing
that too systemic racism one problem
with that is blacks and whites are
different groups with different
histories different demographics
different average ages and when you
control for that some of that stuff will
go away
the second problem is that even when you
can control for everything that's
measurable there are all kinds of huge
and important immeasurable differences
between people so if you're even if you
think you're comparing like with like so
you you're just gonna look at 25
year-old black men and 25 year old white
men both from two-parent households who
live in Wisconsin and why is it the case
that black men are incarcerated at what
I'm just making this up but at X times
the rate of the white men isn't that
systemic racism well no not necessarily
because there are all kinds of relevant
differences that can't be measured with
numbers like culture habits customs
values desires and we should notice that
we're not tempted to do this in many
areas
we're not tempted to look at the fact
that 20% of postal workers are black or
three-quarters of the NBA is black and
jumped to the conclusion that there's a
systemic bias towards black people in
those cases so what I would say is
people to people are fart in addition to
there being a conceptual problem there's
there's just a huge literature that's
founded on the presumption that in the
absence of bias groups would achieve
identical outcomes and there's there's
no reason to support that assumption
that said individual racism is certainly
real and I don't ever expect it to go
away and the other caveat I would give
is that there are certain rare instances
where I think the notion of systemic
racism is useful for example there was a
study recently that showed court
stenographers routinely messed up in
transcribing the speech of black
defendants and a
of black people testifying in court and
black stenographers and white
stenographers were both equally likely
to mess up so this is a notion where
it's not that these people were
individually biased against black people
it was just hearing african-american
vernacular they were worse at
transcribing it in a way that redounded
to the detriment of black people
disproportionately so there it's not a
policy it's not quite an individual
anti-black bias so in those rare
instances I do think the notion of
systemic racism is justified but what's
interesting is not how many such
examples there are about how few i mean
race is certainly one of the most
polarizing topics and one of the hottest
topics in American culture do you feel
an obligation to use your words
extremely carefully yes I do because I
want to get my point across without
being needlessly inflammatory I don't
see I don't enjoy making people angry
I'm actually a rather conflict averse
person by Nature which I know people
won't believe but it's true so I try not
to inflame any more than I need to to
make a point because what I've learned
is when I say things that seem totally
common sensical and rational to me
sometimes that causes a shitstorm at
least in my Twitter bubble which
admittedly is a very very small corner
of the world that in the grand scheme of
things doesn't matter all that much but
yeah I do I do feel a responsibility to
be careful with there are many different
ways to make the same point you can make
it with a variety of formulations that
range from pointed and click Beatty to
overly academic and hidden behind jargon
and it's certainly more art than a
science to find where in that spectrum
you fit but I do my best and what's the
reaction being to the articles
mostly online I get everything from
scholarly critiques of niche points that
I've made to complete dismissals of me
as a human being as a sellout and as an
Uncle Tom who just wants to make white
people feel good so that I can collect
paychecks and I get everything in
between and I tune most of the stuff on
that end of the spectrum out because
it's boring and I get some legitimate
critiques and a lot of praise as well so
I get I get the full spectrum one of the
issues about the the work that you're
doing is that it would be very difficult
but we seem to be in a bit of a catch-22
situation at the moment where it would
be very difficult for a white author to
be making some of the points that you're
making people are more liable to give me
the benefit of the doubt because because
I happen to be black they assume that a
I understand racism exists and that B
I'm coming from a good place
in terms of my internal intentions and
those two assumptions generally don't
extend to white people who make the same
points that I do and that doesn't make
sense to my brain but I suppose there's
a kind of logic to it it's a kind of
heuristic stereotyping logic which goes
there are some legitimate racists we do
polls and we still find sometimes five
or ten percent of white people in this
country agreeing with just outright
racist claims so when you hear a white
person criticizing affirmative action
that could be a white supremacist or it
could be a political centrist or even a
liberal who just has a particular
perspective and if you're trying to
determine on a small amount of
information which is which you might
just form a heuristic to say
assume they're all white supremacists if
they're making noises that a white
supremacist might make and there's
there's a kind of logic to that in this
sense there's a kind of logic to
treating whites and blacks differently
there but you know because a black
person is very unlikely to be a white
supremacist so you're you're kind of
forming a stereotype and you're Urist ik
to play the odds of course to some
degree people are doing this all the
time everyone is stereotyping subtly all
the time but we know that we're not
actually supposed to act on stereotypes
we're supposed to treat people as
individuals and we have taboos on
stereotyping for a reason
it's it's only that those taboos become
inactive when we're now discussing a
white person who you're stereotyping as
a racist because they have a nuanced
grasp of affirmative action or they
don't think that the you know they're
concerned about racial crime disparities
or what-have-you
so I think the strategy that should be
employed there is to treat people as
individuals regardless of what is true
statistically of people who hold their
view and you you mentioned this before
that some of the criticism has been that
you're making white people feel feel
better or I mean it and if I if we were
to take a sort of more critical view
you've certainly had a very fast rise in
terms of your success with the Colet
pieces and being invited on to sam
harris and on to to dave rubin so a
cynic might say you're being taken up by
people who are just wanting to make
white people feel better about the
legacy of slavery for example what i
would say to that is it starts the story
in the middle because ever since the
late 60s there has been
a powerful and loud group of
intellectuals writers orders who have
been intentionally making white people
feel guilty
keeping white people feeling as if
they're on the hook for crimes that they
did not commit which on its face is a
bizarre thing to do to a person or
bizarre thing to suggest is rational
that you should feel shame for crimes
that you had nothing to do with what
they would argue is that you benefit
from it America was built on the back of
slavery so how can you possibly exempt
yourself from that legacy and it's
people who looked like you who
perpetrated these it was your ancestors
regardless of whether it actually was
the point is you benefit from it so to
start the story in the middle and say
well Coleman you're making people feel
you're making white people feel less
guilty for slavery and Jim Crow looks
like yeah because they shouldn't have
felt guilty for those things in the
first place I don't think guilt is a
useful emotion or shame when you're
talking about how to craft policy to
make the majority of Americans
flourished as much as possible it's not
clear to me why guilt is a useful
emotion to throw into that discussion
because
guilt is too powerful guilt is an
extremely powerful emotion it has not a
unique power but you know it's it's
capable of shutting down a reason to a
degree that is really remarkable and I
don't mind if my writing makes people
makes white people feel less white guilt
because the whole idea of race pride and
race guilt is corrupt to begin with so I
would agree with the current like does
my writing make people feel less guilty
sure that's fine
that's not my intention my intention is
just to make sense about race in America
and to critique the way we talk about
race and put forward alternative
frameworks that are more useful but if
part of that entails people feeling less
guilt shame or pride for the amount of
melanin in their skin than so much the
better let's say one of the sort of
summarizing for maybe people who haven't
read many of your pieces one of the
themes that you talk about a lot is that
if you if you just look at kind of
disparities between different racial
groups and conclude that it's only due
to discrimination you're you're ignoring
a whole load of other factors that could
be responsible for that would that be a
good sort of summary and also and in
particular in that the the role of
culture yeah yes so a lot of the
confusion around systemic racism stems
from the assumption that in the absence
of some systemic bias different groups
would achieve statistically equal
outcomes we have no reason to believe
that this is true if you think about it
for just a few minutes for example the
average white American household of
Russian descent earns $1 for every 79
cents earned by the average white
American household of French descent in
America both of these groups would just
be called white people but if you
categorize them by the country in Europe
they came from you get a 21 cent on the
dollar pay gap does that imply that the
u.s. is systemically racist against
white American French people well no
it's just that these disparities are the
norm it's normal to have disparities
between groups with entirely different
histories entirely different patterns of
migration entirely different
demographics entirely different average
ages and this is equally true if you
break down
quote-unquote black people into
subgroups and sub ethnicities you'll
find that Nigerian households make not
only more than the American average
American household but much more than
the average say Haitian American
household yet both of these people are
black if we can't even attain parity
within races what is the thinking that
assumes we should be achieving parity
between races when races have entirely
different histories and patterns of
migration and cultures and values at the
median this is a completely unsupported
assumption and yet it seems to it is
rarely challenged because if you do
challenge it then you have to be willing
to say cite uncomfortable facts about
different cultures having different
values that lead them at the median to
achieve different outcomes whether it's
in education athletics or business the
example that you just gave was Haitian
and Nigerian I think and obviously the
the the the big issue under all of this
is the legacy of slavery which I guess
the Haitian would have in the Nigerian
wouldn't not necessarily I mean there's
been slavery in the in modern-day
Nigeria there's been slavery virtually
everywhere there's been civilization
obviously we know about we know more
about the transatlantic slave trade
partially because the West participated
in it most people don't know that 14
million Africans were enslaved by Arabs
most people know very little about the
history of slavery in China most people
know very little about the history of
slit of white slaves on the Barbary
Coast in North Africa so one thing I
would say is yes we have a recent legacy
of slavery in the West Indies in America
and Brazil etc and we happen to know
more about it because we're
kind of narcissistic about our own
history and we talk about slavery as if
it's something only America and Britain
and Portugal participated in but slavery
is as old as civilization it's at least
ten thousand years old it's been
practiced on every continent that's been
inhabited in virtually every
civilization so in some sense the legacy
of slavery is something everyone in the
world is trailing not just black
Americans what do you think of the best
criticisms of your pieces that you've
seen that's a tough question because if
the criticisms are that good then they
become my new opinions so they don't
they don't stay criticisms for long if
they're that good I think so I guess
another way of asking that question is
how if your views change then I mean in
too many ways to count to many small
ways that probably don't get flagged in
the moment the changes are happening I
think one thing I've probably changed my
mind on recently is the degree to which
the welfare state is responsible for the
rise of the single parent family in the
black community I think that those
claims are less supported than they're
sometimes trumped up to be especially by
conservative intellectuals there's no
doubt that there was a huge spike in
single-parent homes but it started a
little bit before the welfare state so
before the huge Great Society era
expansion so that's one reason to doubt
that the welfare state was the primary
cause and secondly I've been looking at
the work of the economist Rick Nevin on
lead poisoning and the degree to which
lead poisoning is correlated with the
fall there the rise and fall of vile
crime in the in America and throughout
the world the rise and fall of out of
wedlock births so it's it's led me to
greatly
upregulate my belief about how important
lead poisoning and environmental toxins
have been relative to liberal policy in
the breakdown of the black family so
there's a there's a big conversation
going on around reparations at the
moment I think Tana he see Coates had a
big piece in the Atlantic about it
brett weinstein talks about he's not a
fan of reparations but he does believe
that some kind of investment into black
neighborhoods to make up for histories
of disadvantage should be considered do
you agree with either of those
perspectives the question presumes that
we haven't already done that this thing
happened called the civil rights
revolution we had the Civil Rights Act
the Voting Rights Act the Fair Housing
Act Community Reinvestment Act we've had
set-aside programs for decades that
specifically target minority business
owners for lucrative government
contracts we have diversity and
inclusion programs that were down to the
benefit of people of color in virtually
every sector of the labor market the
idea that we haven't yet targeted black
people with race conscious policy meant
to uplift black America and that we're
now considering whether to start is
absolutely ludicrous
we have an entire entire networks and
bureaucracies that are self sustaining
that you know that seek to that that
were created in in essence to pay people
that to pay black people back for
slavery and Jim Crow so it's not a
question of whether to start doing race
conscious policy we've we've had that
for decades what we a part of the reason
I think that it gets framed that way is
because we haven't seen as much
progress in reducing disparities as
people expect it to so what happens is
you implement some great new
race-conscious program that's gonna
really that's gonna uplift black people
20 years later you see that the
black-white gap in whatever relevant
area has remained the same and then
after the fact you say well we haven't
really done anything and it's like wait
no you're just saying that now because
the policy you proposed actually didn't
work so one thing I would say is again
disparities are normal it's actually
like no one is losing any sleep over the
21 cent household income gap between
French Americans and Russian Americans
we're only losing sleep over similar
types of disparities between blacks and
whites and hey we should interrogate why
it is that we're losing sleep over the
one and not the other
really why and don't just say slavery
and Jim Crow go deeper than that because
I'm sure you could tell a historical
story about why the French and the
Russians aren't at perfect parity and B
we need a conceptual change in the way
we understand what is just what progress
entails does progress entail equal
outcomes well not really and this may
seem a glib but you could easily get
equal outcomes just by making the people
who are doing better do worse like take
some income away from Asian Americans so
that they're earning as much as white
Americans and you've made progress and
then take income away from both so that
blacks whites and Asians are all making
the same amount of income and now we've
achieved parity isn't the world better
well no you've just made a lot of people
poorer that's it so the way we should
conceptualize progress should allow for
different groups that have some
disparity say blacks and whites to both
make progress without the disparity
necessarily having to collapse because
disparities don't always collapse right
and that's not an indictment of society
when they don't
and I mean you kind of hinted at the
idea of unintended consequences there
and you had a really interesting example
of that in the Sam Harris podcast I
think in affirmative action and what
happened in California can you outline
oh yeah this is the what's been called
the mismatch theory or the mismatch
effect which is when you take an
eighteen-year-old black high school
graduate and you apply affirmative
action to their application which is to
say you put them in a much more
competitive school than they otherwise
would have gotten into at their level of
preparedness what you're doing in effect
is putting them in the bottom 10% of
preparedness at a top school where they
might have been at the 50th percentile
if they were a white applicant at a
different school
so there's I believe his name is Richard
sander is the UCLA law professor who
wrote the book on this but basically
what happens are a few things you're
more likely to drop out because you're
struggling in every class and it's not
for lack of intelligence it's just for a
mismatch between your level of
preparedness and this school
specifically the student pool that year
that you're part of you're more likely
to switch to less rigorous majors so I
believe there is a study at Duke
University that showed the amount of
black kids who came into Duke wanting to
study rigorous majors like economics but
then defecting to far less rigorous
majors like African American Studies and
then if you look at the amount of whites
that came in wanting to do economics far
fewer dropped out into rigorous less
rigorous majors so that's an an adverse
consequence that doesn't get talked
about much but is concerning and
certainly is a side effect of
affirmative action which is supposedly
this great this
policy that is so important for
uplifting black people and if it were
gutted we would just be sending America
back to the 1950s and yet has shown
remarkably little progress in the 50
some-odd years that it's been around but
what I understood is that they abolished
it in California and then they saw the
the grades rise or more success that's
right yeah they abolished it in either
1994 or 1996 and there were doomsayers
who said this is gonna set black people
back it actually didn't it it narrowed
the test-score gap at many UC schools UC
San Diego I think the test the the GPA
gap between blacks and whites virtually
disappeared which makes sense because
which makes sense because now the
students admitted to UC San Diego in a
colorblind fashion were on par with you
know the 50th percentile student that
goes there rather than being the you
know like rather than getting someone
who would do pretty well at a somewhat
lesser school and shuttling them into
that more competitive environment where
they're set is being set up for failure
and what do you think of the most
compelling comparisons or examples to
make to tell us straight the points that
you're trying to make yeah so there are
several examples throughout history of
groups of people that experienced
enormous levels of oppression and not
only did they nevertheless achieve at
what would be seen as a high level of
success but at a higher level of success
than the groups that oppressed them so
one example I often use our
japanese-americans who came to this
country in the first wave of Japanese
immigration as illiterate peasants in
the early 20th century
there were laws on the books in 13 or 14
states called the alien land laws that
prevented them from owning property
until 1952 when those laws were ruled
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court by
1960 Japanese people had a higher rate
of college attainment than white people
than white Americans so I mean that
that's one example I could also give the
example of West Indian and African
immigrants in the United States who
there had there have been men there
haven't been many studies on this but
from Douglas Douglas Massey study and
from Lani Guinier and Henry Louis Gates
a study in the early 2000s we know
anywhere from 40% to two-thirds of the
black students at Ivy League colleges
are West Indian immigrants African
immigrants or their children you know
that cohort only makes up 10% of the
u.s. black population so they're
massively over-represented at the
highest levels of achievement and yet
certainly in the case of West Indians
this is a group that was formerly
enslaved for formerly enslaved so what
happens reason I I could say similar
things about Jewish Americans as well
the reason I bring these examples up is
to combat the lazy assumption that sees
a group lagging today behind the
majority ethnic group sees that that
group has also been oppressed throughout
history and assumes that the oppression
is the main cause of the lagging you can
make the point in the opposite direction
as well there are groups that do lag
behind without having an essence
necessarily a historical reason to lag
behind there's a point where Porto
Ricans in New York City had lower
incomes than blacks in New York City
despite having been a recent wave of
voluntary emigration they didn't have
the history of slavery in the u.s. to
point to as a reason they came here
voluntarily unlike black people and yet
show
similar patterns of single-parent homes
crime you could say much the same about
the Irish when they first came the
Italians when they first came they
sometimes had murder rates that were
five times the rate of say German
Americans and they didn't necessarily
have the history of oppression to blame
it on so I'm trying to the common thread
here is that there's a lazy assumption
of causation where it may not be the
case why do you think these this subject
is so important well we have to be able
to think clearly about the sources of
socio-economic disparity to
conceptualize the problem we have to
have the right concepts to apply to the
problem because if we're if we're
thinking about the whole thing upside
down then inevitably our solutions are
going to be upside down as well so
that's reparations is now seriously on
the table in a condition with in a
condition of limited funding for any
given policy serious people are
considering giving some of that money or
some of that policy some of those
resources to someone like me whose
ancestors were slaves in this country
rather than my white friend whose
parents were meth addicts that's a
serious idea I mean like people are at
minimum paying lip service to that and
you know at most endorsing it and that
stems directly from a misunderstanding
of the sources of racial disparity and
the presumptions the lazy presumptions
that people make in this area sort of
taking a slightly more kind of meta
perspective how do you think we've ended
up in this place there's there's a
thinker called Jordan Green Hall who
we've had on the channel a couple of
times and he talks about how the left
has kind of started
on the values of openness but it kind of
degenerated into a kind of ideology of
openness so that there are certain
topics that you have to have a certain
view on that that sound open that are
actually now pretty much binary
ideological frames how what what do you
think's happened to to this conversation
to lead us to where we're at that's a
very that's a very deep question and I
don't exactly know the answer I don't I
can't exactly trace how we got here but
I I think people are insufficiently
alive to the power of ideas to grip
people and to grip entire populations so
I I don't in a way I don't I don't see
that I need to I don't see that there
needs to be an explanation deeper than
people have made arguments that have
penetrated other people's minds I mean I
think there was there was a moment in
the 60s in this country where we were
wrestling between the colorblind vision
and the color conscious vision and
colorblindness was written right into
the laws the way JFK and Lyndon Johnson
talked about affirmative action was
explicitly colorblind the way Martin
Luther King talked about race the way
Byard Rustin talked about race they had
a big picture humanist vision of the
world and then just in a few years it
seems like the war of ideas was
basically won by the Black Power
movement the black panthers by that
contingent of people who were far more
race conscious they didn't want black
people to downplay their quote-on-quote
blackness they wanted to hold white
people's feet to the fire they wanted
them to feel that they were white and
know what that meant and that war of
ideas
has been more or less a consensus since
then though the winning the winning side
of that idea has continued winning I
think and it's abdun flowed and it was
certainly exacerbating start it was
exacerbated starting right around 2014
when Michael Brown was killed in
Ferguson and when we all had I phones in
Facebook to see that to see evidence of
that and to have very unproductive and
scary debates about it on social media
so just since 2014 there's been a kind
of there's been a spike in intensity
around this issue and it's magnified the
conflict but the conflict has been there
for decades so I would say the power of
ideas is sufficient to explain why we're
here in addition to that I would add
that social media and the current access
to videos of unarmed black people
getting killed by the cops in isolation
of the fact that in any given year more
white people are killed by the cops than
blacks the visceral nosov seeing those
videos rather than reading it in the
newspaper as you would have in 2007 has
magnified what the the conflict of ideas
that has existed for decades just moving
on a little bit too so there's sort of
sense at the moment that there is a an
emerging kind of alternative media at
the same time as the kind of mainstream
media feels a little bit more
ideologically captured what do you make
of there was a Collette piece recently
that that basically said that this
attitude to the social justice left
either for or auntie it's becoming the
the main wedge issue now between and I
think you can really call it left and
right but you can certainly call it kind
of
a new constellation what do you make of
that do you think the last reasonable
argument on its face I think that if
that's true then that says something
flattering about the left's ability to
eject people from it because so like
interrogate what that argument means
what it means is that sjw's came up
sprang up right around 2014 yes they
existed before but that was the year
where it kind of started becoming a
national story that sjw's were
infiltrating journalism and you were
just seeing more of these outbreaks you
were seeing things happen on campus that
a few years earlier you would have just
like laughed off and now it's a Yale
professors is leaving campus over a
Halloween costume that's like when that
started happening and the idea is that
five years later the main or one of the
main political fault lines is whether
you're pro or anti sjw's it's sort of
the like Vox versus Colette stand off
what that tells me is that a lot of
people on the Left didn't like sjw's and
got booted out of the left the which
says that which then made it the case
that the new fault line was Pro and anti
SJW whereas before you could have a pro
or anti h IW h JW and be on the left it
also could be a story of anti s JW
people on the left to choosing to move
more towards the right there's agency
involved as well
so I don't maybe that's a CI I don't
really think in those terms but I it's
definitely a fault line whether you're
kind of into social justice ideology or
not that's definitely an important
political fault line one of the most
important I don't know exactly how it
tracks with left and right because left
and right are kind of by definition
moving
it's and now one person gets to decide
what they mean and I don't really know
what they mean right now in 2019 so I'm
not gonna I'm not gonna comment on
whether the Pro and anti sjw divided
mirrors the left and the right at this
point because you know people can argue
it just get semantics when we talk about
what does it mean to be a leftist or a
right winger how do you think it's
possible to reach people who are maybe
just ideologically captured or just have
bad ideas without making them into
enemies I don't know that there's a one
size fits all strategy and I do know
that there's no strategy that avoids
completely the phenomenon of making
enemies so there there are many people
no matter what I said no matter what
evidence I provide provided that I was
coming from a good place
yeah I could save 10 puppies from a
burning building from a burning building
risking my own life and they would still
think I'm an Uncle Tom I'm gonna sell
out which is not to say that saving
puppies is clear evidence that you're
not a sellout but you get my point and
I'm fine with that
you have to reconcile yourself to the
fact that not everyone in life is going
to like you that's kind of an insane
thing to expect nor should you use that
as a reason to write off people who are
passionate and disagree with you because
people get persuaded out of entire
worldviews all the time they just
generally do it quietly so we get the
sense that everyone is unpersuadable
because the unpersuadable people are
adverse i advertising their
unpersuadable 'ti very loudly on twitter
twitter and facebook and you know
writing in general selects for a kind of
stubborn personality and often what has
happened is that the writer you're
seeing now right in 2016 being all
stubborn is someone who had a profound
change of worldview five years ago very
quietly brought on by some other writer
so it's not I'm not cynical or I'm not
pessimistic about the prospect of
changing people's minds but again I
don't think there's any silver bullet or
strategy other than just trying to make
sense trying to state other people's
arguments accurately and then giving you
their giving your reasons why why you
have a different perspective and you've
been sort of lumped in with the IDW
the intellectual dark web and one of the
criticisms of the IDW is that it's
reactionary how would you if someone
accuse you of being reactionary how
would you address that what would you
say to that yeah I guess reactionary and
contrarian are two words that confuse me
because sometimes I'll be because
because is the idea that I shouldn't
disagree with anything or that I
shouldn't disagree with something a lot
of people disagree with is the idea that
reacting to things is bad well not
really what they're accusing you of with
those words are either being contrarian
for the sake of being contrarian which
is to say not being oriented towards
truth but being oriented towards
whatever you view as the counter
narrative to that charge I you know
there are all kinds of manure contrarian
which is to say someone who got off -
contrary beliefs just for their own sake
I would be leaving a lot of happiness
points on the table by acknowledging the
mainstream scientific account of of
climate change by not trafficking and
conspiracy theories it seems like I'd be
kind of kind of just giving up all of
these potential you so you're doing it
quite badly you want to be a contrarian
yes
so from my point of view I'm contrary to
and reacting to ways of thinking that
are deeply unreasonable and I see no
problem with reacting to unreasonable
things because what is one supposed to
do not react to them so I guess to the
broader question of whether
the IDW is reactionary I don't know that
I have a very intelligent opinion on
that because the IDW encompasses lots of
very different personality types sam
harris doesn't strike me as reactionary
benches ben shapiro reactionary maybe
more than sam harris in the in the sense
that i'm more likely to see him like
react to things on twitter more
frequently but i'm not but here's the
thing like like i just said before then
shapiro style of argument persuades a
lot of people they just get persuaded
silently and not in view so the kind of
fast-talking making a million points a
minute
rarely giving an inch the ben shapiro
brand while it seems very strident and
mean to some people it also is very
persuasive and effective and on the
things that ben shapiro is right about i
think that's all to the good
sam harris has a very different style
jordan peterson has a different style
still and different kinds of minds get
persuaded by different kinds of styles
one certainly wants whatever the IDW is
one wants that to be elevating the
conversation as you said rather than
denigrating it one wants it to be a
force that is bringing people together
rather than tearing them apart or rather
than contributing to the polarization
that it's diagnosing as a problem i mean
that you just said that the the idea is
to try and elevate the conversation
rather than that to the polarization how
do we do that how did how does anyone do
that well i guess it starts with
yourself you can surround yourself with
voices that you don't always agree with
but take those voices seriously and be
willing to be persuaded on things follow
people on twitter who you agree with on
one issue but don't under that another
read the articles that they share talk
to people face-to-face about difficult
issues try to notice the tendency in
yourself to overreact to things to click
on the links that seemed perfectly
designed to piss you off be charitable
to your enemies which is to say assume
that they're not crazy and that they're
probably right they're probably not
wrong about everything they think yeah
other than that it seems like there has
to be some systemic solutions it can't
be all of us bootstrapping our way out
of polarization there has to be
something to do on facebook and twitter
in schools or elsewhere to fix things at
a systemic level in addition to
individuals making personal changes and
you said before that it's important to
be kind of careful with language around
this what do you make of candice owens
language around this cuz she's very very
polarizing and i said some quite kind of
provocative things around race yeah i i
think she is very unserious in in the
sense that you know i've seen her say
things without any evidence of her
feeling of burden to back it up with the
fact like Richard Spencer is a
democratic plant when challenged on Joe
Rogan about why she thinks climate
change isn't real she doesn't even have
a single study to back it up she's not a
smart climate skeptic or it's just her
gut feeling
against the view that she thinks is
wrong and when asked to back it up often
has nothing the Southern Strategy never
happened that's I mean that if you're
gonna argue that you better have some
you better you better know something
that mainstream historians don't but she
seems to feel no burden to back those
opinions up with evidence which is my
first problem my second problem is that
she seems to have very little respect
for civil discourse and free speech she
tweeted that Hillary Muller and Bezos
should all be locked up she tweeted that
right okay
is that someone who's serious about
civil discourse or someone who likes
seeing their enemies thrown in jail or
someone who's performing I don't I
actually can't tell I'm willing to
believe that she is I'm willing to
believe that most people are nice people
but many nice people are also
constitutionally incapable of really
charitable civil discourse kind of
beliefs and they enjoy bullying and
Candace gives me that sense in addition
to being someone who is comfortable
making factually inaccurate claims and
just kind of letting them sit there
because there's also this sort of sense
that in the in the current kind of
expansion of the culture war someone
like like her a black conservative is of
huge value to one side in that culture
war but there's this sort of sense of
huge forces pulling people towards more
extreme positions I'm sure that the the
incentives of social media anything
based on an ad model is you're getting
paid by the click so all the incentives
are aligned to cater to your outrage to
show you things that you either hate or
love which is going to show you ever
more shallow versions of the
opinions you disagree with and evermore
moralizing and extreme versions of the
opinions you do agree with whether that
is that explains Candace Ellis's Candace
Owens his beliefs is something I can't
know and don't particularly care about
again I don't really care how she came
to her belief that Richard Spencer was a
democratic plant I don't care how she
came to the belief that women who don't
have children have something
biochemically wrong with them as she put
it the former is a conspiracy theory and
the latter is just a bullying thing to
say it's just mean and it's not
interesting so you know my my critique
of her has nothing to do with who she's
funded by because again you could be
funded by someone and still happen to be
right you could be funded by the Koch
brothers and have correct opinions just
like you can be funded by George Soros
and have correct opinions or incorrect
opinions so you know my problem with her
is the way she thinks ironically Kanye
famously tweeted I love the way Candace
oh it stinks but it's precisely the way
she thinks that's the problem which is
to say there are many things that I
agree with her on her general critique
of the left on race issues is often
spot-on but it's the way she thinks
that's the problem because it's not it's
often not evidence-based at all which
leads her to say these things that are
patently false and you know it actually
amazes me sometimes I forget how big a
platform she has because just when I see
a clip of her and how shallow it is I
assume that she doesn't have that big of
a following but then every once in a
while I've I'm reminded of her Twitter
followers ship and I'm surprised every
time you're increasingly in a in a
really influential position and speaking
on some of the kind of the hottest
topics how do you make sure that you
are keeping your own mind open and being
exposed to kind of critiques and being
kind of having the kind of intellectual
curiosity and intellectual honesty to
challenge your own views and
perspectives hmm do you think that's a
really important thing for you to do and
it's well I think one thing I'm very
afraid of is if I ever became I guess
there's this thing when somehow as the
number of Twitter followers you have
goes up people's willingness to
challenge you on your beliefs in private
sometimes goes down which doesn't make
sense and is really concerning so I can
imagine someone who has a million
Twitter followers who is a legend and
who surrounds themselves by people who
praise them constantly and they lose
their edge to the point where when
they're confronted by someone who really
knows the topic and challenges them
they're left completely there their
cards are shown and they realize holy
crap I I've just been surrounded by
people who are smelling my farts and not
challenging me at all
I think that's happened to a lot of
people how do you avoid smelling of
phones well I don't really have i'm not
big enough to have a posse of people who
agree with me and that also sounds like
horrible that sounds like a nightmare I
would much rather have people which I do
who disagree with me all the time so I
seek out those interactions I have
friends who think I'm wrong about like
big parts of the way I assess race
issues and I talk to those friends so I
get that pushback
I read opinions I disagree with
frequently tried to steal man my
opponents all of these things
try to stay mentally flexible and
mentally healthy understand that you can
change your opinion on something and
it's not the end of the world you can
admit to being wrong and it's not at the
end of the world so yeah I'm not super
concerned about it but I do think about
it and where do you think this wider
conversation needs to go next do you
have a sense of where the kind of
resolution on the other side of these
the culture wars is no I guess what I
was kind of alluding to there was
something he said in the conversation of
Sam about that you hoped that these race
issues will become less charged in the
future oh I do yeah
if black people became less and less
attached to historical victimhood if we
taught slavery and Jim Crow without
internalizing those aspects of American
history without drawing a straight line
from how black people were oppressed to
what policies we should enact and how we
should interact with other human beings
in a personal way if we stopped buying
this delusion that your skin color is
injected with meaning by history then
yeah that would that would go a long way
towards ending this particular aspect of
the culture war but that there's
something circular about that it's like
saying if this part of the culture war
ended then it'll end the question is
whether it will how it will I don't I'm
not super optimistic about that right
now but it's possible we hit peak race
craziness around now and we're on the
decline but you know on some level we're
still having the debate that we were
having in the late 60s
which is concerning because we live in a
very different world which once again
doesn't make me optimistic about the
likelihood of us still having this
debate when I'm my grandfather's age
although so much will change by then
that it could really be unrecognizable
but it's impossible to say Coleman thank
you very much thanks for having me
[Music]
you