welcome to meditating with John Breaux
Vicki we live stream every morning and
9:30 a.m. Eastern Time every weekday
morning on Mondays we alternate between
more than Monday is a lesson day at
Dharma day and then the next Monday will
be a review of the entire ecology of
practices and piety the most recent
Monday because he parted it four
previous lessons and force its see the
description if you're joining us for the
first time go and do the first lesson
immediately then meet with us regularly
in this ongoing Sangha and then perhaps
every Saturday or Sunday do another one
of the new lessons while due to you do
another one of the lessons until you
catch up that way you'll be able to it
is indeed a progressive course that we
are all on together something you can
all do to help me is to please like this
screen to increase its building
visibility on the YouTube algorithm I'm
trying to help as many people as I can
I'm not gaining any income from this I'm
doing this because I want to make a
difference and I want to help at the end
of every session there are q and A's so
please limit your q and A's to the
psychology of practice to the course
that we're on together for more
encompassing questions we have my blood
stream on YouTube Q&A every third Friday
of the month the next one is next Friday
which is tomorrow 3:00 p.m. Eastern Time
so going to YouTube find that and then
you can ask questions of a more
encompassing or deeper or philosophical
or a scientific or existential or
ethical nature so I think that's
everything we need to do today is just a
regular sit a and so trying to get into
your basic posture please set your
phone's I do not disturb and we will
begin when I say be good be good
you
you
slowly commodity practice trying as best
you can to integrate what you cultivated
in your practice with you everyday
consciousness cognition character and
communitas perhaps by reciting five
promises to yourself
okay we have time for maybe one or two
questions today Thursday we have a heart
out a little bit before 10:00 so we have
a question from Kyra Kroger hi Kara it's
15 honey here again as always thank you
for continuing to remind me that our
sage doesn't have to be the Buddha I'm
not Christian but my experience with
Jesus is it negative and today I was
able to connect to my moms Jesus and
that felt deeply nourishing thank you
you're welcome
not Carolyn thank you for sharing that I
want to encourage people not to do what
Kira has done so here isn't so much
posing a question of course please keep
up the wonderful questions that's yes
but that's what Kira has done she is
also she's and I don't mean she's not
doing this in any egocentric fashion
whatsoever that she's sharing how she's
watering her Buddha or to be more
appropriate to what her comment how she
is watering her inner sage and it would
be wonderful if people and I don't mean
anything at length as we have limited
time but in addition to questions if
they in you know a concise manner shared
complex shared by a comment right
moments of connection moments of insight
moments where they were celebrating in
the religious sense of the word of
celebration the Buddha the Dharma and
the Sangha so Kira thank you for that
this is something that I learned but my
friend my dear friend and collaborator
christopher master pho has also put it
he said to me he has such a lyrical
naturally lyrical and penetrating and
perspicacious way of speaking but he
articulates this idea about how just
like we have our mother tongue many of
us have a mother religion
we come to reject it to some degree we
don't identify with it anymore but
nevertheless like our mother tongue it's
deep in us and and young actually also
pointed to this point - I think in
certain important ways and so learning
how to relate I really I really resonate
with what you're saying is I was brought
up a Christian but in a form of
Christianity that was actually deeply I
think the right word is traumatizing to
me but coming to reappraise sheight
where I mean that word appreciation in
the sense of my deep gratitude but also
that that that deep learning and
transformation like we people do music
appreciation and also that they're
coming to sense the value of something
more like when we say the value of
something is appreciating so I've come
to appreciate Jesus I hope that doesn't
sound pretentious at all because it's
not my intent I've come to appreciate
Jesus much more profoundly and so the
way in which your inner sage will
interact with for those of us who have a
mother religion with our mother religion
or as a young might put with our default
because if we weren't brought up we have
a default spirituality rumbling around
in our unconscious I think it's a very
important part of this path that we're
on it's a very important part of this
possible so thank you Kara for for
bringing that out and for sharing that I
encourage other people please don't get
rambling I have a limited time but very
concise shared comments of celebration
and appreciation are also something we
should be looking for in the Q&A section
that's all unfortunately we have time
for today we will be able to answer more
questions tomorrow I want to thank you
all for joining as always I find this
majoring and nurturing and nourish and I
hope you all find the same I want to
thank my dear friend dr. major Maura
who's always working miracles my beloved
friend Jay
who's always here behind the scenes
coping with the unexpected
very heroic task right I would ask you
all to please subscribe to this channel
to be notified of the next video you
will also find links to the lecture
series awakening from the meaning crisis
and the dialogo series voices with four
Viki where a lot of these ideas and
practices and the philosophical
foundation are explored in greater depth
and development and set into a more
encompassing framework please and by
others who might benefit by sharing this
series
I'm sure Brett is here pleasure of doubt
and he will help Shepherd you over to
the discord server the link is in the
description and the discord server is as
I say it's a vibrant and vital community
and it is a direct extension right of
what's going on in this practice so I
encourage you to to join and get
involved reminder that we do this every
weekday morning at 9:30 Eastern Time
also reminder that continuity of
practice is more important than quantity
of practice there is no enemy worse than
your mind your own mind and body no
friend no ally no true companion on the
path better than your own mind and body
the lamps unto yourself and ion to each
other they could everyone hope to see
you tomorrow