the turning point and the answer had it
I reconstruct was that when I hit rock
bottom and it really looked at who I was
and experienced that tragedy and took it
on board I found it was rock it wasn't
quicksand it wasn't saying it wasn't
water I wasn't I wasn't evaporating I
wasn't going away you understand that it
was like I actually found an absolute
beautiful new fucking painful like you
know that life wasn't all rosy and you
know beer and chips and I had to accept
that this thing that I didn't want to
have happen and I hope you getting
really angry about it I didn't want it
to happen that it happened and I had to
accept that that is one of the bedrocks
of building who you are as a human being
yes
[Music]
hello and welcome to the next episode of
boys club this is episode 20 finding
purpose in modern society it was
recorded live and it was an interesting
conversation and I think there's lots of
meaning there and well I suppose I'll
just tell you one or two things about it
so you might consider sticking around
and listening Neville who I speak to in
the podcast is a 77 year old innovator a
gestalt therapist urban shaman a venture
capitalist and mentor and I think
someone who has developed his
relationship with spirit now we discuss
what we mean by spirits so I won't go
into that here
of course people come to these kinds of
discussions with different vocabularies
and different axioms about ontology and
the nature of things that can be a
hindrance I suppose to real communion
around a conversation about spirit but I
believe that there is a spiritual
reality to living and that the psyche
itself and consciousness itself draws on
something so fundamental that deserves
the spiritual language to encapsulate
and I enjoyed this discussion a lot
despite some amount of stress involved
but I look forward to many more and I
hope you enjoy it so thank you and I
promise not to be so bloody serious all
the time so there we go
now I hope you enjoy this so
something strange about recording
conversations is that there is a it's
kind of incumbent on you to to continue
speaking even when sometimes silence is
the right thing and so yeah I'll get my
excuses in early for go ahead silent can
I be silent the whole card you will see
so alright here's a quote to begin with
and it's from a man who is nothing short
of a genius his name was Carl Gustav
Jung the story of a life begins
somewhere at some particular point we
happen to remember and even then it was
already highly complex we do not know
how life was going to turn out
so therefore the story has no beginning
and the end can only be vaguely in to
that the life of man is a dubious
experiment now he wrote this in the
preface to his autobiography and there's
something fundamentally right about this
I think because if we want to talk about
what it is to live a meaningful life
then I think in a certain sense we have
to be open to the fact that we cannot
entirely low in the final analysis what
we are here to do in any fixed sense or
even how it all turns out because what
we do is embedded in many processes and
we interact with other people constantly
and so even after we pass what we do
leaves in air code which affects the
story of everyone else and so it's not
clear when a moment would be to look
back and go that's my life that's who I
am nevertheless we need to develop some
coherent sense of what we are and what
we're doing and in a very important
sense I think that needs to be
understood as something like a story so
never I want to
ask you a question that I think is one
of the most difficult questions you
can't ask anyone and I've sort of just
said that there's no possible way you
could ever finally answer this but you
are 77 years old now 77 years young
thank you yes that's right you always
get me on that one so so what then is
the story of your life oh my god - come
on whatever till you really want to go
and everyone hmm what are you here to do
what am I here to do right okay I'm very
clear on my current purpose now but my
purpose and I want to touch on this I
think there are six it this seems to be
booming a lot can you hear okay okay all
right I'd like to touch on later that in
my experience in my view there are
basically six purposes that every single
one of us live and that these change
roughly every five years so that every
five years if you like we have to
reinvent our grand purpose and we've got
six big ones to choose from and
ninety-eight percent of us choose from
those six but these are changed as life
changes but they also change out of a
series of events and seven years ago I
woke up in the morning I was clear where
my life was going what I was doing I had
a son who had paranoid schizophrenic
premium and he was really quite
literally mad and a lot of my time and
effort was been caring for him looking
after him and that morning I woke up and
I started to feel enormous pain I
dropped on the floor
my wife rang me hand melons and I was
taken into a hospital saying that I had
people silence which is a bit unusual at
72 70 sorry 70 the water later I was in
a room of four with a lovely morphine
drip
which I rather enjoyed to be honest and
I'm lying there trying to press the
button to get some more but it had an
overload and I couldn't do it and I
nurse came in looking a bit distressed
and she said there's some people here to
see and so we're moving you into a
single room so I walked out with the
drip and these funny pajamas that they
put on with no underpants in you feel
very sort of a bit wary walking down the
main corridor like this Villas I'm a bit
loose bit loose in there door hangers
and I walked out and I could see my wife
there and her daughter looking very
stressed and I saw a policeman so they
went into the single room and I looked
at him and said Anthony the name of my
son and he said yes I said did and he
said yes and I said suicide and he said
yes and I said fuck and started to cry
quite a lot so that event where a lot of
my life was involved in being a father
and looking after him and caring for him
caused a significant re-evaluation in my
life and it caused a change in the
purpose that I now live to that purpose
now is that I wish and I am actively
every day seeking to directly influence
10,000 people to create and grow a
business with soul to change the world
and have the life and lifestyle that
they want now that purpose might sound
pretty eerie theory but for me it's the
reason the race on d'etre I get up every
day
it motivators motivates me extraordinary
it keeps me young and makes every bloody
thing I do every day meaningful so when
we talk about business with soul we use
a word there that for lots of people the
word soul has become detached from a
reality you can really grasp yes
right and well I think something we both
share is an appreciation for the spirit
and in some important sense the
recognition the motivation to do any of
that at all
comes from a relationship with spirit
yes so perhaps you could talk to me a
little bit about your own relationship
with soul which one is it you reckon the
left or the right either either open up
a Pandora's box there but basically Carl
Gustav Jung fundamentally said there is
no difference in a personal sense
between soul and spirit now a lot of
people do distinguish between that but
he also said that really and is quite
right the word for soul in Greek is
psyche and out of psyche we get the
words psychology and all the other words
beginning with sight so for my
convenience I I think the notion of
psyche soul and spirit are virtually the
same yes I think that's correct and and
that what when we're talking about soul
we're talking about the very essence of
who we are as a human kind has a being
yes and one of the most interesting
things about human beings is first of
all we are the
only animal on the whole planet that
doesn't get up and walk after birth
every other animal that I can think of
sort of is more or less complete to
stand alone and exist alone but
humankind isn't that we are actually
born incomplete and if we look at them
then one of the fundamental purposes of
our life and our reason to be a soul and
a spirit embodied in a physical body is
to make us complete and when we're
complete we're ready to go wherever
Souls and spirits go either into the
earth and finish or somewhere else but
that's our journey our journey is to
complete ourselves yes the movement
towards wholeness yet completion right
which for young can be understand
through that can be understood through
the process of individuation yes which
is something like the integration of the
unconscious contents into the conscious
life which is to say also into action in
the world and therefore also action
within an interconnected network of well
at least other human beings but really
the whole web of life itself
and perhaps we could extend that even
further so can I can I just jump in
there you're always living in an age
where each of us to become who we are
was a fundamental raison d'Ãªtre a famous
really special purpose yes and it
remains one of the six that I want to
keep coming back to that is to become
the best us that we possibly can be but
increasingly the way the world is and we
are at I think one of the most
incredible tipping points in human
history not just our lives but but human
history and there's there's at least
thirty tsunamis that are hitting the
world
and they are fundamentally changing the
way the world is and the way the world
will become and the futures that we'll
all have so my personal view is that we
are at a tipping point where we have to
move away from the focus on
individuation still important to a
purpose that is more collaborative that
is more tribal that is more
communicating and working together and I
think that's a fundamental shift in this
modern world so one of the many answers
to your question I think is how do you
find soul spirit purpose and meaning in
the modern world it's through loving
relating working with others and that's
becoming a very big prime purpose of the
six yes I mean so I agree with you and I
think this is somewhere we've spoken
about a little bit before and this will
be a consistent area of push and pull
because talk about the collective you
have to talk about the individual and to
talk about the individual you have to
talk about the collective and so but
which one like we've come through a
process where the individual is the
supreme over and above the society over
and above community you know well go to
just about any American self-help
evangelist and it's all about you know
finding your goals and striving and
being ambitious and whatever but it's
all about being you it's really being
you in a community in a tribe in a
family in a group of people and that
that has to change if we get to save the
planet for example well yes there's
certainly no disagreement from me when
it comes to the proper sense of
developing yourself as an individual to
be a cognizant of your impact and
relation with everything else around you
and it should be more understood from
the perspective of finding your pro
nitch to give value in that Network what
what sort of character essentially are
you destined in some sense to become or
to unfold yourself into that complements
the show in your own unique way now it
is it is still somewhat confusing though
because I think at least where I come
from sorry what's confusing I'll well
the following the following thought
because there's a tension there right
because yes we want to add as much as we
can to to everyone around us and that
might mean not placing yourself in the
center and recognizing that you just
have a part to play but I think within
us all as a part of that essence of
spirit and psyche in some important
sense the whole is contained is what the
whole is contained within you right the
same the same substrate or the same way
to be the same effective life will that
permeates everything and enables
coherence among things geez just let me
build on then and you're much more of a
philosopher than I am I'm an
entrepreneur and innovator I like to get
down to pretty nutty nitty-gritty things
but there's there's a famous psychology
that at psycho psychologists that I find
totally and utterly unreadable but but
he's quoted all the time he's a guy guy
named James Hillman and he's written
books like how come we've had a hundred
years of psychotherapy and we're still
not well so he he talks about what
you're saying there he uses the word
entelechy and what he says is that just
as the entelechy or end purpose of an
acorn is an oak tree and that
with the Acorn that magnificent huge
acorn oak tree is already there and I've
already said that the interesting things
about us as human beings is that we are
born with an enormous in Telugu we are
born with enormous talent potential to
become magnificent human beings and our
journey is to become that that's our
hero's journey to become the person we
can be I'm just saying that there is now
another purpose that needs to be added
to that as well and that is the purpose
of being in community and making the
world a better place than the world that
we inherited and the world that's
starting to unravel now now so our
individuation needs to take place within
within an ability and an interest to
change the world and make it better if
we don't we will slowly as a human
individual die not physical death but
spiritually yes no I do agree with you
and we can I guess best to move on from
this because I can only anticipate if I
follow that train it's just sort of a
technical dispute that ultimately needs
leads nowhere but why don't we then pick
back up on can you talk me through how
it was you were able to pick your gaze
back up and set a new purpose for your
life after the tragic news you heard
that you spoke about the suicide of your
son Anthony yes it took it took at least
a year to rebuild and
um there isn't a day gone by that I
don't remember my son and even talking
about him now I'm starting to tear up so
that grieving process I think for
someone you deeply love I don't think it
ever ends and why should it it's like
when I divorced my first wife or my only
wife we did that in great love we
couldn't hold Antony's madness as a
couple it was just so bad that it
destroyed our relationship but we parted
in great love and we still love each
other so it's like some of the shittiest
things in life like Amy's dead become a
crystal or a magnifying glass for us to
really really examine what's going on in
our life and why are we here and who are
we and who do we want to become and by
the way these questions are the
questions of purpose Who am I who do I
want to be what values do I want to
express in the world what what
contribution do I make these sort of
philosophical questions are actually the
questions of purpose and the the death
of my son which was fundamental because
like that's that's an unnatural thing
like you know it's the natural order is
that that you know you have kids and
they look after you after you've looked
after them and you die and then they die
so when they die before you it's like it
it sets up an incredible rift in the
universe in your personal cosmos but but
what happened was that in many ways I
felt at that point I hit rock bottom but
the turning point and the answer had it
I reconstruct was that
when I hit rock bottom and it really
looked at who I was and experienced that
tragedy and took it on board I found it
was rock
it wasn't quicksand it wasn't saying it
wasn't water I wasn't I wasn't
evaporating I wasn't going away do you
understand that it was like I actually
found an absolute beautiful new fucking
painful like you know that life wasn't
all Roseate and you know beer and chips
and I had to accept that this thing that
I didn't want to have happen and I've
been getting really angry about it I
didn't want it to happen but it happened
and I have to accept that that is one of
the bedrocks of building who you are as
a human being yes and I think that rock
bottom actually is can I have a tissue
is anyone got a tissue please sorry I'm
not sorry about that I'm glad that at 77
I can express my real emotions yes and
you can ask for a tissue - yeah thank
you thank you so I think that's hitting
rock bottom there is and it's rock
well it's rock it has in its real as in
I think that's a connection with perhaps
the source of the most real thing there
is which is the recognition was sort of
there and a half
it's an affectation and it's it's a self
affirmation of a will to live of spirit
of so I think that's the only thing
powerful enough to to enable them to
enable the experience of the worst
moment in your life
to be in fact the language wouldn't be
obviously it's not the best but it's
there's something there's something
beautiful about something real there's a
man who was going to be here today about
his gallivanting all over Australia
working very hard his name's Patrick
Slater and here I tell this story quite
a lot because I think it encapsulates
well similar themes and he was hiking in
Japan and bug is quite a quite a tall
man and so he got very very sick as he
was hiking along in the snow just
imagine some blizzard just high up in
Japan and he and buggies just sort of
hunched along as how I kind of imagined
it you know and apparently the view from
people behind him walking was just the
most tragic thing ever he's almost dying
and in this blizzard and it was the
worst he'd ever felt in his whole life
just absolutely terrible
thought he was going to die and so they
continued on continued on and eventually
they stopped and he has a cup of tea and
I think he said he felt something like
1% better or maybe not even that but it
was the trajectory from being the
absolute worst to just moving off that
slightly that all of a sudden became one
of the most beautiful moments of his
life which speaks to the idea that it's
ultimately the trajectory it's the goal
setting it's looking for words that its
most fundamental I think there's
something even more fundamental there
and I agree with you I reckon every
single day each of us is faced with
three choices and this I think only
three will will I move forward and grow
and learn and be a better person and
make a better contribution today
or will I stand still or will I go
backwards
now that's a stupid thing to say but
think of it I reckon there are three
choices and I reckon we're faced with
that every day
now as part of this we're talking about
how do we find soul and as I said I want
to I want to delay a little bit telling
you what the six are but I've already
mentioned a couple what I know because
I'm an innovator and an entrepreneur I
know that there is a absolutely proven
way to kick-start finding our purpose or
creating our purpose and making sure
that we move forward every day and that
is as soon as we get up practice the art
of gratitude I have this funny thing
that when I get up I go to the toilet
and as I look down ping I say thank you
for that lovely penis that I have and
what it can do I am very grateful for
being a man and having this lovely
appendage I wish you were bigger but you
know I still works it's to us
it still works at 77 thank you whoever
it is that we think and then I look into
the toilet bowl and I say thank you for
this wonderful amazing gorgeous cirrage
you know because if you've ever been in
the country that doesn't have sewage you
have some idea of how wonderful that
invention is and as I get in the shower
I express gratitude for the soap I
express gratitude for my body I express
gratitude so that hot water and - the
towels and the smells and the sins and
when I go to the refrigerator I think
whoever created that refrigerator and I
think for all the food that's there now
you might say that's stupid but just
research the power of gratitude on
Google and you will be amazed -
find that gratitude is what kick-starts
innovation it kick-starts all of our
happiness it kick-starts growth because
what it does is it moves us from a
position of stuckness or depression or
sadness or any other emotion and it
moves us into a place of joy and
openness and you know embracing the
universe the cosmos and that's part of
what I suppose I think so yes I think so
all right well I think Magellan
circumnavigated the world the Chinese
actually probably had done at all
there's a fascinating book called 14:21
I think yes 1421 that talks about an
admiral Xing I don't know you might be
able to pronounce it properly
Zen a TNG isn't seen
all right whatever he said and and it's
really interesting the the author of
this book traced did DNA tracings around
the world including with Australian
Aboriginals and found that they had
Chinese genes and there were maps that
have been discovered that Marco Polo
took back to Europe that the Chinese
certainly discovered most of the west
coast of Australia and most of the south
coasts and probably probably Tasmanian
so the Chinese were here long before the
Europeans who of course being so
egocentric were the first to discover
the world and the first and they went to
America as well long before the
Europeans now what's the point of this
story the point is that out of this
ignorant are in the medieval a in the
medieval world these flat maps so-called
used to have a big landmass down south
and it was called anybody know Terra
Australis incognita in Latin which means
the great unknown Southland but the
notion was that we had to set off in
ships and find this unknown Southland
and I'm telling this story because most
of us seem to believe that we need to
search for our purpose but I want to say
that there are two purposes that we are
given at birth and for purposes that we
need to create so it's not a matter of
the search for meaning it's a matter of
deciding what our meaning is what our
purpose is as any particular time now
I'd like you to imagine that you've
suddenly been transported to one of
those great South American countries
like Peru or wherever where they have
very ancient civilizations and cultures
I'd like you to imagine
that you find yourself waking up on a
plateau and when you wake up you look to
the left and there are two mountains two
mountains of equal size when you look to
the right you find that there are four
mountains of of equal size and in your
mystical state because you are in a
sense of transcendence or something
you've probably been taking a few
chemicals in this state an ancient
princess appears to you and quite
unusually she's able to communicate with
you by thought transfer and she knows
that what you are seeking for is to
clarify your purpose whatever it might
be at this particular point in time and
she points to the two mountains to the
left and she says first of all these
purposes were given to you at birth the
first one over there is the God purpose
now you can call at many names
scientists say we actually have a god
gene which is a gene that is searching
for a higher being and we go right back
into all the earliest civilizations and
we find that every one of them had a
sense of art and a sense of-of a world
beyond and things were buried with with
people going right back 10,000 years
so the first purpose that we are all
given is to have some belief in a God or
a being or a transcendence now we will
translate that in many ways but this
voice tells you that you cannot live a
meaningful purpose life unless you have
some sense of a life beyond a life
that's different a life that compared
transcendence a spirit a being a God you
call it any damn thing you like
you make it up but you need to have that
as one part of your six purposes and
then this voice says over here is the
biological animal purpose that every
single animal is going that is that you
are born it is an expectation that you
will find a partner or multiple partners
you will have as much sex as you
possibly can manage until you're
exhausted and then you'll do it again
and you will have some children you will
raise those children and you will create
for them a better life than the one
you've had yourself that is an innate
biological purpose that we all have and
whether the we're gay or transgender or
bisexual or whatever the hell we are
unless we somehow
work through that notion of family
creating something having children of
some sort whether that's kids that we
mentor and because both of my kids are
adopted and now I have one only not two
I work that that that through by
mentoring and having people that that
are my children that that I mentor and
every single one of us has to work that
purpose through it's part of what it
means to be human
right okay so what I'm hearing there is
we innately have this connection to some
transcend transcendence yes source yes
and then we feel the need to participate
in furthering that source by its
engaging in some kind of co-creative
manifestation of that source so igniting
in other people how to properly develop
in light of well by the light of that by
that first purpose but that's way too
vague and sorry it's interesting I can't
remember there any of their names at the
moment I've already had a drink but
some of the great atheists who spend
their whole life proving there is no
other transcendental state or being or
God or call him see it whatever you like
they actually do believe in God they
just spend so much because if you if
you're absolutely convinced there's no
God or no other existence why the fuck
do you keep arguing about it just get on
with your living so they're they're sort
of you know they're involved in it
so then there's there's four others and
the first one we've there on the right
zone and these are the terror Australis
incognita they're there they're not
there to be created because they exist
they are there for us to consciously
choose at this time in our life we will
embrace the first two are Givens the
next four are choice and the first one
is we've touched on another touch first
on the notion of self actualization
individuation becoming the best human
being that we are able to be to grow
expressing gratitude every day and to
keep getting better and different and
enlarged and becoming the expressing our
entelechy expressing the potential that
we were born with the next one is the
notion that I don't believe we God
created us I don't believe there is a
God personally but I believe that we
create God in our image and the most
amazing emotion or expression that we've
ever been able to come up with is love
and so so hang on a second so we came up
with love I know love is the most the
strongest emotion desire value that we
can think of and that's why we have
invented and said God
god is love so we've created God in the
best image that we can think of which is
love so it seems to me that love has to
be connected though to that initial
source you're referring to the first one
yes it does but I guess I've misled us
here what I'm saying is that the the
next purpose that we need to choose is
centered around the notion of love and
relationship love in all its forms the
Greek we only use one word for love the
Greeks had three words
Agatha Fillion and I got ahead of divine
love brotherly love and sexual love but
but the next purpose that is fundamental
to all of us is to love and be loving
and without that without that as a core
purpose we are not human we're something
else we become beasts you okay so on
this side three purposes the first is to
be the best human being we can be to
grow the second one is to love and be
loving and to create meaningful
purposeful wonderful relationships
singular or plural or you know being
polygamous or whatever we need to be to
do that the third the third and final
one and this is becoming more important
and especially it's becoming important
to the Millennials the people who are
under 36 and that is the desire to do
some good in the world to leave the
world better than we found it to create
something bigger better than brighter
than us now I say there are six because
so far I've only found five fundamental
purposes that everybody lives by but
I've put a six in there because I don't
know everything I'm sure there are some
ones in this room that'll say after me
this one so I'm willing to learn so 6 is
the Terra Australis incognito the one I
don't know about okay
but this is what's important all of
those six mountains of equal size and
our equal value right now your choice is
to climb one mountain being right now
the predominant mountain of the six and
from that mountain you are going to
embrace the other five so for me at the
moment it is too since my son died it is
to do some good in the world and from
that I am able to embrace my spiritual
purpose my family purpose my loving
purpose my personal growth purpose and
whatever else might come along I hope
that makes sense to you because we need
to create and choose our purpose it's
not out there waiting for us and we have
to search it right now you tonight say
of those six this is the one that's
preeminent and I will embrace the others
from that mountaintop well that was um
that was a monologue wasn't it sorry
about that there was no there was very
interesting I guess honestly speaking
for me those purposes are all linked and
they are we could you know each them
apart in many different ways you know so
rather than do that exactly I thought
maybe I might ask about some of the
foundational transformative experiences
in your life that have been very
important in building your capacity to
relate to the world like this and we've
spoken about one of them but I know that
your past you have had a series of
shamanic experiences
yes that works sorry that were pivotal
in the finding a new purpose so is there
a particular initiatory shamanic
experience that comes to mind and we
should say also as well what a shamanic
experience I think is is the
intermediation between transpersonal
domain of consciousness and ordinary
conscious States which is quite a
confusing idea because it involves
relinquishing a certain way of relating
to what you are and demands of you at
capacity to navigate your own internal
experience using in a way a different
set of tools because it's not so much an
intellectual process as it is orienting
in experience and again discerning
between qualities and it's it's
something that's not it's becoming more
common to talk about this stuff but I
think in ordinary life is something that
eludes our comprehension quite easily
and the reason for that is we're all
remarkably concerned with the external
world and we take a lot of the internal
world for granted which is to say we
take a lot of the unconscious components
of our psyche for granted now commonly
people might well we we dream most every
night some people remember them some
don't and what happens in dreams is a
projection of the unconscious content at
least a selection of unconscious
contents into well consciousness sort of
but it's a different sort of
consciousness the question is what the
hell is going on there and and
how how can you draw any meaning from
such experiences at all now it's
difficult to link the meaning of dreams
to where we are without again speaking
about psychology in the work of Carl
Jung and the conception of the
archetypes of the collective unconscious
which is something like an innate set of
patterns which are also the filtration
mechanism for meaning these are a
collection of patterns that are
analogous to instincts analogous to
physiological instincts they are
instincts of the psyche but again also a
filtration mechanism for the mind as it
relates to the world so what we
experience is fed through this pattern
recognition and it rises up as a sort of
spontaneous selection of symbols that
array themselves in narrative something
like this now many people here will be
familiar with psychedelic experience and
some may even have been to far-off
parts of the world or perhaps closer to
home where you can have experiences that
are mediated by a guide or perhaps not
and they're very very strange and they
involve in some sense the apparition of
unconscious contents into the conscious
life now the unconscious contents are
you as well as the conscious life is you
and they reflect where you are and what
you're doing and where are we going with
it
where we are going is to ask you about
your shamanic experiences but just to
provide I suppose a little bit of a
background into how to understand what's
going on in an experience where
well I know for instance that in one of
your shamanic experiences you
encountered a shaman an old wise man
right and this was a well perhaps I'll
let you tell the story but look you're
opening up a real can of oils with the
shamanic experience it's weird to most
of us ah it's it's a world that is
similar to the psychedelic world without
drugs or can be but I guess and I'm
happy to talk about it but I guess I'm a
little bit interested whether there's
any comments or questions from the group
so I'll just say yeah any any time if
someone wants to ask a particular
question or felt like there was
something that was touched on that we
didn't explore that you would like us to
explore please say so at any time just
let the silent sit for a few seconds now
and in case anybody feels like saying
something
it looks like Neville it's not going to
be able to dodge talking about shamanism
okay just very briefly the shamans are
amazing people that arose in medic
tribes before the great I unilateral God
religions of Judaism Christianity Islam
took over the world they were tried
tribal chief makers they were dancers
they were physicians and healers and
I've had many many experiences as an
urban shaman without drugs by dense
fasting and certain types of music that
changed brain patterns the background is
that I was born and bred a evangelical
Christian which was a whole series of
don'ts I was saying to someone one of
them one of the the messages we used to
get
you must not dance because dancing is a
vertical expression of a horizontal
intention and I have since learned that
that's absolutely true so I do as much
dancing as I possibly can but the
religion I was raised in was don't do
this don't do that you can't you can't
do anything on Sundays other than go to
church you can't dance you must have
wear modern clothes if you have any
books in your house to study you must
get rid of them secular books you can it
was it was a religion of don't stone
stone stones and and and I was I was
raised with the feeling that my inner
life was so dirty and dark and devious
and full of demons that you should not
go there but through these experiences
of transcendental going down deep inside
myself the very first one after going
down for layers being led by a very
skilled person I found an old man
a Chinese man with a beard and I stick
and he said I'm a shaman and at that
point I never heard of what the word was
and he took off the cloak that he was
wearing and you were going through an
internal experience in an internal yes
total so it's like a dream states an
awake MIDI me mediated meditations and
what was the experience of moving into
that States
well transformative because ah it was
absolutely alien to me to be led into my
psyche and as I went down into the
layers instead of finding a dark and
dirty and devious I found it beautiful I
found it was full of colors and totems
and power animals and transcendence and
States and people from history people
who were part of my DNA and at the
bottom or ancestral kind of experience I
had a universal global
making experience as well yes yes I saw
stars and moons and planets and
vibration it was just I mean I've never
had a psychedelic experience I assume
that it was that's close enough to some
kinds but did you did you retain a sense
of your own identity in this experience
or where you fused with the environment
well it was it was like as I was going
down the layers of my psyche my sense of
self kept changing and as I said I
started with this view that my inner
self was dark devious dirty and full of
demons and to be avoided as I went down
these layers being led by music and
meditation I found that that was hog
shit if you'll excuse the expression
that inside was like going into an
Aladdin's cave there were treasures
there were gifts there were there was a
potential I never knew and as I said at
the bottom or you you raised it at the
bottom there was this very old Chinese
man who looked like he was about 800 and
he had this amazing yellow cloak and he
took it off and gave it to me as a gift
and said you're a shaman
now as I went back the layers of my
psyche I couldn't take this coke cloak
of course into the real world I had to
leave it at the top level but it's there
at the top of the top level so the top
level of my psyche right do you mean the
deepest or do you mean just when you
were exiting the states we started at
the top of a mountain we knew it down
down and down and this was right at the
bottom and you leave it up to the top
then we went up and right at the top of
the mountain when I came back into the
real world I had to leave the cloak but
it was there as a transformative thing
that I can put on at any time
so there's a lot of beautiful things
down there but there's also a lot of
darkness no less far less darkness then
we have all been taught and far more
Beauty far more gifts far more jewels
far more potential
well there's untapped potential no doubt
uncapped I'm anxious
so you think then we can make sense of
the very depths of us as being more good
than they are thought there does not
need to be a balance yin 9 90% came too
soon wow that's that's interesting I
don't think I agree with that
I mean how how can that be the case
because that's what I've experienced so
in so in was this in one experience or
whether multiple experience it has 10
years of experience 10 years of
experience of in the encounter having
initially a stage of more shadow like
contents so moving through darkness and
then there's just the more bountiful
treasure' to be found within well I can
hear you're leading me but I have to say
those experiences time and time again
were never of darkness would never of
demons they were the opposite and they
the transformative thing was like you
imagine a lead in the story of 11 a poor
impoverished boy that finds these
thieves have been stealing and sticking
all his treasure inside a cave and he
learns that by saying Open Sesame
the cave opens and he goes in he doesn't
find any demons he doesn't find any
uglies he just finds the most
extraordinary treasures and riches and
depth and Wonder and joy and beauty and
al adhim was transformed Neville
Christie when he went inside when I went
inside myself I did not find what I was
taught would be there I didn't I found a
lads cave now you may be different I
don't know
but the message for me is that we are
more wondrous more amazing more
fantastic than we have been taught I
don't want to put myself on the side of
someone who's trying to teach someone
that thing what he that we're not
wondrous I definitely don't want to take
that perspective but look I'm you asked
me about my shamanic experiences I can
only share with what I experienced
whether that's universe or I don't know
well no I mean of course I'd love it to
be I would love that all of us here find
that we are wondrous joyous fantastic
incredible beautiful amazing creatures
and that we fulfilled that potential and
we grabbed all those jewels look so I
don't think we can divorce what you
experience in your particular shamanic
journeys from every other thing you've
done in your life and what you're aiming
at more you were aiming at then how
would you conducted yourself how you
conducted yourself in that exploration
itself what your intentions were what
you wanted to achieve in the world
broadly speaking the responsibility you
took for working for the better of
things you know so I mean so what I'm
interested in doing is is learning
what's most helpful in preparing for any
sort of exploration whether out into the
actual world or or within because
intention is important and the
congruence between what you want to do
in the world and how you treat yourself
in your experience is crucial yes
so look it doesn't make sense to me at
all that the universe broadly speaking
can be more good than it is bad I think
we are faced with this situation of
essentially more or less immutable flux
continual harmony balance and we play
out that capacity in ourselves and we
have the capacity to choose our way to
some significant but limited degree
within the framework of our lives and
given the interconnected and
ridiculously long lineage of our entire
evolutionary history and so I guess I
guess I guess I just do I do have a I do
have a concern when it comes to
discussing any sort of transformative
experience without without commenting on
the profound and very and very dangerous
kind of of Darkness you can encounter
because if you're not properly equipped
you can do yourself lasting damage and
I'm not trying to create some sort of
oppositional relationship here where I'm
saying you're saying that that's not
going to happen I know you're talking
about your own experiences but perhaps
then I might ask what do you think it is
about how you've lived your life how you
approach those experiences that enabled
you to find such treasure within when
there is treasure within and then we
look at many many many examples
throughout our entire history of human
beings with the same innate potential as
every single person sitting in this room
that I've committed the most foul acts
of atrocity and darkness and malevolence
you could ever imagine in order for us
to understand and connect with other
human beings we have to recognize that
potential in us to be that yes but but
this is about a choice I said I think
quite clearly for me this notion of
purpose is is not something that a god
or a
or whatever give us except for the two
mountains about a spiritual belief
system and the biological imperative to
procreate
they are Givens everything else is a
choice and I put it to you like this
life and human beings go over like most
of you I'm so sorry
I stopped you one second this this this
desire to procreate this desire to to to
to require that the transcendent I mean
it's it's precisely on in these areas
that many many people I mean people
reject these right people many people
today are anti-nato list many people
today
deny the transcendent deny God's yes and
so the question is like and they face a
consequence of that I'm not saying that
you have to get married and have
children
I'm just saying that you have to you
have to create the equivalent of
children to find meaning in this life
yes I agree with you and anything why
why don't people because they make a
choice and because they're mislead they
don't so they're making so they're
making a choice bites but ok so I don't
want to go down that sure I just want to
carry a point you do look we know that
human beings are full of the ability to
commit the most ghastly atrocities we
only have to look what's happened in
Syria we're having the boat people look
at what the Nazis did look what happened
in Cambodia
I mean look what's happening in Burma in
even in China to some extent we are
capable as human beings of the most
incredible awful unbelievable
godforsaken atrocious atrocities we're
also capable of the most divine amazing
wondrous things now I think we have a
choice which universe we live in
yes that's what I'm saying it's a choice
I can choose to follow the darkness
I can choose to be a rotten human being
I can choose to do dirt on other human
beings
I can choose to beat up my wife right
that's a choice I I know I know so that
sorry what is the better choice to go
that way or to go this way well I think
I think everyone I mean almost everyone
would agree with that I guess the
problem is is that people don't a lot of
people don't feel like they can of
course they don't but but we do we have
a choice so I so I'm interested in what
it is that people lose connection to in
a in a in a pre in a precognitive way I
have no idea I cannot tell you well only
but that's that's why that's why the
that's why understanding the process of
engaging with the shamanic journey I
think is so interesting because the way
to orient in that space is not
intellectually so the question is when
you are in that place of Darkness and
you're moving down the mountain to use
your own metaphor like how do you hold
that space and move into it with the
right intention right you make the
choice do you follow the darkness or do
you follow the light do you follow the
negative energy or do you follow the
positive energy and every single one of
us are faced with that every day
do I choose today to grow to be better
to add kindness to the world to make the
world better do I choose just to stand
still or do I choose to go backwards and
embrace negativity you know things that
are not so good that's the choice you
and I every one of us are presented with
every single moment of our lives yes I
mean I agree there's there's things that
complicate this process though one of
them is immense fear but I can choose to
give in to fear you know I can choose to
be annihilated when my son kills himself
and be overwhelmed by existential guilt
you know why wasn't I a good enough
parent and father to stop this suicide
what I could choose to do
look III do agree with you I do agree
with you I I guess I'm trying to get to
a place and use language that sorry look
I think the issue today is that many of
us do not want to make life happen we
want to let it happen and letting life
happen
I believe leads to the darkness the dark
side hmm that's interesting so letting
life happen I mean so we want to
distinguish again should make we had
happen yep we want to distinguish two
kinds of letting life happen there one
which would be the positive sense which
is paying attention to the experience in
front of you right being able to look
and observe and pay attention before
immediately reacting precisely and then
there's a letting things happen to you
that as you go along with whatever the
flow is without you engaging that
capacity to discern and have agency and
enact agency on the basis of that
discernment between quality so so I mean
I I want I do want to talk about fear
because I think fear is a thick veil at
the moment in well I think it has been
of necessity throughout the entire
course of human history because we have
this very precious thing that we come
innate with which is this drive to live
that I believe resides in a spiritual
base and by spiritual I mean something
fundamental that we participate in which
on this view is something like
consciousness so consciousness is
fundamental that means our consciousness
is of a kind with what is fundamental
the capacity to discern between
qualities
in our conscious experience is therefore
related somehow to what's going on at a
very fundamental level our capacity to
orient their foreign consciousness is
involved in the creation of continued
being but we're very vulnerable and we
are finite and growth and movement and
change is all one at and individuality
and identity is all one at the price of
death the death of what is fixed at that
moment the death of what currently
exists so are we I'm getting lost okay
we'll just let me I have to I have to
continue and I'll bring it back
eventually all right so well again we'll
pick up with fear we are finite we have
something precious to protect which is
this drive to live if we put it in some
in the language you've introduced with
your purpose we have here talking about
this source of transcendence and the
desire to procreate which is to involve
in that process of maintaining that that
that spirit that transcendence in your
own language because we die so to
participate in the continuation of
something beyond ourselves right means
to okay and so we are scared because we
die and we are vulnerable now now what
impart enables us to maintain enough
order in our psychological makeup is our
evolved history of culture and our
current social norms and our current
stories we tell ourselves and our
current patterns of behavior that ground
us presently in the world but they're
prone to not be adequate because things
are always changing and so when that's
challenged in any way it's terrifying
because that is what buttresses you
against
collapse against chaos against negative
potential right so we have to confront
the the necessary suffering and fear in
reality in our experience born of the
fact that we are finite and precious and
take ourselves to be precious so the
question is how like how how do you
first find a moment with that in that
overwhelming chaos in that fear in that
in that place of ultimate abandoned
dissolution and the destruction of all
your well-made plans well like any and
you and assume you've spoken about you
find the ground how do you hold the fear
to then look for the ground because
people like as soon as the fear comes
it's like no no no fear okay that's
that's too I'm too afraid I'm gonna go
with whatever I can latch onto some
bollocks
I could I could go into about this of
starve stop okay I think you've opened
up a massive topic so let me not spend
too much time on it but I'd like to
change your model if you go back to the
lancet old man you know when he was
faced with dinosaurs he had two options
both based on fear the first was
flight-or-fight
now those two cerebral cortex adrenal
reactions of anything at all will that
we perceive to be threatening are built
into every human being they are
fundamental to the animal aspects of us
as human beings now we can return to the
animal or the internal state of just
simply fighting it denying it have it a
punch at it or run away from it but
there are at least five other options
the first is
to bunker down and wait till it goes
away and a lot of people are doing that
that's a response another way is to be
as shit chamois Leone and neither fight
or flight that adapt to the situation to
become something else to change the
color you know to find a different a bit
to be Asha million the next thing is in
some way to adapt to it like to take
that and say consciously what's going on
here what can I learn what happened with
my son
you know fear depression anxiety a whole
Sue's in an absolutely overwhelming
negative emotions took over but I found
there was a rock to build from and I was
able to go back then to other
alternatives to fight or flight the the
next response is is innovate change a
transformation so like we are not
actually rational human beings the
notion that we are rational is bullshit
we know from imaging that virtually all
data there comes to us from the external
world goes to the central part of the
brain which is the I called them a
million brain the horse brain where all
the emotions lie and it's mixed with all
sorts of emotions like fear like anger
like like positivity when we we face a
negative emotion and we consciously
using consciousness awareness we replace
it with a different emotion you know I
can do this this is overwhelming but
I'll face it I'll learn from it as soon
as we do that the fear goes away
but we don't just have fight or flight
as our responses so before immediately
responding we can pay attention and
recognize other options yes okay and the
more we practice that and the more we
practice gratitude the more options we
discover right the link between
gratitude and options would be very
interesting but we are at 9:30 now and
I'm conscious of people's time we said
we'd speak to about now maybe we'll just
take five five minutes or so and wrap up
and then I'm happy to have you know any
questions asked if anyone wants to wants
to ask a question it's a Nevil or about
what we've discussed was that hand at
the back had people not being what sorry
people not being okay yes yep right okay
so the question was how do you define a
good community and what advice would you
have for someone who wants to find a
community right that's a beautiful
question has had
I guess the simple answer is start
simply relating to everybody you meet
seven years ago I used to go to a I'm
not a party animal my wife used to be a
myers-briggs person and she used to ask
me generally she'd say I don't know
whether you're an INFP or an ESTJ and
the answer is on both I but I've learned
to be an extrovert I'm really an
introvert and I would go to parties and
I'd be overwhelmed by the community the
all the people there so what I would do
would grab a plate of hors d'oeuvres or
whatever and I would go round and I
would share the hors d'oeuvres and have
a few words until I suddenly found
someone that was Sympatico and I grabbed
that person and talked with them all
evening you know and and we had a
community of two and I think of the
essence that's fundamentally what
community is most people are lonely I
believe most people are waiting except
the extreme in extroverts most people
are waiting for the other person to
communicate to initiate conversation to
move the relationship from being
transactional about buying and selling
to something that has a bit of a tea
dimension a bit of depth and the way we
build community is we take the
initiative and we start that process of
opening our soul to another human being
and finding their soul and we do it one
at a time
I believe I can't answer that in any
other way I just like to add that the
Syracuse I think have a wonderful
methodology they believe that the whole
world in terms of us as human beings has
seven eleven circles
in the in the very inner soul mate
circle they say that in our whole life
we probably have a maximum of three to
four to five real soul mates we might
only ever have one in our whole life and
then the next level is friends that you
know are really close and whatever and
we keep going out to the eleventh circle
being friends we have yet to meet and
and I think that that's what community
is about it's about eleven circles and
in the middle of it is three or four
soul mates and that's vegans their
people their relationships we build over
a total lifetime so I think the essence
of nevels answer there was showing up
really as who you are when you meet
other people yes and being vulnerable
right precisely and being and being
vulnerable my current wife gets annoyed
because in the flat where we live in
Melbourne I talk to everybody you know
and she she can't ask the men and I said
well I just had you know it's like you
gotta you gotta talk to people so part
of that 1r ability means putting
yourself out there which means speaking
in part and that means if it's
vulnerable it's it's true so what I mean
what's ham in mainland herbal know I'm
of course well I mean there's plenty of
harm actually in being vulnerable
I mean that's what being vulnerable is
right like you're putting yourself in
danger now that's what life requires
that's what growth requires it's what
any real connection requires taking a
risk it sure vulnerability now to build
on the answer because this is obviously
something that is quite important to me
and deeply involved in everything we're
doing here and moving forwards so I
don't I don't think it's
in some sense that complicates it I
think it's showing up speaking
truthfully and well actually that the
difficult part is I think is that you
actually have to love yourself right you
have to believe that you're worthy of
love and it's a in some sense it's a
cliche way to appreciate thing to say
but what I think that means is that the
vulnerability you show is actually
anchored in something that itself is in
principle or could be good worthy of
love just just on that as an evangelical
I was taught over an hour again
that joy was Jesus first other's second
and yourself last
that is hog shit if you go back to what
that great teacher taught he says love
others as your self not not others
better different than we are or less
than us but as ourselves and I think
that's the whole basis of community to
love others as ourselves not more not
better not less not richer not poorer
that as us right so you have something
to offer and you must believe that the
other person has something to offer to
right that there is that there is
something like that there is a dignity
to the human spirit that there is a
dignity to what we do in the world which
is bear the reality of our finitude and
suffering and somehow find a way to move
forwards for the better all right this
is a ridiculous burden and it's a it's a
it's an incredible thing to achieve and
I think being in that space and
believing that not just with the mind
but also with the body is
is necessary for the kind of community
that I think is required to be able to
platform these sorts of conversations
that I think society needs today in
Australia in these suburbs in the world
there's much obviously that we haven't
touched on and there's plenty that in
the future I want to Tim could I could I
offer a genuine thanks to the group that
for me ah it's I spend most of my life
listening to other people and you know
paying attention to them I would like to
thank you very much for Tim for the for
his questions and I'd really like to
thank you for the attentiveness and the
consideration you've given to this 70
year old 77 year old man who's actually
only 17 inside for spilling his guts so
thank you thank you it's a gift you give
me right so that's almost oh you do
you're done we're we're done so thank
you very much
[Applause]