thank you everybody for tuning in so
this will be a video which Jordan Hall
Christopher John rebecky and myself will
be entering into dialogue OHS I just got
done over the conversation and all I can
say is I feel filled with a sense of
fullness and openness at the same time
directly in my heart in my mind and
about our times so when my experience
the reason why dude go into dialo goes
as a wave life really is exemplified
through doing deilogos this is a deep
faith that seems super pertinent but
only forever in this time a couple
housekeeping things like I've like I
said before about my company's circling
Institute we've moved all of our our
teachings and her courses online links
below if you want to work one-on-one
with me just email me that my emails
below enjoy also
and at plumbing crisis so plumbers were
in the back and so that got in the way a
little bit in the beginning so I hope it
didn't doesn't distract too much but I
had to go back and forth so few
technical difficulties all right enjoy
three gentlemen I'm good to see all of
you again very good to see all of you
again hmm
now I propose in the email we sent
around that we use this four-way yellow
goes to try and follow up on the two
dialogues that Jordan and I had
centering around the notion of something
like a Socratic faith and Chris and I
also recently had a very good discussion
with Andrew Sweeney around this and so
these three discussions are very much on
my mind right now
and what Socratic faith might look like
and why it might be needed here in our
current situation Jordan and I have been
exploring that and what its relations
are too closely attending notions such
as wisdom aspiration and perhaps also
the religion that's not a religion these
are all the things as sort of I proposed
that we might sort of put on the table
for discussion right now how does that
sound for the rest of you for today that
sounds really good and in weaving in
with that which actually I think maybe
makes what you're talking about more
even more salient and more pertinent
which is something that's really stuck
with me and I think he just said it out
of just spontaneously or just in finding
his speech in one of his videos Johanna
said he said mark something like it's
it's kind of funny being a philosopher
where where a philosopher has some as
something to say that's actually timely
and I've that's really sunk in this
sense of that work that we're in a time
right now that it may be such that what
a philosopher says speaks to the time
that we're in in a direct way
I think so I think I I was with a I was
peter lindbergh it's creating an online
store and we were and I was asked to
speak I think Jordan you did yours today
didn't you do your another situational I
did yeah so right the one I did last
night was on the meaning Kairos and what
this might be doing to shake you know
Kairos is Telex notion drawn from
miltonic Christianity of a timing of a
sense of a constellation of events that
make radical transformation so for you
know extended periods of time a system
is very stable it has a lot of inertia
it's very it's very resistant to
significant change but in Kairos the
conditions come together it's analogous
it's not the same but it's analogous to
criticality in complex systems theory
the conditions consulate in such a way
that radical change is possible and part
of what Jordan and I were talking about
is the kind of knowing and the kind of
faith perhaps that is relevant to being
able to pick up on Kairos and the reason
why I mention this to you guys because I
think totally thought that notion at
least it seems to be in his own work
he's exemplifying it is where the
philosopher and the prophet in the Old
Testament sense not in the pour teller
of the future but the philosopher and
the prophet and of course there are
figures that embody both Nietzsche comes
readily to mind
Heidegger constructively to mind right
the philosopher prophet is a
particularly pertinent individual during
these times of Kairos I think you
harness this notion of how we are
collapsed back on to you know the
subjectivity that has been so valorized
and raised to such a huge metaphysical
level in our culture only to find that
subjectivity incredibly shallow in its
resources and its resiliency for
effecting what we need in order to
respond to the to this biological threat
I think that's a very telling an
important thing so I really and I think
I'm suggesting a way we can weave them
together yes
and I and I and I think the way that we
had been talking about philosophy as in
the original sense of the word of the
prime
sense of the word as as dialog owes as
philosophy as the process of disclosure
of what's beyond beyond and of us so I
in in having had a an experience and I
was telling Chris about this and this
when I wrote this email for us to get
together I was I had a circling weekend
online so we're doing everything online
now and it's actually working out like a
lot better than I thought it would and
so just basically when you lead a circle
you're basically zeroing in on relevance
basically you know Jeff continually
finding the sweet spot between chaos and
order K and relevance and going up and
tracking all the stuff that we're doing
so you're doing that for 10 hours a day
and I got done and I would imagine all
of the all of those those yoga stretches
so all my machinery is just and then I
turned on the news and it was funny
because it was for me anyways that's the
moment where it turned like where I was
like this became less abstract lunch
room from something kind of abstract to
whoa this actually could change
everybody's life mmm and in that turn
from that state it was so interesting
because I felt myself go like take it in
and then back back back back back back
back back and I just felt myself go so
far back in context to to feel into the
place to respond from hmm and in a way
they just kept inviting whatever was
happening as it was happening but also I
just felt a sense of like what is what
am I actually what am I actually looking
at when I'm when I'm when I'm getting
this what is this crisis that we're
talking about exactly and I got this
sense of I had this feeling of
being an ant on the back of an elephants
right they can see an inch in front of
it they've just discovered that it
wasn't even an elephant it didn't know
that it was walking on and from and then
as I started to think about about it
afterwards so I started thinking about
well there's probably gonna be many
phases to this right there's the phase
that we're in right now which is the
immediacy of the crisis right which I
think that you guys have alluded to
where there's a burst there's a burst of
energy and meaningfulness of importance
because of the change but the thing I'm
the thing I'm I think chris has alluded
this to this as well that there's
another there depending on how things go
it seems to me that there's gonna be
another phase to this right which is
actually going to be the revealing of
the molasse the malaise underneath all
the structures that are being like are
being shown their instability right and
are crumbling and that where that sense
of emergency or our ability to respond
we may not be able to respond in the
ways that we always used to and I have a
feeling what we're gonna start to do is
feel like feel what was just what was
concealed in in all of our foot all of
everything functioning well right this
kind of sense of of molasse right and
[Music]
despair and despondency you know in the
sense of kind of waking up to something
that that that was covered over and from
there I started to feel into the sense
of wow you know maybe right now and in
the video that that John and Chris did
with Andrew Chris you said something
that were you were kind of positioning
the stay at the place that were in that
that maybe this is the time were where a
philosophical I think it was I wrote it
down a philosophical
intervention contain take place and and
my sense is is is this whole thing about
the religion that's not a religion dialo
goes and this particular time and then I
heard Jordan you talk about this notion
of the can visit the campfire or the
talking fire
yeah the campfire yeah this Brett's
campfire yeah the Brett's campfire and I
love that image right and this idea of
what we've been doing so far maybe this
is the time to really kind of strike
around that is to really start to in to
figure out the constraints the right
constraints for these dialogue OSes
start to - and then distribute them and
get them going in this time such that
when when that malaise comes in we'll
have something to actually start to be
able to to to with faith go deep into it
in a meaningful way distributed so I
just had a sense of just like that was
my experience of watching the news and
how I've been making sense of it since
then and what's what had me write the
email going okay let's let's me my
concern personal the campfire image I
was trying to remember whose it was one
of the people that was I was in the
group last night a rebel wisdom thing I
believe it was was talking about how
this medium is very different because
what you get is you get people's faces
much closer in some ways and so if I was
this guy of you if your face was filming
me this much of my normal we'd be
extremely close and it'd be kind of a
socially awkward situation probably for
us but because of the way the technology
works it's it the grammars changed and
acceptable we're all and this goes back
to Jordan's point
before we start recording we're all in
this weird space where we're not where
we're all sort of equally close and
equally distant from each other they're
right it's a weird space and so I think
one of the things she was bringing up in
it and then I made a connection to the
campfire was that this is having an
impact it's creating a new grammar of
intimacy and relatedness the medium
itself is doing that to a certain degree
and then I suggested and I couldn't
remember the name so Jordan thank you
for bringing it up I suggested that what
it's doing is it's exacting the thing
that's most analogous to us maybe this
is how Bret came up with the metaphor
from our evolutionary history is when we
sat around the campfire in the campfire
we were that close they're all oriented
inward where there was no circle so we
pretty much equidistant and because of
the way campfires work our faces are
particularly lit and then everything
around us is quickly fading off in the
darkness and Matt Rossano argued you
know that we've evolved across several
species for a hundred thousands of years
to sit around campfires and that that
had probably huge selective effects on
our cognition he actually proposes that
we we gain the capacity for meditation
because we sat for generations around
campfires so it's a possibility that
this medium is exacting that primordial
kind of intimacy and we haven't had that
kind of thing available to us and it's
really interesting the way of juxtaposes
something very primordial with something
very sort of cutting edge because this
is an amazing technology and so that's
an interesting symbol on it's an
interesting to joining of sort of
reaching deep in door ancestry and then
pulling us you know into the precipice
of the future so I want to I think
there's something right about that and I
think that's contributing to the Kairos
I've been calling the virtual campfires
I don't know what that calls and so I
don't want to steal his term but but I
have a concern I think you're right guy
that there's a very real possibility
that Chris's thesis you know that the
crisis is causing you know very much a
reciprocal narrowing for people a kind
of Dom aside they're getting into a a
scarcity mentality all of these things
that you
really contribute to a threatening
meaning in life and that once all of the
urgency is passed and we just sort of
settle in to survival endurance I agree
that that malaise can come forward I
think it's a Kairos though sorry I won't
talk too much longer on this but I think
it's a Kairos in that like most Kairos
is it's it's multivalent it's multi apt
for sending us in many different
directions I think the response we're
gonna get to it
is gonna be complex I think yeah I think
some people I've already seen the
language and this came up in the
discussion with Andrew you know the the
the virus also triggers a lot of
mythological grammar that's hardwired
into us about demonic agents that are
ubiquitous in the world and they can
strike us in an unpredictable way and
yet we can't see them and they don't
seem to be making you know but they may
appear right and so that's sort of
mythological nostalgia I think is coming
out for some people and that's that can
be reinforced by the fact that we're
enforcing a purity code we're enforcing
a purity code and so sort of you know
Old Testament you know ubiquitous
threatening deity and purity codes
that's hardwired into us in some ways
and you have to be these culturally so
we have to be careful I think that's
gonna be a real possibility come back
I think people trying to alleviate the
anxiety with premature closure and
claiming a certainty of a certain
ideological prediction I think that's
going to be another thing that's going
to come up
I think people seeking for some kind of
integration of those potentially maybe
as somewhat nefarious interconnection in
which they propose various kinds of
comforting Gnostic like conspiracy
conspiracy narratives in order to try
and alleviate this and give right some
give a face to the demon as well as you
know make a give us a plan of action for
the eutrophic future I think all of that
I think those are all very real
possibilities ah I see may see it forms
them already taking place so I think the
malaise is going to be interacting with
these other factors there's in a very
very very and so I think the
philosophical task is to be able to
engage the philosophy and exemplify it
in such a way that we can steer through
that complexity yep they happen and when
I say that I'm picking up on Jordans
metaphor for the Socratic faith of you
know surfing the wave of uncertainty
sailing through the storm of uncertainty
so I think we we have to be very
Socratic about our faith I think so I'm
going to add something to what Jordan
our timer it's it's it's this it's this
integrity and the ability to sense and
find the flow but there's also an
element of the Socratic in here because
we're gonna get various competing
worldviews and ways of life that I kind
of come to the fore and what one of the
things Socrates does is he doesn't just
put a competition of arguments out he
puts he exemplifies a competition of
ways of life where Kowski makes this
argument very clearly and that's why we
have to exemplify what we're doing as
much as talk about it it's like sorry
this is I'm not I'm not capturing the
importance of what I'm trying to convey
here but the deal logos form is is
almost as important as anything we're
trying to say because of its capacity
for bringing ways of life or as you put
a guy getting worlds into right a you
know a viable enacted comparison so that
we can actually not just have a
competition in the good sense of the
word arguments but a competition of ways
of life because that's what we're gonna
need I think to steers through the car
us and so Jordan that's why I'm trying
to broaden the notion of faith that we
discussed you to capture some of this
other Socratic element that's what I
want to be clear about that
yeah what I'm hearing when you say that
actually perhaps or maybe go back to
date because there's a few things in the
previous conversations that I wanted to
just sort of pluck all the strings you
tone when the word philosopher is
brought up I get the feelin Nietzsche
and desire to distinguish between the
bookworm Quibbler and that individual
who is holding the shamanic lineage in
the contemporary environment he said
that we have Brett's campfire invoked we
have the shaman sitting around the
campfire playing drums and we have our
modern environment right now yep now
what's interesting about our modern
environment is part of the shearing
against our systemic dynamics a very
painful sheeran has been the need to
bring the virtual into right
relationship with the physical we are
the inheritors of a generation of a
confusion the virtual has been emerging
and emerging in a very disruptive
fashion but not integrated into a
wholeness of life and of course as we
were mentioned earlier that we reach of
this now feeling quite deeply I am at
home I am in a place away from social
interaction like my social interaction
is very much of two very distinct kinds
there's no confusion I'm either
interacting with my family and with
nature while I'm in the virtual sphere
and there's no in between the two so
that that that fact creates a really
nice crispness of these two very
distinct lineages right you have an
actual literal biological clan and
you've got complete trans physical
virtual and they're both like isolated
from each other and yet simultaneously
occurring so I suspect that part of the
work at the shamanic camp fires to weave
together a new psycho technology that is
adequate to actually hold the reality of
that relationship so then the question
that came up when you're talking about
that that juxtaposition of the the
Socratic conversation India logos in the
context of faith and the countries of
serfdom the question I imagine is is
that who who is certain as soon as you
say ah is there something that somehow
hanging in the center it is neither is
the
I think we've already used these terms
before my apologize I've lost them I am
NOT surfing John is not surfing when
we're in dialogue OHS there is someone
else who is surfing and that holding
that place in the center is the thing
that is surfing and then simultaneously
so the faith is held by the thing in the
center and we are now in relationship
trying to hold that which is they
imagine that physical metaphor trying to
do that while surfing that's quite an
acrobatic feat yes the logos is surfing
the logos is that which is of faith and
it is the code in the co-creation of the
logos and then the feeling of the being
pulled along with that surfing that
makes sense if you think about like that
feeling of faith is having an almost
uncertainty you imagine that in you when
you and I and not before but
increasingly they were beginning to kind
of get the rust off the wheels enter
into deal logos and then notice that the
deal logos is now often running on a
surfing mission of its own there's a
feeling in each of us of a how do I say
this an absolute uncertainty and such as
my uncertainty now it's actually we
uncertainty so it's two directions and
yet also if an embeddedness like a being
pulled along with being part of
something it's like being a nut some
kind of fluid flowing dance troupe where
your individual dance moves are always
generated by the dance moves that are
around you and there's something about
the invisible hand that somehow holding
everything in place and you still held
by it and yet at the same time out of
control in the context of it that's
exactly perfect I mean that's what I was
trying to get out either use better you
said it much better than I did that's
what I'm trying to get at that deilogos
isn't just it isn't just a parent of
communication it isn't even just a
positive reflective action
it's an exemplification of a way of life
and this that's what I'm trying to get
at the notion of faith is it's linking
on one side to this cognitive
communicative aspects of via logos but
the faith is also as you said like
Jordan it's that sense of it's a way of
being
this way we are in the deal logos is the
way of being that I think we need to you
need to put out there and say look this
is a really good alternative to these
other alternatives that I fear are
emerging in in the karosta that's what
I'm trying to get at the notion of faith
is both you know a cognitive act but
it's also an existential right
exemplification right my faith is right
yes I feel carried along by this but
right it's not it's the D locus isn't
just something I'm saying it's a it's to
me it's giving me a taste of a way of
life the way yes that is I want to
recommend to piano right now yes yes I'm
the being that is that question there is
a question of itself and in faith is and
I want to ask it right there's a notion
I want to take it up and but the way
that the what Jordan was saying though
the way in which it presents is the
logos that presence is something between
us that we are beholding to that to use
your term that we're hearkening to that
is adducing that is drawing us along
right and that I I I have a sense right
a participatory sense that that is the
the the the the kind of relationship in
the way of being I need in this Kairos
that's what I'm trying to say both it's
a yes that's what we're saying in the
dialogue it's a dialogue the study of
logos itself yes is anything a way of
life that's the Socratic aspect that's
what I'm trying to put my finger on yes
the enacting of it yes yes yes yes very
much the enacting of it and finding this
is one of the things about the faith for
me has always been and I think this is
what you you guys are getting it as well
the the faith has this element of that
when I find myself in the dia logos
it was already happening and I found
myself there there's that sense of of I
was participating right I got the ball
rolling I showed up for the game and we
started to to go back and forth but in
some way that was beyond just am i doing
I found myself it's in a flow that is
beyond itself right but is that I find
myself inside of at the same time well
because I think the dialectic insofar as
it engenders the diello the deal logos
is also its participate like we're
participating not just in our own
cognition its conforming us if it's if
it's a way of being I'm not just a way
of communicating
it's conforming us I think in important
ways too
you know the way reality unfolded it it
gets us into a state that's not even the
right word maybe a mode it gets us into
a mode that conforms us best to reality
that's what you know again it affords
the continuity of contact it doesn't
give me a particular stable calm you
know propositions that I'm gonna hold on
to I'm trying to get away from that
closure grasping notion of faith it's
rather no no it puts me into this mode
that has me conforming with reality in a
way that is conducive i i sense to my
well-being chris you haven't said
anything and i'm staring in today yeah
no no no just discusses this is all good
there's no need to speak when it's
better to listen but all this time as
i'm listening to you guys talk i'm i'm
still staring into the campfire metaphor
and this is really interesting because i
mean i'm sorry i'm thinking of these
virtual campfires something like a
philosophic de cameron you know everyone
escapes from florence into the
countryside to flee the Black Plague and
they gather around or Knights to tell
one and other stories but the campfire
does something really interesting
because the campfire campfire you know
the ring of the campfire is like a
portal that collapses many worlds in
together and one way in which it does
that is
the concrete in the virtual the other
way does that or perhaps by analogy the
inner and outerworld switch right now in
our particular muttered predicament
there are inner and outer words don't
meet on the same horizon anymore that's
one of our fundamental problems right
they're separated they're like separate
akunis they don't meet and there's
something about what the campfire does
is that it plays host to both the
darkness and the light it plays host to
both the interior life of the individual
and the communal life of our sociability
and it does that simultaneously even if
you think about the imagery of a
campfire right every bed there is only
darkness except for the individual faces
of the people gathered around you right
so we are both in solitude and in
communion at the same time one of the
things that we're going to learn how to
learn how to do especially right now is
how to treat ourselves in solitude and
have to treat one another one so it
we're seeing this right now people don't
know how to deal with solitude because
we have been trained how to deal walls
that's why as soon as there's a call for
people to cloister themselves their
immediate impulse is to deny the
solitude and do their best
sometimes playfully and sometimes
amusingly but still people are doing
their utmost to try and avoid the
solitude that they've been faced with
right to spend every waking hour of
their day in conversation with people
right on the phone over video on their
balconies right I mean it's becoming
like a meme that's circulating the
creative ways in which people are trying
to avoid their solitude but there's a
sense in which playful though that might
be it's actually not helpful I think in
the long run at least some iterations of
it aren't helpful because what this
affords us is a tutorial for how to
treat ourselves in solitude and the
campfire does that beautifully because
the campfire mediates Communion and
solitude and I think it does that by
collapsing narrativity and and what we
might call reasoning together that's
right
right so there's something about the
telling of stories around the campfire
and the disclosure the intimate and
personal disclosures that take place
around the campfire that help to cull
laughs the solitude into the world of
the social and then collapsed the social
and solitude so there's a nexus point of
this virtual campfire India logo that's
why I think it's such a beautiful
animating metaphor a mesmeric metaphor
right we stare into a fire we're
mesmerised by it right it's hard to tear
your gaze away from it because it seems
to it's no wonder Heraclitus was too
obsessed with it it seems to disclose
reality as you gaze into it just as
dialogo seems to do right it's
equidistant between you you're all
gazing into it and you're all gazing
through it at one another at the same
time so I just find it to be like a
really rapturous symbol and when we
understand it as an enactment of the
dialogic process I think we'll find
within it if we can adapt that if we can
adapt that symbol and place it at the
center of a dialogic praxis it will help
us to understand why dia logos in the
way that we've been discussing it is
such a perfect way of mediating our
relationship between the interior life
that has gone so uncultivated all this
time and the outer life that we are so
hopelessly beholden to show that over
there was a gap it's okay that's what we
do because in the Plato in the seventh
letter uses the metaphor of the fire for
exactly talking about this kind of via
logos he says you can't get it just by
talking you have to dwell with people
you have to live with them the longtime
spark catches and then it takes on and
he talks about how the fire takes on a
life of its own and so I think the fire
is used by Plato like picking up on the
heretical idea and fragment about the
universe is a self kindling fire the
idea that the D logos you know is very
much like a fire and that it takes on a
life of we put the conditions together
then it takes on a life of the cause and
then it has this function that we're
talking about very much as function
you're talking about so I'm trying to
I'm try to
see what the if we can make a connection
between what you were saying just now
and then and and the point I was trying
to make we're right that dialogo sees
very much and the reason I'm doing that
is because Plato brings them together
right it's not just a conversation it's
not just you have to live with people
you have to sort of enculturate a way of
life all right that that's it that
that's part of what makes the deilogos
actually possible the part of the fuel
if you want a video logos is not just
the conversation about how people are
bringing ways of life together and
wondering how that comports with what
you were saying about the bridge would
mean the individual and the collective
well I think if we were to afford to
carry the metaphor through of the fire
it does that quite naturally right the
whole point of the campfire is that
people flock to it precisely because it
becomes a refuge for these sort of the
darkness that's intrinsic to the world
in which people are living at that
particular moment I think the problem is
right now that we're seeing is that as
the as the the well as this reciprocal
narrowing becomes more and more
constrictive and as we retreat more and
more and more into our inner lives we
find that were the source of our own
scarcity right like as we retreat into
the darkness we don't find the darkness
yields anything it's not we're not
penetrated by it except in ways that
seem pernicious and so in a way where I
think a lot of people are gonna find
that there is no choice but to seek some
kind of some kind of communal antidote
to that feeling of of just that feeling
of destitution that happens when you
basically have only your subjectivity
like yours cetera and you have wind only
your subjective being left to lean back
on and it reveals itself to be like
vapid then you have to somehow find a
way of sharing it in such a way that it
that it's that is that it's reimbursing
something alive and so I think so I
guess what I'm trying to say is this I'm
I'm as we're treating further I I'm
thinking about
this idea there's a I think Agustin
talks about the idea of a what's a
called and a chassis of Kritika I think
it's called where you know the the the
febrile state that the fever that the
the fever is actually worse the state of
illness is actually worse the more
distant we are from recovery or and it
but it and yet it feels better the more
distant we are from recovery and as we
get closer and closer and closer to
recovery
the fever seems to become worse and
worse and worse noise so as that happen
as that happens as that happens and we
retreat closer and closer and closer to
the center of that sense of darkness
that becomes so crippling then diello
goes just as a fire is in a primordial
darkness becomes the refuge that in our
solitude we can flock to right but but
we have to it's it's as though we have
to get to a particular point of
desperation yeah of material desperation
before that becomes somehow a live
option to most people I mean we've
entered into it voluntarily and quite
happily but it's not top of mind for
most people and it's as though we have
to get to a point where the material
where where our material resources are
sufficiently exhausted when the
physicians have exhausted their use and
we have nothing to turn to it's at that
point that the dialogic campfire becomes
the thing that the thing that that
rekindles
no pun intended that that rekindles our
attention because it's only at that
point that it will start to be salient
enough to most people to be taken
seriously to be taken as something of
value it's like what were the
alternatives I've talked about are also
going to become more salient too right
yes which is why it's going to be in
competition with a lot of a lot of
pseudo religious and ideological
thinking the lights of which we've
talked about already right I wouldn't
say by the way we came here sort of
willingly John and I met in the context
of him
a lot of personal time and to do a large
series around the the meaning crisis
which is a diagnosis of the fact that
shit's up and I think all of us
have been to a greater or lesser extent
guided by a both a theoretical and
embodied sense of the reality of that
being the case I certainly would much
prefer to smoke dope and play with my
kids than to be indifferent to throw
myself into the campfire nonetheless I
feel that as you say the the rains have
not come in many years and there the
watering hole has served as well it may
be time to uproot and try to cross the
valley in search of a new watering hole
who it is activated telling us what do
we do in these times did we do in the
times when the old ways clearly are no
longer working very bad times indeed
with the old ways don't work because
yeah making new ways is a hard thing to
do and as you say this the space the
moment that eating between the interior
and exterior meaning meaning between the
self in the communal the place where
that line is that's we would women call
culture and the creative aspect of the
culture is this relationship between
individual and the collective and we
need room back into that campfire the
locus the loci the focus the code
writing endpoint of culture is actually
at is when you've actually come to the
conclusion in the embodied sense of the
self and the collective that this is the
place that we can be in the only place
we can be reality of course will send us
that like it or not it keeps getting
broken you don't fix it so here we are I
agree I agree with you there's a there
are phases two distinct phases have a
certain like a face to them everybody
can just look in the mirror that they
need to see and one thing didn't get you
another one will I notice the friends of
mine for whom the notion of virus meant
nothing are paying very close attention
to the losing of their bank accounts on
the part of modern robber barons there
will be more perhaps I could say
something that might bridge its also
picking up on the fire
ultimately aspires not only functional
the fire is beautiful in the way it
wraps our attention and what it what and
done tonight you and I talked about this
the project of beautify it but we're
trying to make beautiful we're trying to
get the salience landscaping to make and
this is you know that this is clearly
part of Plato strategy to the you know
there's a kind of beautification that's
going on that make way of life that you
find in deilogos beautiful to people and
I'm wondering what we can do I'm sorry
keep putting this in terms of sort of a
responsibility question but what we can
do to beautify deilogos so that it
becomes active way of life and in fact
of way of connecting and debating
meaning culture well for one I noticed
that there's a large amount of
background noise oh my I'm having a
plumbing crisis of the plumbers here
hang out let me out put on mute but I
notice the best actor was a very for me
at least it was a as you were speaking I
was noticing in myself I soaked okay
listen to the aesthetic sense is there
anything in my aesthetic sense is being
called up and probably was being called
up was oh wow I'm paying very close
attention to John but there's actually a
lot of noise going on in the background
and there's something about that that's
there's a heaviness a weight the clarity
isn't available in this context is there
some way of using that sense to notice
where the noise is is there a way to
shift our relationship with that noise
that we can actually get to a place with
the clarity which oftentimes is very
difficult to get a hold up let's give
him the space hmm say George or next
one's really cool guys do I have any
more to say
I mean you're talking about a kind of
reframing that's trying to like open up
a way of like clarifying and making it
appealing in some ways I like an
aesthetic is it like an aesthetic
seduction almost that you're talking
about Jordan like to beautify the
process to make it attractive from
without to people whose eye it hasn't
already caught absolutely I mean I think
in some sense if we just sort of invite
the feminine into this conversation well
know what we're talking about right
right right if you want to actually have
this thing happen that's the way to do
it mm-hmm everyone fills in themselves
the attraction to that which is most
needful if you can allow that to seduce
us into right action then we're there
very happily that becomes the joyful
interaction that's really cool so is
that back to you know the finesse that
between vulnerability and exposure that
guy talks about you know because I'm
thinking you know Jordan we you and I
talked about sort of maybe you all say
an anti aesthetic and we people try to
catharsis they try to transform the
anxiety into fear which gives them a
clear distinct object and they can
discharge it but that actually isn't to
respond to their fear whereas right it
might be instead right there's a way of
responding to the noise of anxiety in
the way you're talking about here mm-hmm
is that does that land at all whatever
I'm trying to get out yeah I think there
is something there it's something this
is worth let's just said after the
contemplating it for a while sure
you
I imagine we've all been seduced I would
hope so if not I recommend it and
there's something in that that is
exactly what you were speaking about
when you talked about the I think was
the vulnerability and exposure and it's
yeah I was thinking that maybe there's a
parallel right between you know anxiety
you know but if you can sort of transfer
so a positive transformation might be to
transform this is very pertinent to me
personally to transform exposure into
vulnerability where vulnerability is a
kind of probative sensitivity as opposed
to a sense of being harmed or cut off in
some fashion mm-hmm I would say that
more than any of the reasons that I
actually stated the reason why I wanted
to get together is because what happens
here is beautiful it is in an
aspirational way in a way that actually
and it actually in a way that I
anticipate being so in a way that I know
without knowing it there's a there's a
way where I think that there's there's
that quality of beauty that that
inherently involves concealment and
withdrawal and coming into concealment
that and there's a there's something
about at least for me these
conversations and reading philosophy and
doing circling and and all of the the
mystical traditions and everything I've
ever even done any remotely like this
that that I think the the thread through
all of it has to do with awakening the
sense that there is more than meets the
eye there's more than that's being heard
but I can begin to orient my attention
to that which is isn't here but could be
here or reach into that sense of as you
often talk
John is that sense of more nests like
The Fountainhead of intelligibility and
there is and I really like this notion
of seduction right in the sense of
because there is a quality of it really
does strike me as you know when my wife
does something beautiful if she just
looks at me a particular way there's
this Shh there's a way where you can't
you you can't capture huh you can't make
that happen
you're in relationship to it you can you
can dance around it you can be present
but when she opens when she opens right
and there's always a sense of of being
when she does a deep gratitude in the
sense of being subordinate to her so the
the I really like this quality I do
think that the the draw the attractor
right the attractor is is the beautiful
and I do do you notice that like in my
experience with circling you know which
is a lot has a lot to do with people
experiencing other people and themselves
being vulnerable and there's a volunteer
like the difference between exposure and
invulnerability has to do with violent
being a volunteer right so it's like you
know it's the difference between I'm in
the playground and somebody comes up
behind being pushes my you know pulls my
pants down I didn't sign up for that but
all of a sudden like my my most
vulnerable parts of me are exposed to
the world in a way that I wouldn't have
volunteered for right there's that sense
of exposure where vulnerability is more
of that sense where I'm actually at
something scary yet something I see
something valuable enough glows bigger
than that fear and such I really this
disclose myself to it and I noticed that
when people witness other people do
do that it is almost impossible not to
fall in love with that person it's
almost impossible not to be moved
they're just that experience of watching
somebody stretch and reach and fumble
voluntarily being awkward in the face of
something they could be so painful if it
doesn't work out right and to do that
voluntarily is it is a revelation of I
think what is most beautiful in us but I
want to pick up on that though because
in and the two things you talked about
because there's I don't think this
contradicts you guy but I want to put it
in sort of like into dialogue because
what strikes me about beauty is exactly
what I just said
Judy strikes us we're struck by it right
and there's something it's almost like
beauty is retros it's it's retrospective
voluntary like I'm carried into it and
it's almost like you said before and I
find myself already in it and it's I
retrospectively say ah I've been carried
here sort of against my will if you'll
allow me that but I assent to it
completely right you know so I'm given a
moment of choice in beauty where I find
it being carried along by some kind of
logos huh and and that's a moment of
faith that's a moment of no no no I
accept I'm being carried up by this and
I accepted and it's precisely because
you know because it's beautiful that
seems to me to be part of the
phenomenology of beauty and and scary in
her book beauty and justice she says
that that capacity for beauty she says
it that she's trying to do a thing with
the true the good in a beautiful she
says our encounter with the beauty is
where we get our primary training and
this is the aspirational part right it's
where we get our primary training for
truth and justice because unless we can
be struck by something outside our ego
respect
and come to be drawn into accepting it
we're incapable of the truth or
incapable of the truth
we need that primary ability - this took
me by surprise
and yet I accept it I feel there's a
gathering yes I'm feeling something
gathering in the conversation I'm
starting to I'm starting to feel myself
circle around in this and that she talks
about and she talked about how that also
prepares us for justice because what it
does for us is it makes us realize that
certain things are deserving of our
attention in the way that virtus talks
about in the sovereign it's the opposite
of the subjectivity of attention right
it's it's an inversion that these thing
the project is to make myself relative
these things things are deserving of my
attention not because of some specific
project but precisely because they are
beautiful right yes yes that right there
that involvement like it's it's it's
deserving of my attention and I'm
involved right there's that quality of
its revealed and I'm reveal I'm Co
revealed yes yes the love ya like that
Co Revelation is the love so this is
what I mean about how there's a deep
connection and you know and of course
was obviously alluding to it
Leto compares getting into philosophy to
seduction and the seduction metaphor
it's rife through the Platonic dialogues
us right especially in the encounter
with also by these for example and so
this what I mean about the way
beautification like it's it's exemplify
it gets us into it it draws us into a
way of life by starting to train us for
truth new truth and new justice right in
powerful ways
hmm yeah I was
a movement in that direction between the
between the salient and irrelevant in
that context right
I was actually been thinking
contemplating the evolutionary story
what the evolutionary theory behind the
nature of what we consider to be
beautiful yes over a very long period of
time and that which was a likely good
choice
is what we have come to do receive as
beautiful right in all ways and
everything everything that we can ever
of our entire relevance realization
project for 13 million years has been
honed against the capacity to actually
make effective choices in the context of
that which is perceived as most
beautiful part of what via logos does
Plato considers this in the symposium
right here's what it does is it takes us
through sort of stages of aspirational
exaptation we take sort of a basic you
know sexual ability and then we exact it
into epistemic and then we exact it into
existential and perhaps we then exact it
into something profoundly ontological
because Plato talks about that capacity
ah right
think about how its it's intrinsically
holistic it's an integrative sense it's
an integrative sense of discernment that
you actually cannot help but huh if you
don't have the whole like you're you're
playing music yeah use that metaphor
playing guitar and you're not playing a
script you're not playing a song you're
playing something this is a feeling
right if you are fully in it right
you're allowing the whole of yourself to
just melt into the sensing that uh but
and all you do is feel that aspect that
which is yearning to be the most
beautiful move that can be made right
now you are making beautiful music and
exactly to the degree to which you have
either either back away from an aspect
of yourself or you've reached the limits
of the capacity to be wholly in
relationship with the possibilities that
are emerging moment to moment is in fact
the end in the limit of your capacity to
become to make beautiful this is a Pope
this is the appropriate modality for
considering questions of the sort that
we're considering yes you have to be
coming from an integrative wholeness and
be feeling into the right way of making
steps in a place where they we can't
analytically break this thing down it's
hopelessly complex
every move implicates everything else in
ways we can't possibly understand this
is the inactive integrity you often
point towards in these discussions of
faith am I correct
yes absolutely go ahead this is dead
this is also the difference between the
two versions of the philosopher that you
were talking about at the very beginning
Jordan mm-hmm
one who is circumscribed by constraints
that usually eliminate and exclude the
artistic that that that that that sort
of guilds philosophy with the aesthetic
attractiveness that ultimately begins
the process of that seduction right
because right now I think it's almost as
other probably like the artistic project
and the philosophic project need to be
revalorisé to one another to be
reintegrated after so many years being
at quits and I think if it's it's that
that that that that marriage is so so
essential to to to being able to for the
whole ism that you're talking about I
think that marriage is so essential and
one of the things that we struggle right
now to to to resolve Wow yeah I think
about this I mean we had these cycles
between the the shaman and the chief
between the philosopher poet and the
king we have the that individual who
plays the role of a suppose the scholar
who acts as the weapon that the King
uses to hold back the power the
philosopher poet and in some cases this
is most meaningful because for God's
sakes the Worcester poet is very
dangerous to the status quo the creative
impulse is disruptive but there are
moments would come like the moment that
we're in when quite obviously the king
has become the old king building the
Babylonian myths right now oh yeah
you're enacting where the time has come
for that transition to actually become
fully bursting forth and now the calling
is to actually recognize the the
philosopher poet and with full creative
potential to go reawakened and then of
course as you say it's near artistic
impulse the ability to actually to make
a glue to beautiful music to hear the
song of the angels to hear the music of
the spheres that thing out of which
creativity literally weaves a new
possibility into reality that's where we
are right we're in the moment of the
breakdown of the old actual actuality
which pushes the threshold of the
necessity
reweaving a new possibility into reality
yes part of what it would be that again
is that via logos the dialogic form
exemplifies exactly that kind of
synthesis right it's it right and I
think particularly I think I was talking
to you about this joining about no maybe
it was also in the discussion with
Andrew Chris I can't remember one of the
things I deeply admire about Chris I
mean I find this at all of you guys but
I find that Chris and that's why I love
hanging out with you guys but I find
this but together named Chris the way he
weaves poetry and philosophy together
[Music]
what we're talking about right now
thank you for that John I mean it's an
it's an interesting thing because it's
an interesting thing because it's not
you know finding a venue for it is it's
not it's not is not easy right and one
of the things that we're contending with
and and and trying to resist is the are
the multiple sets of constraints that I
mean as you were you were talking about
our particular state of actuality that
ultimately needs to be subject to a kind
of artistic disillusion in order to be
reborn into something of possibility of
a possibility that that becomes
navigable and that's a hard thing to do
when the very structures that are meant
to foster and equilibrate us are also
the things that that circumscribe that
same kind of creativity that prevent
that same synthesis and and I think
that's that's that's why it's so easy to
be at a loss that's why it's so easy to
be at a loss is because that has to be
it has to be nurtured from without it
can be kindled from within but it has to
be nurtured from without and that's
again to your point you got about the
importance of like the the logic process
is so important precisely because it
requires that it requires the tutoring
mm-hmm there's the loving from without
and the tutoring from without it
requires us
if we must first be seen in potentia in
order to actually then reach out into
the actual and those two things have to
have to wed properly and it's very
difficult for that to happen if it's not
called out from from something or
someone beautiful right because it's not
it's not a charge it's not just that
it's not just that we have to behold
beauty it's that the beat we have to be
beholden by the beauty we have to be
called out by the beauty right well I I
liken it to that feeling of you know I
like to you know yeah you're looking at
some someone attractive from afar and
then they look at you and it's like whoa
look at that
alright you write it because and all of
a sudden you're outside of yourself
immediately it's just like that you're
struck but it's not but right but it's
but but it's being struck by Beauty
requires activity if I can put it that
way on the part of the beauty right yes
yeah there's an agency of the beauty
it's not passive it's not like a kind of
Aristotelian passivity we sort of move
around it but it doesn't move right it's
no no no no it's it reaches to us as we
reach out to it um and then I love that
you're sort of your and that and I love
the way that you articulated that trend
that we're sort of born by the logos and
then in process of being born by the
logos we make we sort of we we make we
can't we consummate the journey with the
choice to undertake the journey even as
it's already undertaken right and but
but but I think that but they're they're
in see therein lies the challenge though
therein lies the challenge because if we
can't that goes back to the fundamental
problem we started with with the
subjectivity the barrenness of the
subjectivity that can't reach into
itself and also can't reach out of
itself is that it needs to be lifted at
least it needs to be lifted from without
and I think I'm hearing us start to
start to get at I think I'm hearing or
what we're saying is distinguishing a
and intent isn't it in integrity within
or a beauty yes and the structures that
you're talking about that there's an
integrity so I think it hurt someone
said that all possibility
right sits on top of integrity if
there's no integrity
there goes possibility they're very very
wedded and so what I'm hearing are the
conditions of possibility of beauty and
that's just where my notice my listening
is sinking into here yeah because it's
because it's a beauty that record yeah
yeah yeah that's right guy cuz it's a
beauty that it's a beauty that
recognizes beauty beauty it's a beauty
cognizant of beauty yeah while I'm
thinking about it because we just read
it the other day I'm thinking I'm
thinking about the beginning of Yale
societies were you know Socrates butters
Alcibiades with flattery for a few
minutes I mean not only a Socrates
attractive unto himself right because
he's Socrates but he butters Alcibiades
and beautifies him before his own eyes
and there's something about the way he
beautifies him before his own eyes that
actually attracts him and entreat them
into the dialogic process mmm
places for a careful game right he flack
you sort of he does that thing he does
he sort of flatters him and insults him
at the same time cool right
he sort of he he strokes his potential
but reveals his lack simultaneously and
it was that combination I think that's
like the ATS the alchemical combination
right there it's it's you know you're
you're you have the forum within you
right you have the soul of eternity
within you you have the divine spark in
the pneuma
but it's unpronounce t' so you need my
help to pronounce it so let's begin the
pronunciation and and and somehow that
both of those things together seem to be
required in that aesthetic yeah that is
that set yeah that aesthetic in
treatment it's because it's engendering
the two parts of error right it's giving
you the sense of direction but a sense
of lack at the same time right which
which which is what you need I mean that
goes back to I think this carries point
about how it opens us up to the truth
that we don't have right but I'm
wondering given that you know because
you're talking about you know Plato
talks about you know the response to
view the real response to be denied here
I'm trying to connect back to Jordans
notion of an active integrity and active
integration it was
- beauty is the the the impulse to make
beauty like to generate beauty right so
Plato Plato sees that the true
experience of beauty is you want to give
birth to beauty right you won't it's
only when you're in conformity and
wanting to give birth that you've
actually in count and that's how he
continued that's who he's trying to
contrast beauty with just something that
gives us pleasure and then I'm wondering
how this intersects with the two
epistemologies that have have tended to
sort of warp this there's as you said
Chris there's a kind of empiricism that
just excludes this completely and then
there's a romanticism that just says no
no no Beauty is something that I express
I press on to the world and what it does
is disclose myself giving rather than
calling me beyond it it discloses it
powerfully it's not I want to say right
clearly that's a that's a bit of a
caricature of Romanticism that's what I
would call decadent Romanticism there's
obviously individual romantics that move
what very significantly from what it
doesn't close but I think it's fair to
say that it's definitely a widely
disseminated and accepted cultural
pattern around a romantic
misinterpretation of beauty that is
holding us in thrall to a very very
significant like where Beauty losses
integrity somehow and stop yeah because
we're doing is we're taking credit we're
taking credit for it okay it's it's like
that it's like the hi to Gary and
technology it's a tional beauty it's in
service to us right right rather than we
right rather than we are in service to
it it's not that it's it's my
subjectivity is deserving of attention
not the beautiful itself that's right
and then in the inverse of that the end
the inverse of of that problem is then
then the the the worshipfulness right
yeah the idolatrous worship of beauty
the inverse of the narcissistic problem
yes of it's subjective valorisation yes
yeah I mean you can think about a lot of
interesting things that come out of that
has to do with the the failure to close
the generative origin and source of the
purpose and meaning of beauty and it's
again if we think about from an
evolutionary perspective a landscape is
beautiful because to venture into that
landscape is bountiful once Weaver made
it an artifact it did not actually close
with it a woman is beautiful because
ultimately she will give birth to
beautiful children right is actually
don't actually go through the entire
loop and come all the way to the end and
play it all the way through as a
generative enactment we've done
something which is deeply in violation
of the thing that God is here so I think
there's a powerful warning in that so we
got the waken we've got to bring to the
fore that deal logos the beautification
with India logos is trying to get us to
give birth to a new way a new right ass
that's honor it to honor it is to listen
to it and to listen to it be drawn into
it to be drawn into it is to be both
resourced
but also to be challenged give her that
which is calling us yes yes very much so
the socratic midwifery goes to being not
only something between people but also
between people and the world yes yes and
then between people and themselves yes
totally ignores requests yes the deep
interconnection between Socratic soft
knowledge not autobiographical self
knowledge but Socratic soft knowledge
and the ability to do this yeah I think
that's a deeply important point you just
put your finger on that shouldn't be
excluded because that is that that is
the alternative to subjectivity right
Socratic self-knowledge which sets you
in to the aspiration to be other than
you are is the opposite of of
subjectivity yeah hmm even sovereignty
yes yes even Socrates isn't isn't like
Socrates famously so but famously Amos
Lee he's a topos right you can't put him
into a category and it constantly is
Metaxas he's inter categorical both
horizontally and aspirationally and and
ayah now also ontological II he's inter
categorical mmm-hmm which is why he's
both subject and object tere yes
Socrates then you want to be Socrates
simultaneously
which helps which helps to then obviate
the possibility that he become
worshipful in the wrong sense of his
beauty huh oh and that's Gerard's notion
right Gerard's notion about the
malevolent mimesis that envy and
covetousness are right the are the you
know as the dark side of admiration
right that instead of wanting to aspire
to be like Socrates or to be like Christ
one wants to consume them into one
subjectivity even one wants to subject
them completely to one ego hmm
yeah and I was talking with Nora Bateson
this morning and she was pointing out
that the the present context creates the
situation that in relationship to
identity it's a bit like being a a
gingerbread man made of certain sort of
low-viscosity goo that happens to still
have the mold on it and then you pull
the mold away mmm
and it begins to ooze out of its shape
and we've become so accustomed to
alienating ourselves into a context that
is not of our own making and to imagine
that that context the shape look the
form that we've actually adapted to is
in fact the shape of ourselves rather
than the shape of the formula adapted
you doing willy-nilly to that form has
gone away we're in a rather
uncomfortable state but the discovery of
the conversation here which by the way
is also the more that's discovered that
we were having I was having with her in
a difference in two words was that the
the deal logos the the relationality of
the conversation in the space that can
be held around the campfire is precisely
the container to enter into when you're
in that like goo you would flow it
that's where you want to be and the
drawers that the drawers that the sort
of the her acid esta The Unbearable miss
of being alone in the goo pulls you into
the necessity of finding your way into
the campfire no matter how hard that
might be and then in simply discovering
how to rediscover the capacity to
resolve the interior it's not even on we
it's stronger than that but the horror
of being shapeless in the context of
the goo builds the context build the
capacity then do logos that gives rise
to the objective the objective follows
the necessity to create a context that
allows the subjective which again is the
crucible of culture so as we discover
the way to actually be capable of
holding our true selves ourselves in an
openness and liminality and is only with
each other in a particular style of
relationship as we become capable of
that we discover that we are also
creating the exterior we are migrating
our way inside and outside to this new
place so so it's hoppity's capacity to
beautify the inter categorical in that
way exemplifying the recommendation
he's taking that's what I meant when I
shut it out I'm sorry
buta find the goo he is showing that
when your shapeless that can be
reassured as a Socratic project
pratik virtue that's a better word a
Socratic virtue of being right able to
be moved between the categories give
birth beating the symbol on that that's
right that will together that's right
yes it's very uncomfortable to be the
goo but as soon as you awaken to the
fact that you're in fact a polymorphic
that shapelessness is your natural
condition it allows you to become like
water then you've rediscovered the true
power of who you are and in the end and
the willingness to be the GU seems like
the question of vulnerability like the
willingness to dissolve into that which
could flow in and out of categories and
find out who I am in the next moment and
the face so if we're looking at the face
that good I ain't actin doing that right
is as the right word it rests on what is
the face such that allows me to be able
to be goo able now where I keep thinking
of James Bond right right now of like
there's so much urgency going on right
but the last thing that we need is a
bunch of urgent people mmm-hmm like what
we need is a lot like a lot of people
who are really resting deeply that can
you know James Joyce was making a
martini while he's like dis you know I'm
saving the world and the whatever that
whatever that sense is of the that the
faith the faith especially I think maybe
in this time is calling forth an
equanimity from us right in in the
presence of danger because in so many
ways just I just noticed me attempting
to look at how okay what can I do here
right now what can I do here right down
in relationship to this is goo like
right yeah yeah it turns to it turns to
goo so I'm just kind of I think I'm
walking myself back into this sense of
what is it that I have faith in or such
that I'm goo able voluntarily and that
gute that goo ability you're talking
about a guy it's like it kind of it's
kind of like it kind of lays the
conditions almost surreptitiously lays
the conditions for gnosis because it's
like you're real you're relaxing into
the indistinctness as to be informed by
that indistinct 'no sand a Neoplatonic
sense of being informed by the
indistinctness is kind of a certain like
an ontological impression ability to
dispose before the newfound uncertainty
of reality and then and then and then as
we sink into the depths of that
indistinctness the the the the
affordances for its potential begin to
occur to us precisely because we've
allowed ourselves to slacken into the
indistinct state mm-hmm
mm-hmm-hmm there is a repose in that
there is an interesting kind of
philosophic repose to be found in neck
and I think maybe that's what we're
trying to refer to III in in this and in
a couple of other recent conversations
any number of us have had there's I I've
been sensing this tone of like well
actually I'm feeling I'm feeling rather
good you know not good in the sense I'm
not to trivialize the state of suffering
that that many people are in at all but
there's a certain there's just not it's
not a respite but it's a kind of a kind
of cautious and interesting and
interested alertness that we've all been
provoked into and and I think that those
states are I think that those states are
somewhat aligned in this case can I
offer a term up from outside the
Platonic tradition that struck me when
you said that Chris so in touch each one
you're after a state humming ah yeah
which is this state so like my arm isn't
limp and it's not rigid and the metaphor
is is its imagine that there's water
flowing through my arm so it could like
it has forced to its right but at the
same time it has it has suppleness to it
and it has adapted activity to it and
you're trying to get you're always
trying like when you you do when you
like you're trying to have Pung
sometimes I do the immovable arm with
people like they have their arm like
this and you try and Bend it's usually
very easy to bend it then you say okay
imagine that there's water flowing
through your arm like really quite
powerfully and people will find that
they because it what it does is it sort
of get you much more much more
sophisticated coordination that imagery
and what happens with that sophisticated
coordination is their arm becomes
immovable but it also simultaneously
feels more alive and supple to them and
so that's that's pong and it sounds to
me like what we're talking about
all right is is that you know we're
trying to get whatever we're trying to
pong argue so that can be struck by
beauty and open to the world
or we should also mention the other side
of it is that the movable arm becomes
the thing that can do for anything in
the world yes exactly it's multi act
that's the whole point right the whole
point of it is it has its this nexus
point between force and flexibility it
has tremendous resect ivities but also a
tremendous capacity for redirecting
which is which is part of what we need
in the Cairo's right we have to receive
them we've been talking a lot about the
receiving but what pong brings is is we
also need the ability to redirect right
properly yes yep that's exactly it now
what I'm noticing is also then the
context of the changing state of context
we've talked about this a few times
there's pace the world is moving faster
just changing more rapidly and I've
often said this in very close
conversations it the challenge has very
little to do with how do we how do I say
this right overcome or let's go overcome
the structures that we currently find
ourselves engaged with human build
structures that's actually not the
challenge really to convince remove or
change a break reality it's changing
fastness the velocity of change will
destroy those structures they cannot
stand before it the only challenge is to
retrieve this place that you called Hong
Lei yeah we can achieve that we can
become the movable arm that and that
alone is that which could endure that in
context anywhere yes it's as simple as
that right right so that's the kind of
integrity you're talking about two prong
is the kind of integrity you're trying
to you're trying to articulate is that
fair Jordan that's right so it's really
an invitation it's just an invitation to
be part of that only that only kind of
way of being the only possible way of
being the kid in fact long endure the
context into which we were for sure
entering anything wants to survive must
do that as simple as that
so as we're talking I keep seeing
through this metaphor of sitting at the
fire and us and then noticing the
darkness behind us and the glow on your
face and listening and hearing you
describe like as you were moving your
hands and talking about this having you
described like out there if you go like
the
if you go like this and you just the
invitation is out there like the sense
of the darkness beyond us is almost like
we're leading in talking about how to
how to be there right how to in the the
darkness opening up and becoming
distinct and it's really interesting how
pertinent that symbol is I'm seeing
through that symbol and with that symbol
here okay can I just go beyond almost I
was looking for Mary and officially
proposed that is how we should be out
there yes and what's weighted mean is
precisely how a game for the if you'll
allow me if we're tidying into the
darkness you have the moving pong but
it's also it's attractive it's beautiful
right it's beautiful and therefore
liable to be imitated yes and that's
self to imitation Oh
exactly but the correct kind of not the
malevolent something minista's but the
aspirational mimesis an invitation to
become a part of to become a full
participant symmetric participant in
always because on loses all integrity
the moment if it falls out of that yes
so the darkness has occurred for me as
we've been sitting here it went from it
went from some version of opaque and not
something to go towards to glimmering
shimmering beautiful that's when that's
that sorry guy I hope I'll accept your
apology
but only for a completely didn't mean
I'm gonna toss in there I know you you
you won I mean that's cuz that was just
gonna riff off of what you just said I
mean that's what happens as that's what
happens as as the as the spirit as it
were of the campfire becomes hosted by
each of the participants that gather
around it the darkness itself becomes
right the darkness itself is befriended
and so its presence stops being a source
of disquiet and starts to become a
presence of that more mnestheus ink into
the dialogic fire the darkness
penetrates us but it penetrates us in a
way that envelops us into the more
mnestheus can pretend somebody got their
tag the last 33 minutes and 36 that was
some seriously good just tag it
just write it down somebody can click on
it if you don't want to watch to all the
rest of the crap we just did grab that
like I say I accept your apology there
is a sense in which I'm I'm getting
there's a certain obvious nasai dialo
goes do I do this like this was
exemplified that for me yeah exactly
that's exactly what I was trying to call
us to in this dialogue a great job is
you know is too like in this is a
feature that Chris and I talked about
the the India logo through one of the
skills of dialectic as a psychic
technology is to constantly move between
explicate it like doing conceptually and
then exemplifying it like modally and
we're constantly bike is the way
constantly rebounds between us you know
it was within and without and between
like we say something and then we
rebound and then we it starts to get
exemplified and that that to me is a
tamiya is is well it is very attractive
it really draws me and fascinates me
because it harkens to go what Chris said
it harkens to a potato II and us that
can respond to the depth
the darkness and the dark as the
darkness descends the campfire becomes
all the more attractive and the late
night the cold weather standing around
the campfire telling stories just to
keep ourselves warm in a week to keep it
stoked so everyone else can have warmth
and have a campfire to find as they
wander through the dark culture that's
very cool well guys I feel complete I'm
very happy with how this unfolded yeah I
feel I feel I feel better Hill I'm going
to use this adjective and I hope people
can resonate with everything I'm trying
to convey by it I found this genuinely
lovely mm-hmm yeah vehicle moved and
hope there's a sense of wholeness yeah a
fullness hmm and their silence also like
I felt like as we were just being silent
is proud I was I could like it listened
to it like it was a a pregnant fullness
for me we talked like I could fire after
the storms people fall into silence and
waiting around the campfire
the wholesomeness of this project of
recovering all these good old-fashioned
D words when we're turning them into
coinage it's kind of the opposite of
Diogenes he he said he wanted to deface
the currency and I'm trying to reface
things yeah oh so that we may better
face things okay a bit of a pun mmm
well thank you for saying that it means
a lot to me that you recognize that yeah
definitely and just thank you for for
being more and more possessed by the
right thing that there's a madness to it
and I've always appreciated that about
you
well thank you all right guys see you
around see it the next campfire you got
it take care of it Oh