welcome to meditating with genre Viki
I'm a cognitive psychologist and a
cognitive scientist at the University of
Toronto where I study scientifically and
academically mindfulness related
phenomena like Insight flow mystical
experience transformative experience
higher states of consciousness the
cultivation of wisdom have also been
practicing the past and meditation meta
contemplation Tai Chi Chuan a moving
flowing form of mindfulness and martial
art for over twenty nine years and I've
been teaching them professionally for
almost 20 years
welcome this is a progressive course
every Monday is a Dharma day in which I
teach an important principle that builds
on previous principles give you often an
exercise so you get a direct experience
all understanding of it and then we sit
together Tuesdays through Friday and
today's Tuesday our days in which we sit
together and then there is a Q&A after
every session Monday through Friday the
Q&A is after this is tend to be longer
if you're joining us for the first time
you're of course welcome to remain I
hope this isn't beneficial to you but if
you go into the description for this
video you'll find a link to the previous
sips and lessons and you can find a
playlist that is exclusively about the
lessons and you can go through the
lessons and catch up with us if you want
to continue on so today as I mentioned
is a sitting day so feel free perhaps
you want to just do basic for pasta
today perhaps you want to do another
today remember to always get into the
pasta first before you do meta over hops
you want to do the meditative question
questioning or as I like to call it the
meditative questing remember to get in
to find your core for really well to do
a bit of a pasta choose your question
that has an automatic familiar answer
but coz also capable of a profound deep
answer and there's personally relevant
to you that what I recommend is Who am I
you treat every answer as it comes up
with gratitude and as a portal that
portends what is beyond because what
we're trying to train here is vigilance
a kind of exploratory observation we're
asking this question not to fill in the
hole but we doing normally asking
questions of our ignorance we're trying
to deep the hole deeper and deeper until
the bottom falls away and we get to the
depths because we're no longer just
looking at the surface of the pond that
we begin to become too calm we're trying
to be passing a deep insight into the
depths of the pond treat every answer as
with gratitude but as a lens that you
see through as a doorway that you pass
through as you go on the quest to get
right deep into the unfamiliar depths
the point of the practice is not to get
an answer no matter how insightful but
to be filling fill your eyes and the
automatic ignition if you're distracted
label the distraction with an ing word
return to your breath do simple Pasta
they could ever get alright so feel free
of course what to do either at the pasta
meta or meditative question all right
so please make sure that you are in a
comfortable position the questions we
take again today should be specifically
about the practice the lessons that I've
taught you those of you who are
interested in more general questions
about how this fits into the cultivation
of wisdom how this you know how this has
to have something to do with the
response to the meaning crisis or how
this compares to other practices like
those nuns and stoicism or neoplatonism
or Christianity for that I have my
general Q&A of this Friday and it's
pretty much has this kind of setup and
so please look for that I will post on
that on my social media you can find me
on LinkedIn Facebook and Twitter okay so
make sure that you're comfortable please
set your phone's to not to not disturb
and we will begin together when I say
begin
begin
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best you can to
integrate what you cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition always
remember the coming out of your set is
part of the practice so we have some
questions one is another question from
I'm an impulse buyer good to see you
again
I spent a small amount of time in
meditation and have focused on only
clearing my mind any tips for allowing
oneself to think again but we did today
I think there was a question leftover
from yesterday uh so I'm not cool
quite clear what you mean so I hope I
don't misinterpret you I'm surmising
that what you mean did you go to a place
that felt very much for that rest and
there were there was no motion movement
of mind and that's what clearing your
mind meant I hope that you weren't sort
of holding thoughts away but because if
you're sort of holding things away
that's not really conducive to what we
walk because what you want to do is you
want to fact and maybe this is what you
did I don't know I'm just surprising is
you allowing like you mind to settle and
the monkey mind to Jenna generally of
its own accord fall towards rest in
silence now usually takes a very long
time though usually takes a very long
time so the the motion of mind that
we're bringing here is and that's part
of what sort of the knock here is is to
be able to do that with attention
without having to speak just that sense
of expanding your awareness so if you
think about how you expand it and
enriched your awareness in flow so
you've already got that skill engaged
that's what you're sort of bringing in
to write he already had the soft
vigilance practice for finding your
focus
you have those two skills and that's
what you're bringing in to sort of
excluding into the depths of from which
you know the answers to your question
are being disclosed I understand the
challenge the challenge is having the
mind move without having without it
being moved in either speech and that
does take a bit of practice so if you
concentrate on what's happening when
you're finding your flow and finding
your focus that will give you a non
linguistic sense of how to move your
mind I hope that answers your question
sign yep has another question I had a
therapist who told me meditating when
you're dissociative can put pulling you
more into dissociation would you still
recommend meditating in that case if
you're in therapy and you have
dissociative things going on you should
definitely talk to your therapist about
this I recommend if you no longer in
therapy because the therapy has come to
some conclusion you could at least
pursue the core form but I strongly
recommend that in addition to the city
of meditation you need a moving practice
the moving practices are a very good way
to train mindfulness in a way that is in
which it's very difficult to get into
the dissociative thing so taking up
especially a moving practice that is
very initially challenging I don't want
to say that yoga isn't challenging it is
but it's challenging in a different way
you have to really get into it before
you really taste the challenge where is
something like Tai Chi Chuan or martial
art like a keto or something like that
Tai Chi Chuan is good in our current
context because you learned on your own
at least initially you want a moving
meditation that challenges you and gets
you into the flow State so if you're a
tendency to dissociative maybe just
stick with the core for finding your
Center root flow and focus and
indefinitely integrating that with a
moving mindfulness practice Oscar Jenson
I have a question about pace I'm very
slow enough trouble finding the rhythm
or flow in the routing flow in parts the
core takes up to 10 minutes it feels
chop
natural what to do so first of all it's
very there is no sort of set range on
this taking up to ten minutes to do that
is good but it does it it's an important
point things that help with routing and
flow are taking up a movement moving
practice like especially like Tai Chi
Chuan things like that because they they
give you a direct and much more
participatory sense much more direct and
participatory sense of routing and
finding your flow that then really help
in your city of meditation so the pace
takes longer keep going choppiness
is you know that's fairly common too but
something that really helps smooth
things out take it deeper and speed up
the time in which you sort of slow down
as I shrink the time what if they speed
up the access but shrink the time of
getting into your movement flow is to
take up a moving mindfulness practice I
can't emphasize enough how important
this is for routing and flow especially
if you're finding it challenging Andrea
good good to see you again
I keep switching language in which I
asked the question between English and
my natives check should I stick with my
native language since it might be prone
to destructions the need of translation
um yeah speaking with your native
language is fine if you find that is
more conducive to getting into the
practice then just start with that and
go with it that's probably better
precisely because if you said it doesn't
have that sort of bunch of stuff and you
seem to be a default into that anyways
on Herron Destin I don't think it in
question so welcome I feel that the
routing goes very very deep to the core
of the earth is that normal um I don't
know if it's normal it's not abnormal in
the sense that it doesn't happen to
other people if you're getting a very
deep root and it's not impeding your
ability to find your flow and find your
focus then go with it
there is something profound about really
mention the achieves enlightenment he
touches the earth like rounding thing
this is a deeply mythological and by
myth I don't mean a false story about
the past I mean an enacted image that
puts us into contact with perennial
patterns and problems and he touches the
earth right
he's disclosing something very important
about that grounding and if you're
getting that and it's not impeding flow
and focus great lucky you
lucky you Diane Nicholson when I asked
Who am I and got to a simple profound
place with the answer did okay to stay
and explore the profound place before
sitting through to a duper deeper place
yes I understand the question
it you know there's right as long as you
don't get in mesh because if you stick
to long with an answer you'll start to
train yourself into making this a
magical practice where the point is to
get a profound answer and the point is
not in obtaining an answer or a product
the point is in deepening the process of
the question so stay with it for a bit
maybe you want to explore it and get a
deeper sense of it so that if you wish I
understand right you get sort of so you
can return to this after the practice
and perhaps reflect on it more
philosophically that's essentially
that's fine but don't do it too long
because you don't want to train yourself
remember your brain is always being
trained at multiple levels many of them
outside your ego awareness you don't
want to train your brain to say ah the
point of this is a magical practice to
give me divine answers to all of my
problems okay then it's mentis last
couple days I've experienced a drawing
of a specific thought in my throat and
that causes reflective swallowing it is
somewhat irritating you know anything I
could do to get over this so you we all
develop these sort of your monkey mind
itches as they're called these things
that come up and that they sort of grow
with spin and and they're and they're
very discomforting I would recommend
that if you you try making it you're
here that the excessive swallowing just
something you're not fighting something
you focus on it we're going to talk
about this a lot next Monday and just
okay you want to be my focus I'm going
to focus on you and I'm gonna feel
what's happening there all the
sensations also going on feel what
happens when I swallow
feel it in my mouth feel the texture
feel that saliva going down I'm going to
make that my meditative Center and keep
and keep doing this because when it
becomes apparent that this is not and I
don't mean just you permeating and
percolating through when it becomes
apparent that this is not going to take
you from your mindfulness these kinds of
monkey mind things tend to dissipate so
I hope that I hope that's helpful
Pat Patrick Joe it is the meta practice
when we are trying to realize the
mourners to someone are we continuously
trying to draw out more expressive
identities or with anything that comes
up be somewhat categorical it'll be
somewhat kind of everything you bring up
is going to be somewhat categorical and
the point isn't to sir oh no it's
categorical the point is in how more
things come keep coming up for more
categories so you're trying to get a
sense of the inexhaustible Ness that
keeps feeding into all the categories
right and so you want sort of get a
direct Oh sort of pure more nuts what
you'll get in sense is exactly what
you're articulating more and more things
come up and they belong to different
categories and that's fine but again
you're trying not to settle into a you
know a solution in any one of the
categories you're trying to always oh
there's there's something that's feeding
into those categories an inexhaustible
--mess that keeps feeding into the
people generating new categories new
members of existing categories keeps
making me open things up more so again
if the categories I keep using this
metaphor because it keeps being relevant
I hope the categories are like the
relevant through our like a lens through
which we're seeing but I'm helping us to
realize that morna's what would be some
examples of expressive Co identification
was part of Patrick's question
expressive
identification is first trying to note
like when you call somebody up you might
ask us what role am i taking but we're
all am I taking teacher-student boss
aggressor defender hero victim what does
it feel like and don't try to be you
know too analytic just you know
intuitively ah all right what rule in my
sight what happens if I reverse the
rules not a community anything to you
but I like being the victim
the heroic victim the heroic victim it
gives me the sweet taste of
self-righteousness what I like being
right the aggressor because that way I
don't have to face my fear right now I
say all of these things with words but
you want to have that sort of direct
experience real realization that's what
it's like to find that Co identification
stringer I got a question about my pasta
I regularly feel that I'm losing the
peripheral awareness on my torsos so I
keep redoing to find your flow part is
that okay yes yes keep going back good
it's just like returning to your breath
what you're doing is returning to both
the field and focal aspects of your
breath and that's good and eventually
that will settle it that will settle up
for you all of these things that keep
you know they think they do settle out
with time remember you've spent a whole
lifetime building up automatic patterns
mind and body and identity and you're
putting against it a very little amount
of time in meditation the amazing thing
is if it works but it takes time for
that little to make a difference to that
huge huge set of habits and mechanisms
that we've been trained and Rea again
how long am I supposed to wait until I
ask the question again
I understand it's supposed to be
questing for answers but do I ask and
wait search in silence or can I ask you
again or did I get it wrong no you're
right if if there's sort of silence and
nothing comes up you know maybe for a
couple breaths then ask it again and if
nothing comes up take the nothing as the
answer try to
feel and sense your way in vigilance
right into that nothing that's coming up
because that what does that mean to you
not inferential II not theoretically how
does it how does it feel in your mind
and body
how does it taste in your awareness just
Seltzer hi Josh it's good to see you
hi John how should we approach the
loosening relaxing part of routing is
the purpose to Rio special honors to
focus so as to sense it in more depth
should we be physically relaxing yes you
should be doing both that's a great
question Josh you should be you should
be physically relaxing but the point
again that's that that's exactly right
did you're trying to sort of Riaz
specialize pick up on new aspects new
features new flow of informations so
it's actually just doing the two
together
excellent question it's good to hear
from you again by the way shivery any
during the past I feel like I'm losing
the peripheral Ernest in my arms and
legs and just feeling the torso is that
normal yes yes it's very hard when the
orientation association area of the
brain isn't getting a lot of active
signal from arms and legs for you to
keep an awareness they're effective and
so that's why I say just concentrate on
the torso because you have you still
have the movement throughout the torso
because of the breath so thank you for
joining I want to thank my techno mage
dear friend Omar my beloved son Jason
for their continual help please
subscribe to the channel to be notified
of the next video you can go back also
and find previous teaching lessons if
you just join for the day in the channel
you'll find lots of videos on
mindfulness higher states of
consciousness flow inside with mystical
experience the general responding to the
meeting crisis the relationship between
the meeting crisis and the Cova crisis
that there's a lot out there to try I
hope to be of help to you please help me
to help others please share with other
people this this meditation
series or course issue perhaps perhaps
also share the channel with them if
you're finding the more with the broader
framework of the channel conducive and
helpful but at least please that I think
this this practice can be a lot of help
to people right now that I you can help
me help as many people as possible by
spreading the word about it so I'm
asking you to help me please we're doing
this every weekday morning at 9:30 EST
our general QA is this Friday 3 p.m. est
please there'll be a reminder set out on
YouTube and on my channel please set a
reminder for yourself I hope to see some
of you you there and get to us answer
some of your questions
remember continuity of practice more
important than quantity if you honestly
honestly can only sit for 5 minutes then
it's sit for 5 minutes
please keep sitting and please keep
trying throughout the day to do you know
one minute the past note or one minute
Metta follow your breath in the past no
no Mehta maybe sense your root sense
your flow bring in soft vigilance try
and integrate what you're cultivating in
your practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition
thank you everyone thank you for your
time and attention I'll see you all
tomorrow
take good care