[Music]
how are you Andrew a man being
temperamental left-winger on I'm very
much concerned with the bottom of the
bottom of the world and how how we can
make it work so I'm thinking about how
how I'm the the the age you know the
amazing age of prosperity in the 20th
century how this actually happened so
capitalism slowly revved up in the 19th
century people were desperately poor in
the 19th century nonetheless even though
there was there was there was this this
new prosperity was happening it seems to
me that the economic decency came to the
larger Western public in the first half
of the 20th century and this great event
which is an absolutely amazing event was
obscured by the events of the wars the
wars were so dramatic and occupied us in
in such a deep way that we were unaware
of of this other great event that was
going on independently of the wars and
what was going on was are you sure was
independently of the worst that's that's
that's that does doesn't quite work for
me because somehow there's always this
story where wars are big money general
or tire wars every economy generators
yeah that's a big theory and then
there's that it's also another theory
that the American economy has been a war
economy for a hundred years and and it
still is a war economy so the it seems
to me the Union finally was able to
integrate itself properly and in the in
the capitalist economy and I have a
sociologist friend his name is Steve
Lopez he explained this to me that when
the when the war end ended Germany the
you know the Nazis were completely
shamed in Germany and and and and your
Germans were completely humbled and and
went about the process of building a new
society and they created this
fascinating structure they created this
threefold negotiating structure between
government business and and the unions
and so in order to make in order for big
companies to make any decision
had to be made at the table with
government and with the unions so that
all three of them came to an agreement
and they would on a on a regular basis
sit down if there was a and and and
renegotiate and make plans for the
future and this was a in many ways a
very non conflictual way of doing things
because that all the conflict was in the
negotiation and once the negotiations
were were achieved when we're finished
then business they just went to head
with their plan they went they with the
exact plan that all three all three
parties agreed to so I was sort of
fascinated by this I thought this was a
really fascinating thing and I do think
that all around the Western world
including North America there was
whether or not this was this particular
three-way negotiating process was
official it it was more or less
something like that that that that
occurred so government was evolved in in
in in the economy in in business and
capitalism and so was were big business
and so were unions and they were all
involved and they all had a stake and
that and that created this complex
counterpoint of powers and a sort of a
complexity of counterpoint is is is a
seems to me is what it is what is needed
to make a fair economy and what this did
in the post-war years was what I mean it
the Western world happened to be
extremely prosperous during those years
and the and the whole society you know
with relatively few exceptions did
extremely well the the it was an amazing
period and now the West in a left-wing
house and and and and we you know I I
was around a culture that's picked apart
all the negatives of this particular
social economy but nonetheless in
retrospect looking back it seems to me
it's probably the fairest society we've
ever had the period say between 1945 and
the mid 80s or so until until Reagan and
neoliberalism and globalization and now
to explain Reaganism it seems to me that
in the late 70s the in the 1970s it
didn't work as well it was it went into
decline unemployment began to rise there
was a lot of unease
in the
in in in society and there was there was
seemed to be a feeling that there was a
need to shake things up and another
thing is big companies knew damn well
that there was cheap labor outside like
door take piece these jobs were also
upheld by you know high tariffs and
things like that governments governments
had trade tariffs to to protect these
industries and whatnot so it was a it
was a protectionist arrangement but it
seems to me looking at that now now in
retrospect and I was on the side which
very much you know I was only a kid at
the time but I was a part of a culture
that saw this as dark as this this
change is something in retrospect forty
years later I think of it as probably
the most amazing period just as amazing
a period of economic history as the
period following the Wars it's just that
it wasn't amazing for us in other words
what happened was the trade barriers
came down that free trade free trade
started we moved all our manufacturing
to - well first of all the unions were
broken in the US by Reagan but then in
the 90s globalization began this was a
very dramatic time very volatile very
unstable for the Western world it seems
to me we paid an enormous price for what
in turn was the amazing economic
prosperity of basically the rest of the
world I mean this is it was a credit
this I mean I was I was terrified of
this in the 90s when when I was in my
20s that it was I just felt so
vulnerable you can AMA cleave almond
with that there are no jobs and this
kind of stuff and and I was not alone
and scores of people wondered if in fact
our economy was going to collapse
completely because there seemed to be no
way of to support government government
government revenues and these type of
things that manufacturing base it felt
as though I think in in reality it
wasn't fully the case there was
manufacturing that stayed and survived
but we certainly had a feeling that our
manufacturing base had disappeared had
been just taken out from under us
and when that happens you basically lose
your tax base and that and so we we just
felt like we had no everything was was
fluttering in the air with with it's
like having a building without a ground
floor that's what it felt like and and
and and so it was it was hovering in the
air and just ready to just ready to fall
and crash it seemed to me and and I just
thought I felt through the 90s that this
was gonna happen and then somewhat what
amazed me is that the economy turned
around and everything went to buzz and
things got things got you know there
were jobs and things went well again and
I did I don't think I understand that
except that capitalists will talk about
you know there are always up turns and
downturns in in any in a capitalist
economy and that's that's life but it's
I did my understanding of how that
worked
didn't doesn't I just don't understand
so well it's a funny thing like I mean
again I'm not an economist and I don't
really have any much informed vision of
all this but you know you get a feeling
of what's going on from the news in some
sense and and I felt like like ten years
ago there was this incredible pessimism
about where the world was going and now
it seems like there's this there's this
kind of new kind of optimism and I don't
know whether I trust the optimism
because it's it's it might be just the
information that I'm getting on my
Twitter feed or you know what I mean I'm
not well there's all Steve Pinker and
and and and you know there's all this I
see you you know and I know there's all
these this stories about how India is is
now you know people are not starving to
death you know poverty has gone down
everywhere and you know there's life is
getting great better and better and
that's the kind of you know I guess
maybe even just five years ago mmm I had
the sense okay there's like we're on the
Titanic and we're heading towards global
warming and the you know everything's
gonna collapse and recently it's like oh
no no we're building a better and better
world and I don't know why that's
happening
it's just I'm just what I'm describing
is the information that gets fed to me
through through media which is very
strange these days and yeah and it's
it's very hard to process or understand
what what the hell it is like yeah yeah
yeah I mean I'm basically kind of
talking exactly about that that this was
a very unstable time but nonetheless the
word there were enormous benefits going
on now people are talking about all the
enormous benefits that are happening to
China and India and another that doesn't
mean there aren't negatives doesn't mean
there isn't an environmental
environmental price to pay and that kind
of stuff but it does seem that that
these countries are way more there's way
more money in these economies and that
allows for all kinds of other benefits
to to people all around the world and so
there it seems to me that the period
beginning with reaganism amounted to a
what I would call a capitalist
redistribution of wealth all around the
world of wealth that that was consonant
what was also new wealth created but in
part some wealth was redistributed from
the West to to these places I think part
of the reason why this globalization
worked is because we in turn we gave up
good jobs for cheap products so you know
we would pay back in the 70s we would
pay way more say for television or
something like that
and we do now and it's because of
because they're made much more cheaply
at a much cheaper cost well there's also
the free economy right now and you know
in the sense that information is free
right yeah oh yeah yeah information free
most music and and and and and and TV
everything is is you can get it so I was
legal but everything is you know that's
a whole other it's a whole other
dimension of how that's that seems to me
almost like a subsidy or something like
the Internet is is this massive subsidy
that that that helps us it's a free tool
essentially I mean it's not free we pay
a little bit but we don't pay much and
you know we get all this free
information which you know in the past
we had to pay for quite a bit but but so
I'm just trying to give you a little
historical backdrop of my sense of my
understanding of
where we are now and so in other words
there's been a the work was getting the
world is getting richer but there is a
still a grave sense of insecurity and
the this sense that you know people
there was a time when people paid into
pensions and then then they retired and
they had this pension and then they were
set they were set for their retirement
and this kind of thing well people the
people haven't been paying into
retirement you know people people don't
have pensions set up anymore this is
this is something that there was a
people prior to 1970s had so to speak
they probably own up until the 80s say
and then the pension economy began to
wane and it's because the money that was
there was way more money in in our in
the Western economies then it seems to
me than there is now
at least to invest and put a saw maybe
that's why everything the prices have
gone down and there's all this free this
free stuff is that you know well we're
working out no way can't really pay for
anything these days it's in some sense
you know with your little salary we
still we definitely still pay definitely
still pay rent and and how you know
property taxes and stuff like that has
to cause still cost to live but it's
true that that the money money in a
sense is that it almost seems less
important it's because other things are
other things are being covered by other
means it seems that way anyway the so I
was thinking about this and and it and
it dawned on me that well didn't Donna
me this came over a very long period of
time that we needed to reintegrate
notions of subsistence economy back into
the money economy and I have this sense
that a big part of the great prosperity
of the first to half of the 20th century
up until about 1970 is due to the
continuing existence of subsistence
economy during that period in other
words there were still loads and loads
of family firms out of town and that
kind of stuff and the money economy was
picking up people were getting jobs the
jobs were getting better
they were good industrial jobs this kind
of stuff but there were still people
you know some some remember the family
still had a firm with with with with
animals and things like that out of town
this kind of stuff well yeah even though
that's cause it's a shadow work yeah as
being like I don't know 30 percent of
the economy or 40 percent of you know
the real economy is not you know taking
account oh yeah you could call that yeah
yeah that's that's related to what I
what I consider to be subsistence
economy - yeah
every time you sweep the floor for
example that's that's work but anyway I
feel that there was a lot of wealth
generated from subsistence economy
people had gardens and animals that they
slaughtered and this type of thing they
had sheep but they had a cow and they
and and this became less and less so and
by 1978 I completely disappeared from at
least from North America and everybody
from that point on was entirely
dependent upon money whereas before
there were these older practices still
in place where it just seemed normal
natural for the old people to carry on
in their old ways you know but like I
was thinking like when you always hear
that oh people been in the past lived on
one dollar a day and I I hear that I
think that's bullshit it's like they had
robust subsistence economies that's you
know I mean that that kind of it that
kind of statistic in a way there's
something true about it right because we
means I didn't have money you never
money economy didn't leave live how we
live now but there was other richness
--is that you know absolutely no no the
idea that they were dirt poor and had
nothing yeah
they had they had gardens and fruit
trees and animals and that's the kind of
I guess Peterson's optimism about all of
you know what's happening now your and
that's I always feel critical about that
a little bit okay back in in in the past
people had such really terrible hard
desperate lives and and now I don't know
I I think it is the case that that's a
kind of a difficult thing to talk about
because it is yeah
the first things like child mortality
was really high then you know what it
was more
more than it was it was it was related
to poverty but it was it wasn't just it
was mostly related to knowledge it was
related to the fact that there were no
cures for a lot of these childhood
diseases but I think their lives they
ate well and they were well housed but
they and maybe that community right they
didn't have this level of depression and
schizophrenia yeah it's everywhere in a
modern I think there was a new there was
a rise in awareness of a hygiene as well
in the early 20th century which really
improved you you know it improved the
health of the larger population that's
another that's kind of so science and
technology really improved the lives of
the average person but the loss of
social services in the economy was a
terrible loss I think when people call
this the the loss of traditional life
but I think that's a that's a little bit
of a that's a little bit of a Miss no
Miss nomer because it's very easy to
have a subsistence economy in a modern
life or an inner vein life it's just not
it was easy but it's certainly
imaginable you can do it and that's not
traditional so subsistence and
traditional don't mean the same thing
and so this is kind of so I'm I'm
working on the idea that subsistence
economy can can be reintegrated into
cities into the urban life and we can
have an entire level of economic life
which is essentially unrelated to making
money I'm related to going out getting a
job and making money yes okay you know
in a way where you know I you know I'm
I'm putting out content and writing and
I'm not being paid like you know we're
that we're having this conversation I
have my job right on one hand and that's
about 50% of my even less I probably of
my work right I mean how would you
define work right I work is doing the
stuff that's kind of hard that you don't
really want to do right yeah now it's
it's it's it's the it's and and we but
you do it because it makes your life
meaningful right yeah
so so
you know my wife she has a full-time job
in hotel and and most of her work is
work you know for me it's like 50
percent so so I love that's a
subsistence economy that's what you're
talking about soluti I would say we're
moving we're into that now I'm not being
paid for that but but it there there are
some I guess rewards intangible rewards
well I would say you would probably
first and foremost think of essay
writing as cultural life and you might
think of it as intellectual life or even
political or something that but it has
absolutely is economic it you know it
has an effect on people if they're
interested in your essays and they read
it and it has you know it has an it has
various effects on them and it'll
influence how they behave and so
everything in a sense I mean just I mean
everything everything overlaps a little
bit with everything else so you know you
can think of that as economic and you
may eventually get paid for that from
writing those essays you may nose yeah
but but I do agree that we can imagine
say a world of making art like I think
since most people stack up at the bottom
of hierarchies to quote Angie Sweeney
and for example since most artists don't
make any money or Jordan Peterson sorry
you said to court and your Sweeney but
who doesn't
Jordan Peters I wouldn't want to Cano
you got right so anyway the that I'm
thinking that there's all this art and
somebody's really good art that never
that never gets involved in the monetary
economy but is nonetheless involved in
people's lives now maybe we can call
that not economics or cultural life but
let's say you make a pie and you give it
to your friend well that's obviously
economic you know it's a gift but you
know they eat the pie and if they're
eating the pie they're not eating
another pie and that means they don't
have to go out and buy one if they you
know if they you know sit down and eat
the pie they don't get so that there's a
there's a there's a deeper level of
economics which is profoundly
non-monetary yeah well I see that also a
at this Buddhist community I know
there's these people that the ladies
probably a master of Cuban Cuban
percussion you know of some kind and
could probably be earning tons of money
doing that if she wanted to but they
actually have chosen not to write engage
in that way so you know they're making
all this extraordinary art of music but
it's but they're not they're not you
know it's not yeah it's for the sake of
its I don't know I don't know for the
sake of itself but then you know on the
other hand right okay if I'm being paid
if I'm being I'm being paid $10 for it
for an essay that I put on medium I'm
pretty damn happy to be to be paid for
sure for creative about 400 times it's
like it's like the shock of being paid
for that I think we're digressing a
little bit in talking about cultural
matters such as the arts I'd like to
stick as closely as possible to economic
work in other words work which produces
things that we consume for economic
benefits such as food shelter and
clothing this type of thing
so the so I just want to back up a
little bit so I just discussed Reaganism
and and and global globalization pre
free trade and this kind of stuff the I
think one of the reasons why there was a
huge amount of capitalist economy was
shifted over to these countries is I
mean obviously because the labor was
much cheaper but there's a reason why
the labor was much cheaper because these
people were living off the land they
they they were they they were completely
their economies were basically
subsistence economies and subsistence
economies lend themselves to a rapid
Prospera monetary prosperity in in a
capitalist climate in other words
subsistence economy and money economy
have a dynamic relationship where one
helps the other and I it seems to me a
terrible mistake once you develop a
robust money economy to get rid of your
subsistence economy it's a it's a retro
mistake you should keep it you should
make sure you keep it and I think we
made or you might valorize it because
it's always gonna be there in some way
no I mean
well it's always you're saying it wasn't
it was destroyed well in the sense that
we got rid of we got rid of animal and
vegetable husbandry fairly quickly and
easily in our society you know how much
people live most people lived on farms
and 130 years ago and now me you know 2
percent of the people are involved in
agriculture and back then it was crazy
percentage I forget the percentage but
really high so you're talking kind of a
return to artisanal yes I am and work in
a sense I'm basically saying that we if
we don't have a strong enough dynamic
economic dynamic of subsistence making
your own food growing your own food
doing helping each other out developing
skills to you know fixing up your own
house that kind of stuff then you if
that's not strong enough then we you you
you will we will be forever vulnerable
to the volatility of the money economy
which it seems to me is inherently
volatile at least the capitalist one and
I don't believe the Socialists have
figured out anything different so not
even going there
I'm not going it's not gonna entertain
alternatives to capitalism because they
don't seem to the only the only system
that seems to have really worked is that
is you know there there can be
government revenues can be can be taken
out of the capitalist economy so as to
so to create social enterprise which I'm
which I'm in favor of you know basically
the mixed economy that we have in the
Western world seems to be the best
system that has ever worked mystic and
it seems to me that the Union was also
an essential feature of what really set
down established a voice for the workers
yes and if and and the fairest
capitalist economy that the world has
ever known
basically was the period between the
Second World War maybe even a little bit
before and and say 1980 and that was
then that was basically dismantled their
arse there are still some unions but
basically not nothing I think it's not
there's nobody used to be yeah I was
gonna say they're being destroyed in
France actually the union's they're just
they're just seems to me that the unions
don't have and it's simply
we they don't have a strong enough
footing anymore so and so what I thought
about this for a long time and I and I
realized that I'm not going to even
though I'm going to acknowledge the
importance of the unions historically
I'm not going to think about them as as
a viable piece of the future so they may
well be or they may or there may be a
smaller piece or something that but
they're not then in other words I I did
not I just simply didn't consider the
their importance in the future and so if
you're in a capitalist economy and
you're subject to the whims of the
capitalist come the up turns in the
downturns and all kind of stuff and you
basically are you only get paid you know
whatever in other words the salaries in
that in this at least for the time being
are gonna remain relatively low it's see
there's there's an argument out there
that as as the rest of the world gets
richer then the cost of their labor also
goes up and that will bring up in turn
bring up the cost of our labor and that
will make us that'll that'll be better
as well but in terms of making a living
through by having a job that is a that's
a that is something I certainly don't
have a huge amount of faith in as that
you know that being the fundamental unit
of Social Work socio-economic that
conversation that comes from that comes
from factory models doesn't it yeah yeah
and that's that's what's that's already
obsolete in a sense but we have service
industries that the factory model is
sort of it's sort of you know III you
know even education is like there's
these monolithic structures that are not
in tune with yeah how things are how
things really are moving to what things
are moving towards and then how people
are behaving and you know okay I'm glad
you mentioned that because that makes me
think of so we've also evolved in in in
as a new way of making money people are
becoming self-employed they're doing
stuff on with their computers on the
internet there's all kinds of more but
the thing is it's fairly clear to me
that not everybody's capable of being
self-employed it's a relatively small
percentage of population who actually
have that capacity for to self-employed
might be true I do think that there's a
dimension of shepherding involved in
social economics in other words there's
a there's a fairly significant
percentage of population more that's
need to be taken care of so to speak now
this doesn't mean they can't do valuable
work but they they don't they're not
going to Robert I would go even further
than that I mean I know I when I have
too much time on my hands I I'm less
productive actually than when I have you
know I wouldn't have a job and then I'm
you know I you know I have other things
to do and I there's a structure of you
you don't have structure in you in your
life here you could very easily sleep in
and you know get get hooked to cereal TP
and and just you know have naps all the
time I know this you know do you just
lose your your-your-your structure very
easily I do
oh me too absolutely yeah yeah no
absolutely so the so I started that
that's basically I'm setting it up I'm
setting I'm setting setting you up so I
can I can talk about what I think is a
is a possible solution which I also
believe is a possible solution for the
can the environmental environmental
crisis which we seem to be facing and
that is there's a there's a potential
for mass redundancy a potential for a
lack of money in our economy a potential
for there being increasing numbers of
dispossessed people people who would
simply cannot cannot find a place in all
in these competence hierarchies that
that basically run the world and and and
you know when you think of competence
are keys you don't just think of
electricians and plumbers you you also
think about someone who can you know
play the guitar at a party you know
there's all kinds of there's all kinds
of competence hierarchies yeah yeah yeah
but it seems to me that there's a there
and one of one way to include every
every as many people as possible
incompetent hierarchies is to have as
many competence hierarchies as possible
so if you don't fit into one well then
you go off and try your hand at
something else you keep trying your hand
at something until you find the place
inside the hierarchy but even and that's
it that's a beautiful and dynamic
and a free way to think of the world but
it it seems to me also that huge number
of numbers of people are still left out
of it they just don't they just don't
they don't find a place or at least
there's a fear that increasingly people
won't find a place I'm thinking about
all of the waste that we produce because
we're consumers Society and the amount
of garbage that goes out on the street
every week in say in my neighborhood
there's a you know crazy amount of
garbage goes out on the street the
amount of cars that get sent to the to
the junkyard
now they do gets melted down and stuff
but I'm thinking that this this all of
this garbage
including the stuff whatever we flush
down the toilet
you know feces and including that kind
of sewage is is valuable and it has
enormous economic potential and what if
we set up a new ethic in which nothing
absolutely no not one unit of waste were
to leave your neighborhood if absolutely
everything worked out and you organize
yourself you organized yourself very
deliberately in such a way that nothing
would leave then and and what what if
this became a very profound ethic first
of all it would take care of a Norseman
of our environmental problem I believe
for one we would we would start
consuming less because we would have all
this stuff that we would be forced to
reconvert into something new which would
function as economic wealth you know we
could you could create all kinds of
stuff with it you could build you can
you I can imagine that with the waste
produced by neighbourhood you can build
new houses fairly easily in it I can
also imagine that rich neighborhoods
because they're too busy making money
would not be interested in doing this
but they would most definitely be
interested in throwing all the garbage
down into poor neighborhoods and if they
were adequately organized they'd be
delighted to have it all all these they
could create a house through 3d printing
they just put all the material and
garbage some kind of VAT and make this
new material and then build houses of it
yeah yeah I mean you could match there's
no end to imagining what can happen with
every time a house gets torn down for
you you have very strict strict ethic in
place where nothing is nothing is wasted
so you save all the wood you save the
windows you even as much as possible if
you're gonna beat beat up the the
concrete foundation for example then you
save you just saved the blocks of the
rocks you know and then the debris and
that gets reused all of it absolutely
every in the plastic and they change it
it's strange that we have what we use
all the stuff and then we just throw it
away isn't it's it's it's it's kind of
what I'm getting at is we we have this
yeah that's right we make all this stuff
and then we put it in the dump or now
there is a lot of recycling that's going
on but I think recycling is very
expensive and doesn't it's it's it's a
very inefficient way of doing things
yeah but it's not the problem with
recycling is is it's another government
service that's doing it you're not
really exactly that engaged in it yes I
think what you're talking about is some
kind of again it comes goes back to
Peter Sounion idea of responsibility
right yeah absolutely
yeah yeah so so so it's a question of
how do you engage it's question of being
engaged in in that kind of process which
right now we're kind of helpless in a
sense yeah we're very vulnerable we we
have emini relatively meaningless lives
and we don't make anything we don't do
stuff I mean some people do but they do
it because they're driven to do it
because they they like that kind of
thing it's a hobby or whatever but you
know they make clothes or whatever but
what if everybody who doesn't fit in
well or I mean I can imagine lots of it
this particular way of life were to
really take off people would lose
interest in low-wage jobs because their
lives their economic lives in
neighborhoods would be more interesting
and more more prosperous because they I
can imagine if you imagine the reason
for example I have worm composting here
in my basement I like what I do is I
shred cardboard and paper and I take my
food scraps from my kitchen and I mix it
all together and I have worms that that
eat it and they eat the paper too and
they they create compost with it takes a
few months and you feed it you know I
just dump the new
you sort of organize in such a way that
the its eventual you know you have you
sort of peed the paper and the food
scraps at one end and the the compost is
eventually is formed at the other end
you know there's this process that
happens and so there's all kinds of
ideas which would result I believe in in
robust food production in in in in the
neighborhoods of inner cities in poor
neighborhoods that if if people saw the
logic of this and actually began to
organize around it then we would have
robust under economies yeah but then
we'd have to talk to our neighbors
Steven that would be terrible this is
this is another thing this is the social
side I've been very worried about oh
yeah all my life I'd been worried about
the loss of community I had a very
strong sense as a child that the the
older generations had a much stronger
community than then then I had and and
that I also had a community which was
ever weakening and had the older I got I
could see that community was was ever
diminishing well you probably have more
of a community in st. John's than the
new you would have here it's funny like
I find the community here where you know
I'm a next Patriot so so I'm not as
involved in the community as I could I
would be probably if I was French but
people I know you know a lot of people
on a superficial sort of you know you
never get to another you know nobody
like I know that I know the upstair Nate
neighbor we smile we say hello we you
know we both have dogs but we haven't
had exchanged a meal together you know
in how many years I've been living in
this apartment complex which which which
is kind of people let prefer it that way
because yeah they like to have their
walls like and you know and but but on
the other hand it's a little bit a
little bit strange isn't it yeah no I
completely agree it seems to me that a
real community is is something like a
circle of fifty to a hundred people and
it does seem to me it's a bit artificial
to like members of the community aren't
necessarily friends but they
you recognize that they're members of a
community so there's there's some kind
of understood it's at issue of
collaborative it's somehow a
collaborative tissue where people
support each other but they don't
necessarily like each other and that
kind of there's there's there's like a
thing that happens in Paris where all
the all you know there's a Food Day and
everybody goes down to the to the canals
and cooks food and has a big picnic
together it's like hmm
these kind of things are very sane and I
don't know yeah yeah yeah so like I'm
imagining if if these neighborhoods were
not allowed to you know we're we're set
up so as not to keep to keep every
article of garbage every article of
waste every car wreck every every house
torn down then there would be a
designated area in neighborhoods where
you would have designated you would
everything would be sorted so all the
metals would be in one pile all the
heavier metals the lighter metals will
be in one pile like the tin and that
kind of stuff the heavier metals will be
in another and then the wood would be in
another and then the you know this kind
of thing and there would be a fairly
engaged process and with a division of
labor so and it'll be a putt because
people are getting people get rid of
clothes all the time so you'd have a bit
you'd have it you'd have one as
designated area with a pile of clothes
and and this type of thing you'd have
rubber you'd have a pile of rubber
rubber tires and rubber boots and you
know all that kind of stuff leather
would be another pile and then the then
you'd have this another level not so
you'd have people sorting this stuff and
organizing it sorting it into its
quality and then you would have other
people who would take it and and do
things with it you know yeah okay so as
you're saying this I am I am getting
some visions of Stella's collectivism
and and like it would have to be I'll I
would would have to be I agree that I
worry about how how this would actually
be put in place I totally am a
free-market person nah you have to be
voluntary in some sense yeah it has to
be totally voluntary and one thing you
can do though
is as a government you can you can
announce this would be my idea if I were
to do it and I would it's a - it's such
a big idea that's hard to imagine it's
just that we have to imagine we have to
write remember that we have pretty
serious environmental problem we throw
away a lot of shit and and then we had
and that forces us to consume more
natural resources in order to consume
more shit and so and what if what if we
really and truly recycle absolutely
every article of everything that is
consumed then you're looking at a pretty
pretty serious reduction in in in our
exploitation that's our resources
because we're reusing it is a natural it
is in a sense a new natural resource I
think you would get it would work if you
announced it would be quite simple I
think you simply suggest you set up
program so as to encourage you don't
force use but you set up say websites
with information on how to do this and
how to do that and then you announce
that within in the next over a long
period of time there's a 30 year plan to
completely remove all elements of social
welfare from our society so that people
know that in 30 years time there's a and
it'll be incremental there will be no
more you know social assistance no more
employment insurance no more working
workers compensation all of these base
subsidies laying out I and our kids are
a little bit in a way no low-income
housing you would get a B and and and if
people know they're not gonna have that
then they start to think differently
pretty quickly and then you say well
we're also going to set up an
infrastructure we're not forcing you to
use it but we're setting up an
infrastructure which will make it wait
which will make it very logical for you
to engage in such an economy in other
words you can recycle everything and you
can read you can you can gather up
everything you can reuse it you can turn
it into something else
and and it'll it'll it'll create another
dimension of wealth I do I have a
feeling that this is the and there by
the way there are cultures that do this
already it's just that it's not so
organized you know there's shantytown
cultures Genta in South America are
known to get rich they they they become
relatively sophisticated towns you know
they are plumbing and electricity
and all this kind of stuff in there
shantytowns they're outside you know I
think one of the reasons why shanty
towns developed is they were outside tax
owns people who didn't want to be inside
cities so one of the reasons why I got
interested in this in the first place
was I realized that the nine-to-five job
the the the money the money economy
grind it wraps you it gets you sucks you
into this high-cost economy you have to
pay your rent or you got to pay your
mortgage and you got yeah the you have
so you had this long list of bills but
what if you lived in an economy which
had minimal bills if any at all you mean
you might have to pay for a cell phone
or the internet or something but
basically what if maybe you know maybe
you there be a if you're living in a
city you'd have to pay property tax but
what if you built your own house then
you wouldn't have a mortgage and you and
your cot of money that goes into owning
a house this type of thing what if you
repurposed old cars and always had a car
that was just reconstructed based you
know and it cost very little I mean I'm
just imagining different in other words
what if your costs were extremely low
and if your costs were extremely low you
would have time you it's your life would
still be structured in an economic way
you'd still have to do stuff you'd have
to grow food you'd have to make sure
your house is as well insulated all that
kind of stuff but basically your your
time availability of time is there and
that gives you time to be more creative
it seems to me something like that that
that and just it seems to me that we can
we we we can make life way more stable
way less worrisome way less stressful if
we think about not throwing our wealth
away the only way to properly understand
collectives is to think you'd think of
it in small groups collectives are made
of small groups once we step out of that
then we lose the intelligence of the
collective the collective simply become
something very Dhamma
yeah well it's it's a they'd yeah that's
the group has to be small enough for
there to be the intimacy of some kind of
collective or let's say group group
genius of some
all right there's there's such a thing
as a group genius but there isn't such a
thing as a collective genius because if
it's if it's too big it's it's always
it's always done through you know force
or under the rug or it's only it's only
the small group that makes collective
intelligence and the small a small group
for me is defined by its interpersonal
interpersonal nature if it's too big to
be interpersonal in other words if it's
too big for every member of a small
group in to know the other and to know
each and every other member and then
it's then it's not a small group it's
it's bigger than that so yeah so you
need to have a big group if you ever we
have countries right but then the
everything has to be broken down so that
each each organization is small enough
you know to be to be intelligent right
yeah I think that the notion of
individual sovereignty is an inherently
male an option of them thinking about
this lately and that there's a female
equivalent which is it has to do with
the making of the person so the making
this is my female principle the making
of a person is an interpersonal process
in other words it's it's more in a
personal course is the flip side of an
individual
I mean ultimately you could argue that
they're they're the same I think there's
a subtle difference but women women
become persons and they and they
ultimately become individuals at least
in their own minds and I of course
they're many exceptions to this but as a
general as a general identity rule they
they their existing groups they they
they function they support each other
and they become they become whole
persons through through the inter
support of each other and and so there's
a there's a much more greater sense
among among women of the of the social
process which makes them whole which
makes them makes them oh I was talking
to the sky peep Vander Klay Paul
vertically he was saying men have
relationships side by side you know if
you see a bunch of guys sitting together
they're like they're side by side each
other eating their
eating their lunch you know at the
construction site you know whereas women
have it men don't relate to each other
nearly as well that sort of engaged like
almost right away in an intense way
where men are sort of afraid of
relationship something yeah I mean we
think of that as a weakness but it can
also be viewed as a strength and I I
think of it as a you know it's possible
we consume strength and for women too
it's both weakness in the strength
they're much more socially dependent but
like Camila palea sort of negatively
said you know women they always go
around in groups you know the teenage
girls they'll show up better dance and
there are always three of them together
and and they'll never never be
independent and come arrive alone and
she said this negatively so you can see
this wonderful I mean yeah well you can
see there's a negative thing and you can
see the male attribute of not being not
being interpersonal as a negative thing
but you know I think the whole idea of
the sovereign individual readiest has
something to do with solitude has
something to do with taking a long walk
in the desert / verbally speaking yeah
Joe has become a more complete person
you know that the man needs to you know
in some form of solitary way face the
world while the woman faces the world
with with that with with you know she
gets by with a little help from her
friends much more it's much more
explicit in her in the way she runs well
I also have this notion of cumulation
every time you take out resources out of
the ground or whatever you're you're
always getting a little bit richer and
even theoretically every time you grow
food in a field and you eat it you're
it's not just energy consumed because
theoretically you shitted in the toilet
but that's actually wealth if you are if
you properly harvest it you know in
other words we can if if we're really
smart with resources we can get rich or
you know because we waste absolutely
nothing and and it seems to me that
nature can can properly recover because
we're not
oh we're not raping we're not raping the
earth too quickly we're simply taking
what we need provide it that we waste
absolutely nothing you don't throw
anything away and that that vision of of
drawing from the earth
of exploring natural resources seems to
make makes sense to me that that you
know one of the reasons why we're raping
the earth is because we're we're wasting
it's true that the small groups idea is
something maybe we should focus on
because that is is is a more it has more
potential for for opening up and working
on like I feel that I I do think that's
that's a more it's a more constructive
concept in understanding the bottom of
hierarchies because we assists people
it's through small groups that people
develop the competence that that allows
them to to find hierarchies yeah you
know it's there's a base and it seems to
me that there's a that was kind of a it
was like a female ramp realm at one time
you know the it was this breeding ground
like children grew up in these
environments where where they you know
they developed the confidence and the
ability to to stuff and and then they
entered they they branch out into the
world this kind of thing so this the
whole idea of the the it's it's like the
bottom of economies is almost the
meaning of the word community or
something you're I am definitely groping
at the edge of something right and and
and I'm trying to think think of
something that doesn't exist and that's
kind of a that's a tough thing to do and
but as for this so the small groups
thing we could work on that and a much
more I think I have a lot more
confidence in that idea that it's a it's
sort of the flipside of individualism
you week and and it's also the
collective but it put it this way the
the reason why individualism is so
important is because it's arguably it's
the only way we have positive change we
changed first of all we get better one
by one and then when when one gets
better then they they they they help
everybody else get better simply by
getting better and that's kind of what
individualism is the the the the
individual getting his act together
health is is beneficial to everybody
else and this is the principle of
individual beautiful thing but there's a
collective side of the individual which
is that you know you know the Annie and
Peterson for example knows this but he
he he does he he
he's not in the zone where he can
properly articulate not maybe nobody can
articulate it but I I was I will go as
far as to say you cannot have an
individual without a small group to
support the individual and in other
words there's a conversation between the
individual and the small group and that
ultimately is it in other words we don't
really have a conversation with the
collective that's actually kind of a
load of that there's something false
about that yeah we actually only ever
have a small conversation with a small
group now we can have many small groups
and we can have imaginary conversations
with small groups of you know people we
imagine there's all but basically with
the collective is the small group and
then there's and then the larger
collective the the the the morass of
countless people is basically can is
best thought of as a relationship
between small groups so is art the
society you live in if you think of the
society you live in as a bunch of small
groups then it suddenly becomes way more
coherent and it's it's it's the real
sort of building block of social
organization makes sense to me yeah and
that's I want to work I'd like to we can
discuss in other words Peterson's take
it even though he's he knows that
there's a need for some kind of
collective expression he doesn't know he
doesn't quite know what it is and I say
it is the small group well it actually
happens around him you know this little
group of friends kind of appears around
him right oh absolutely
and that is what's going on here all
intellectual dark web or whatever bytes
it's it's those are the people who are
sustaining him in a sense so it's like
well I mean in many ways this is a this
is a in many ways for me this is a like
David fuller is kind of basically saying
we need a we need to flesh out the left
side at the left wing side of this yes
what he seems to be saying and and so
I'm kind of more interested in many ways
and what David Fuller's up there because
that he understands that there's a lack
there's a little there's a nap there's a
there's a lot there yeah so I'd like to
push that idea and we could try and we
can work on it I mean
we can work kind of more in later time
and really trying and and Thresh it out
as much as possible I also believe that
that like I said the small group is kind
of but would to repeat what I said
earlier on the person and the individual
are two sides are the same thing
the person is arguably the female
dimension of the individual they're sort
of and the individual the undivided self
yeah this is the positive side the the
person a person is defined by small
groups a person is an interpersonal
process that's so it you cannot think of
personhood without the interpersonal
process that in that envelops the person
and so and this this I believe is it's
fundamentally feminine I think and it's
in its in its in its definition and the
male the undivided self is is something
much more mysterious it's it's like it's
spiritual or something it's unto be
undivided it's a you know you come down
from the mountain there's undivided this
undivided soul this individual it's a
it's it's it's the maleness the
sovereignty of the individual is is of
course there's a there's a sense in
which a person and an individual come
together they're an identity but there's
also a sense in which they have
different origins and one it seems comes
a person comes up from the bottom and in
a and an individual some somehow comes
down from above or something like that
and so these are yeah I'd like to talk
about that and we can that would be a
much longer conversation more
interesting one I think and and struggle
to talk about in the way which which
really integrates the feminine in a in a
positive and equal way sees it sees the
two as a dyad and they're both coming to
they're coming together to mean the same
thing a person than the individual in
the individual are coming together to
mean the same thing but they come
together from different sources
[Music]
nothing has been lost
nothing is the goal and the cost nothing
is complete
[Music]
nothing is the falls and the feet castle
crumble to sand and the golden morning
and in the ride
[Music]
actor play a trick to keep that picture
from getting sick actor Warren mask
[Music]
actor new time and the task actor since
she wasn't real it's up to you to touch
and feel it's up to you to think and
feel cause Castle crumble to sand and
the golden morning
and the railway runs overland and the
poor is becoming a man in the right
[Music]
[Applause]
for full furnace consi cream
you're a baisha America smoking furious
ooh the nation
[Applause]
factory mountain spa bring me couple
bring me
[Music]
bring me where the fairies bring me
where the right is when cars castle
crumble juice and and the golden morning
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
runs over
and the boys becoming army and the actor
does what she can she says you don't
know
[Music]