unless there's a little number on the
corner it's a zero welcome to today's
idea cafe where we are taking turns
answering what do I need remember I
would like to start as welcome to start
otherwise I can didn't make the notes I
was going to be just looking to see if I
had anything immediately to say but I
don't think I do so I'll shut up and
wait to you guys to go first for change
I'm gonna go show third you want me to
go now you go ahead all right the sun's
a weird one because it's like where
everything started for me was what do I
need that guy can't provide for myself
and what I do need is an information
system I can trust a pool of information
and data and systems that I could have
access to to make decisions in my life
to create things with to access and then
in being with that realizing that
together we can actually solve all of
our problems more effectively so what I
need to be able to live my purpose you
might owe is what I need is fail to live
my purpose find my people and be myself
sometimes I what I also need is like
good food and systems to create it and
get it for myself and my people which is
everyone and by and to fulfill my
purpose right so it is the answering of
these five questions but me personally I
need to be in your nature I need to be
with a community of somewhat like-minded
people ie we want to change the world I
want to create something better and to
follow my own purpose and mission to
follow my own path in my own inner
guidance and to have people whether
they're doing that or not themselves
that they are open to me doing it that
like I'm welcome in that journey in that
space and so that is my what I what I
need
and hello Kira I was the first one to go
so he only missed my ramblings a little
bit with maybe the first 30 seconds
thanks for joining and who would like to
go next
for sharing I've got something to say
now so I'll go but yeah needs needs
needs is two things occurs to me or
occurred to me as you were speaking
there Jubilee firstly that just like
with the other questions this needs
thing exists on many many levels right
and you know at a very basic level we've
all got to eat we've all got a
we've all got a suite we've all got a
drink you know what I mean these these
things we all need and so that was one
of the things that occurred to me as he
was speaking is that that can actually
be this what do I need can actually be a
first aisle common ground right because
there are many things that we all need
you know what I mean so getting on
getting on board with that that that's
it seems to me a good starting point for
building stuff in terms of me personally
what do I need again a couple of things
you said struck with me as well so the
being involved in something meaningful
and important right I mean you changing
the world making it a better place with
a bit but but whatever it may be there
being involved in something which at
least feels to me to be meaningful
doesn't actually have to be merely fully
important right has to feel to me to be
meaningful and important but yeah beyond
beyond the sort of obvious survival
needs I have an
for solitude and a need for a certain
amount of distance a lot of the time
right because I kind of see myself as a
standing back and taking a view of
things right which means I can't get too
involved in the low-resolution stuff and
so that's I kind of feel like I need
that at although that could just be my
own emerging as well could well
just be that sees so I'll stop I'll stop
there thank you Shilo okay he did she
just point it did you just find it Kira
is falling actually did want to point it
all backwards I can't there we go there
we go that's that reminded me of a video
I saw the other day of a bunch of kids
in in class who were passing a pencil to
each other the next kid sort of had a
pencil in their hand and like it was
like they had practiced yeah that is so
cool that's a brilliant what a great way
to spend your time that's awesome
especially since they practiced make it
look good as hard that's that's
impressive I'm genuinely impressed it's
brilliant and it was the middle of a
montage of a bunch of different things
that they had all practice with the
teacher in the background saying a bunch
of stuff which things that I need which
is humor
[Laughter]
and so that was fun but but it's
figuring out like how do you like in
this new world where were a lot of the
communication is happening this way how
do you have fun than that like how do
you make like fun and like that was
something that was inadvertent that came
up and so yeah I think yeah humor and
fun are definitely things that I need
it's interesting because this
conversation has come up in more than
one context in the last week and you
know one of the one of the things that
came up in another conversation was the
the the need or the desire for
mentorship from you know like like
needing elders I guess is the best
description it's like what like I think
that as somebody you know I I consider
myself somewhere between the Millennials
and the and Gen X and trying and like
knowing that I'm ready to step up and
take more responsibility but wanting
like that foundational support from
elders is something that's been that
that's been really on my mind as it's
like okay I know things that I need to
do but like having those people that you
can I don't you know there's that
generational continuity I guess is
something that's that's playing along
that's been a theme that's really been
up for me in the last week and you know
in terms of other needs like I need to I
do need to feel safe I need to be in an
environment where to the as best as I am
able create safety so you know it's like
right now that's in California I don't
know how long that's gonna but staying
in California is gonna feel particularly
safe and so you know figuring out where
I can be that feels the most you know
like safe for you know the time being
and you know that can change what else
do I need I need to feel I need to have
people that I can go to and feel
emotionally safe where I can't you know
it's like okay I'm gonna go out into the
world and I'm going to navigate into
some you know crazy places I like I like
being a person who I see myself as
somebody who's a bit of a bridge I go
between worlds
I can I can navigate in between in
between worlds and like I might just
hover around the edges but I can be
there and sometimes when I do that I can
encounter things where I'm like uh and I
have to go have somebody that I can go
back to you and go okay help me process
what I just you know this information
that I just learned because there's some
scary crazy people in the world and how
do you know and and I'm gonna figure out
how I can hold space for those crazy
scary people and I need somebody to help
me you know process all the things that
I learned as a result of that so yeah
that's say yeah that's immediate yeah
things and I need a dog to snuggle with
cuz she's right here oh yeah cat so I
need cats I didn't say that I need to
have I need to have weight when I wake
up in the middle of the night and which
I do often to reach over and be able to
feel something warm breathing and
snuggly so yeah I don't know if that's
the answers the question but on an
existential level but that's what I got
right now that's always that's how it's
like whatever level you're at is yet
it's about your answer
Shila would you like to go oh I'll just
add on to I already agree with like
survival needs animals I'm gonna add
nature I need to be in nature I need to
reground myself pretty regularly
especially if I do a lot of mental head
area you know thinking and I think I
need respect to feel safe I feel like I
want to be seen as who I really am and
then respected for that so those are the
and definitely laughter I love that you
added that that's a pretty basic for me
all right Thank You Charla I made it
Eric and hear yourselves it well if you
would like Cara was saying about elders
cuz I think I mean I I completely agree
with what you're saying it's something
that's deeply lacking it's certainly in
Western culture I mean I think in many
Asian cultures for example if that's
more present you know yeah the I played
a glass bead game a little while ago
when we played as archetypes arises a
four player game and each of us took on
and took on the persona of an archetype
and the archetypes were mother child
father elder and what emerged from the
game was the necessity for all four of
these things right I mean whether within
the individual all within the society
right but but these roles the the
interplay of these roles with each other
is crucial right I mean if you rely too
much on the elders then there's never
anything new there's never anything
fresh there's never any you know
surprise and novelty in society but at
the same time if you lack the elders
there is that exactly what you said that
that sort of sense of safety and
stability a person that you can turn to
for advice or just consolation when
things about someone that you can
absolutely trust and I that that kind of
thing that that is yeah that that's
really crucial that's really crucial for
the
yeah well it's something that is needed
yes and and I think universally right I
mean even even if you don't consciously
acknowledge it as you just have even if
you think no no I'm cool I can sort
everything out myself that everybody
does actually need that at some point in
their lives I think and I think there's
a bigger need you know it's like the
elders to say to everything
this sounds in my head this sounds a
little presumptuous so but like the
elders to turn things over and say okay
we have done what we've you know what we
can do in our lifetime and it's time for
them to you like what let the ones who
are you know ready to step up to you
know have a voice and it's an
interesting one because I consider
myself to be again between worlds of
theirs I understand the world in a way
that my L that my elders didn't don't
because I have because of you know the
point at which I started using the
internet and and you know the age I was
and all of those things and then the
people who are younger than me who have
an even completely more different
perspective because they're considered
are even more digitally native than I am
and how like generations like that are
so profoundly different I think then at
any other time in history just because
of the level of Technology you're born
into yeah all the more reason to vote
for them to find relationship with each
other right because they do have such
different perspectives to bring all the
more reason that it's important I
mentioned part of what was coming up
when we were all sharing what we need
and when I was finding like commonality
and everything everyone said for sure
that like oh yeah that's also a need of
mine I also like cuddly animals I also
need safety and I would add to comfort
but also the differences that that like
although I have elders in my
I absolutely look up to I don't like
having there be a like group of people
that just because they've been on the
earth longer have more experience to
give when I know people who are 25 who
know more than people who are 90 and
then I know a ton of people who are you
know 50 67 everyone has something
important to impart but it's not that
the elders because I want society to
elders I want individuals who want
elders to have and I want Mentors
whatever the ages right depending on the
subject depends you know and what it is
I want mentors there I just don't want
it to necessarily be based on age for me
but that doesn't mean that for other
people it's not necessarily that but it
that there can be to say everyone has to
respect elders I don't respect everyone
but everyone has to do this everyone has
to do that is to me never gonna be the
answer it's like what do I need and how
can i facilitate what I need but also
how can i facilitate what you need right
like we can create a system of
invitation to elders to be mentors right
a situation where there's more of an
invitation which is both more the elders
to show up are gonna be more elderly I
don't want to say that like more able to
impart and wanting to impart wisdom
right because they're they're choosing
to be part of that dynamic and then as
societies just yeah we need some
intergenerational connection that
doesn't need to always know Jubilee I
really appreciate that and it was like
helping me to get clarity of you know
what is it that I'm what is it that I'm
seeking and it's it's almost like
wanting wanting to have someone who can
set an example of how to move through
the the stages of life you know and
maybe that's the wisdom that I you know
it's like how did you you know it's like
how not not what needs to get done but
like how did you do this how did you
move through those these complicated
stages of stepping up and taking
responsibility that's yeah
hmm yeah it seems to me that this needs
to be it's you know it's not just the
presence of elders in the society but
it's also the presence of things like
rituals and rites of passage you know
what I mean which which which have
meaning and the elders are sort of not
in charge of that but but they're the
figureheads of that right because
they've been around for a long time and
so they're you know they're there's a
solemnity and a gravitas that the elders
bring through that kind of ceremony you
know which is and so yeah I think in
conjunction something else if you don't
mind which is I was in a thing with
Bonita Roy a week or so ago she was
talking about power and the what I'm
trying to get in on here is the sort of
wants and needs things she did this is
she she she described the power as a
interaction between so it's like an
equation right power equals capacity
well
resources and skills she called it R
divided by needs and once right and so
the greater your resources and
capacities the less your needs and wants
are the more powerful you are kind of
things right the more personal power you
have and so what I want to sort of talk
about is the difference between needs
yeah what do I need versus what do I
want where is that boundary between a
wants and the need and because one of
the points she made I thought was really
interesting if you're basing your like
the sort of Maslow idea if your base
needs are taken care of then all you
have left on the on the bottom line is
once right and once in the presence of
your needs having been met can fuel an
increase in skills and capacities right
because you know I want to do this and
therefore I need to acquire these skills
and resources in order to be able to do
this right and so you can actually fuel
a greater you know a like an exponential
increase in personal power because you
are your needs are met your wants are
being becoming an increase in capacities
and so your your ability to act in the
world right win with with conviction and
with powers is is is forever increasing
so anyway yeah that and once a need
what's the difference
yeah I specifically I think they're very
intertwined once it needs and it could
easily be what do I want instead of what
do I need but I think because they're so
deeply intertwined
you can't answer one without answering
the other there wants that when you get
them or don't get them they become a
need that it's like okay I actually do
need to live near nature even though I
won't you know necessarily die without
it I'm at my optimal near it and then
there's all the consumer-driven wands
that even if I get them they don't
fulfill anything I think they were in
need but they weren't really a need
until they get it and then I'm like oh
wait that wasn't ones that didn't
fulfill anything that sometimes in just
seeking the answers they prove to be
wants or needs you don't necessarily
need to answer at first is what I was I
was coming to before before this session
what that brought up for me was John for
Vicki talks about the difference between
having needs and being needs and so the
example he said is needing to be mature
and having a car payment like that we've
confused those needs like having a car
payment is meeting the need to be mature
and instead of understanding that
there's a need to be mature or the other
one is a need to meeting the need to be
in be in love by having sex it's
confusing those two things I think that
there's a and yeah I don't know quite
how that ties in but it's it's a similar
thing of like there's the need to be
something and there's an and then
there's the need to have something and
whether or not and and have those things
been confused or transpose and I think
for a lot of our current culture and I
know me personally I confuse the two at
times
silence just factually yes another
example of curse news is even even
simpler right that the need if you're
dehydrated the need for hydration
becomes the want for a can of coke sort
of thing right and I mean that's a
pretty simple line to follow the need
for hydration is very real but actually
the coke is not meeting that need if
anything is making it worse you know it
also just see what I mean and so yeah
that's the option if you're needing or
trying to deal with with the wand is
transportation well a car fulfills that
but in its meeting of your need any car
would fulfill that right it's your need
or you know to look like an adult to
have prestige to get to that specific
color so in figuring out what piece of
that is an actual need it's eight you're
able to I think be happier with anything
that meets that need or not because it's
not meeting the other neither you're
becoming you're either unconscious or
conscious of Dave Chappelle has a theory
that guys don't actually like nice cars
women like nice cars and therefore guys
get nice cars to impress women I feel
like what up depicts and how everyone
sends pics despite the fact no woman
ever has said she wants like but they're
all sending them it's like we don't talk
about there are some women out there who
solicit dick pics they were definitely
so I'm not saying I'm not cool number on
it but I guarantee you it happens I'm
just saying it happens say there are
women out there that don't like men with
nice cars because that car is more
important to them yeah it was a joke
said that
[Laughter]
yeah well I think it but it's against
you you know it's a confusion of like
you know a need for maybe status and
cars some at some point coming to
represent status I was actually I was
actually something I was thinking about
a while ago because there was someone
that I was in a relationship with for a
while and like he was always trading up
for a nicer car and like but now my
question when I see somebody driving a
nice car is how big is their car payment
and how much does that impact their
credit ratio like that's the question I
like so now but it's but it's a funny
thing how those things got you know like
I think the the conversation of what do
I need is ties back to like what have I
confused with me it's like I need
someone like like as a woman I might
have at some point in my past confused
the need for a man who had a particular
status or a particular car as that
representing the status that he had and
that and there being that confusion a
yeah which is also so is bringing up as
any other questions the difference
between want to need like what I think I
want in a partner or community first is
what I actually mean in a part in her
community and saying within myself want
to be versus when I actually need to be
which is myself and to work within my
own limitations without putting
judgements on it and let yeah every all
of them did you're fine
I mean sometimes things that you need
you really really don't want you know
what I mean for example if you're a drug
addicts and you need rehab right
don't wanna you really
you really don't want it last thing you
want is to go into rehab just want to do
more drugs right so you know this is
yeah they can be in direct conflict with
each other I was just thinking exactly
that as you were talking to connect in
whatever way we're addicted to something
isn't ready to say no to in it's your
family or society doing it right there
are the ones with the need for you to
give it up even if you actually have a
biological need to give it up because
it's killing you possibly yeah we're not
ready you're not ready and yeah if you
hate it it becomes even if you need it
because it's not a want it's not gonna
work in the same regard it's like
waiting til because I know with my
addiction cycle I always get to a place
where I'm like this is shitty I don't
want this and then I want to change and
that's the catalyst to change and every
time I go through that cycle it has less
and less strong hold on my life but I
mean there are definitely things that I
both then I do need and yet I don't want
and so I don't necessarily do them and
then there's things in my life I both
need and want and still don't do them I
really want to play the intro to that
Rolling Stones song here there's the
perfect try to just just sing it yeah
you can't always get for the first time
the sinking of sounds somewhat worked us
 great song well great open I
mean that one of the great all-time
intros to a song right yeah what was
coming up for me when you're talking
about that you believe is like there's
there's the part of me that wants to be
surrounded by people who are not who
won't judge me who but then there's a
but then there's another maybe that's
the maybe that's the want and at times
it's a need but then at in other
contexts being around people who are non
judgement
there's nobody to push like sometimes I
need a little bit of push and
encouragement and so like you know it's
like my needs might change from moment
to moment it's like in one moment I
might need somebody who's going to be
like just accept me exactly the way I am
and then the next minute I need somebody
who's gonna say okay now what are you
gonna like push you know but let's let's
push through this
and yeah so finding like and and I guess
ultimately it's being able to on a
moment-by-moment basis connect with you
know at the base of it is I need the
ability to connect with and advocate for
my needs
now I feel like I'm kind of like when
Eric was talking about Benina Roy was
talking about the power I want to see
what this actual formula is cuz it's
like reason or resources and skill and
the needs and wants underneath I don't
remember what that was bringing up for
me now that I've said that are you just
saying Kara no whatever it'll come back
it's okay it's really cool though right
because a pathway to personal to the
increasing of personal power is to
reduce your wants and needs right which
you actually have agency over you
there's some times you can't do a great
deal about resources skills you have
some agency over depending on how much
time you've got but wants and needs you
really do have sync and can make
immediate inroads into study and really
examine do I actually need this in my
life you know a car is a really good
example that we was talking about cars
before that's a really good example lots
and lots and lots of people could live
without cars quite easily if they really
thought about it
uh-huh you know who are you if you don't
have a car right all of a sudden you've
lost as again whoever it was said stasis
if you don't have a car you are you know
in that strata a society that doesn't
own cars kind of thing I was gonna say
about the needs and wants when Kira was
talking was that those needs and wants
that I have a certain level of safety
and comfort and if it
not met I can't deal with any of the
outside chaos and so I need a certain
level of my my needs for safety and
comfort being met before I can fully be
present and accepting of the lessons
that come from conflict and period like
people pushing back right if it was
happening constantly I wouldn't be able
to handle of it because the universe is
always gonna eventually give me someone
that I'm gonna you know come up against
it's gonna give me a lesson I can deal
with that because of the underlining
safety and comfort that I've surrounded
myself with and we I think we have
different needs for that level of safety
and comfort some of us have a much a
much higher one yet yes we can bring
down especially our once but also I
don't know how much control we have over
it like I don't want to need marijuana
but there's a piece that does and so
until I deal with that it's not it's a
no one else's power to deal with that
it's mostly in mine but I still don't
have complete power over it it's still
for society be like well you should have
control over this this is the one you
can control I don't know takes away my
safety in and comfort no that's I don't
know that was just well I think this you
know goes back back to what Eric was
saying that pointing that direction
going back to the like reducing the
wants and needs but it's like figuring
out where that edge is you know it's
like you know that you know there's the
the meme of like you're like here here's
your comfort zone and here's where
growth happens I think it's not quite
that extreme I think you know there
there's another one that's like okay
here's your comfort zone and then here's
the like challenge realm and then here's
the growing realm and you know it's like
and that changes on a you know that can
change on a moment-by-moment if you know
day to day if not moment by moment basis
so like in one moment I I might be like
feeling really challenged and then the
next minute something subtle
something subtle could change and all of
a sudden it's become overwhelming and I
need to know how to get myself back to
grounded as quickly as possible and so I
think like being able to like have a a
practice that helps me to ground is is a
huge part of that it's like okay a
husband and I are having a conversation
about something and all of a sudden it
goes into a realm of like oh look we
landed on one of our one either one of
our or the other ones landmines and that
we didn't know existed and we have to
figure out how to you know how do you
navigate that and how do you stay ground
like how do I stay grounded when that
happens
I was also thinking about that equation
in terms of how the culture we live in
dis empowers us because it's
simultaneously amplifies our wants and
needs right by shoving adverts down our
throat and and you know creating this
environment where you have to have stuff
to be happy and so amplifies our wants
and needs while simultaneously reducing
our access to resources and reducing our
skills right we are not encouraged to
have a wide range of survival skills for
example right I mean you know how many
kids know how to start a fire now how
many no kids know how to skin a rabbit
or whatever you know what I mean so yeah
that's it seems to me that that's if you
accept any sort of validity in that
equation then our culture is set up to
strip us of all of our power I just did
that formula mathematically and if your
resources equal your needs if you
actually have just as much resources as
what you need then those cancel out on
the top and the bottom you might as well
in which case you just have skills over
once equals power how skilled are you
over what you want in life and how
that's kind of CAP that's kind of game a
that's anyway I'm gonna say with that
later but it's I mean I think it can be
simplified that equation power equals
capacities divided by once and once
includes needs and you just you just
leave it at that
you know the hole the hole but all
desires whatever if you want to put
wants and needs together into desire
something like that but yeah it can be
it can be stripped down but then but the
basic point I mean this is what monks do
isn't it is they all the aesthetics
aesthetics I should say rather than
monks necessary this is exactly what
they do is they strip their needs right
down
basically to zero you know they don't
need to eat they don't need to drink
they don't need to sleep you know they
don't need clothes they don't need
shelter you know what I mean this is
this is exactly what they do is they
stripping because if the bottom line
becomes zero your power becomes infinite
right any number divided by zero is
infinite so if you're if your wants and
needs can actually be stripped down to
zero you are
being of infinite power just heard
acknowledged my mouth was completely
wrong that it's not how you deal added
to both sides not the top and bottom
well Erik what comes up for me is having
like been a quite a bit of time in the
Buddhist world and understanding that
you know the Buddha went through his
aesthetic period and then discovered
that that wasn't actually where the
answer it was in that middle way and so
you know I think there is a you know I I
might push back a little bit on the
assertion or not push back but like
reframe it slightly of right now our
culture is set up in such a way as to
help us figure out what our middle way
is like with that to help us figure that
out very optimistic you but I like it
because then I have the choice of like
you know if I if I set it up as the
culture you know that this is this way
the culture is and I don't have a choice
then that puts me in an incredibly
disempowered position whereas if I can
see it as you know I'm being mirrored
back you know like anytime I venture
into Facebook it's like venturing into
the jungle of like here by this by this
what is this and you know when in
reality it's like then I get to work on
that muscle of okay
is that something that I actually need
is that something you know it's like
there are some times there are some some
ads where I'm like huh I got you know I
might actually click on that one most of
the time if I actually needed it you
wouldn't need an ad to tell you that you
know yeah like an it like an example I
was looking for I was looking for a type
of desk and then I hadn't actually
bought one yet and then a Facebook ad
came in with a desk that I was like oh
that's actually kind of what I'm looking
for versus the ones I had been looking
at
not saying like in that case it was one
of those ones where because most of the
time I find something I buy it and then
Facebook gives me ads for something I
just bought in that case it was like a
more optimal version of what I was
looking for but you know most of the
time it's like okay is that you know I
like for a long time I got I would get
down on myself if I if I fell for ads on
Facebook so yeah but I
it's like figuring out like like working
that like all those ads work out a
muscle of resistance like can I resist
being sold things what about you Shiloh
what you're saying kind of reminds me of
the conversation I remember having in
college we were talking about needs and
a lot of the students especially the
younger one were talking about how they
needed computers like that was very it
was a need you're like no that's a want
and they were like no I need it because
you can't really function in society now
without it how can I get a job so it's
interesting how you can all be
intertwined and it's not necessarily a
meme but to be successful you'll have a
different set of needs then maybe just
to survive
that's an interesting boundary example
the computer because you do kind of need
it right but it is you don't need it to
actually survive but you do if you want
to live in this world you do need one
yeah that's an it's a really good one
it's right on that boundary isn't it
between an actual need and just then I
think society sets up things as a
warrants right computers started as an
absolute ones right they were a luxury
they wrote lawns and then it becomes
something that gives you a leg up so
then you want it which is also a need
and then it becomes mainstream and
everyone has one and then you're at a
real disadvantage not having it like
right now everyone's at home
luckily the teacher is called and we're
like do your kids have you know
electronics I think they have some to
lend out if they don't have
but that level right like they don't all
have access to that actually and so you
can't anyway the society sets up once
and then they become needs on a society
of a level that now if you don't have a
computer you're at a disadvantage and
although it's not a need you can survive
without one
it gets you access to to a job money and
that gets you access to all the things
you do need because if you don't
necessarily have the skills and
resources electricity is a really good
example of what you've just outlined do
believe you might back in the day it was
very much a want it was fun it was a
novelty but now it's very much an ease
right mm-hmm
if you don't have an extra see now you
are at a massive disadvantage
all kinds of stuff you cannot do and
cannot have if you don't have
electricity and at the same time there's
a lot of people who opt out and don't
have electricity on purpose to not
participate in this really being a
version of humanity when you say a lot
what you mean maybe they're actually
their lives in whole and fulfilling
because there's also part of answering
these questions right and of what do I
need it's like I need electricity but
you know if electricity went away
tomorrow I wouldn't kill myself like oh
good I would really really miss it but I
wouldn't why I'm from it you know that
electricity is refrigeration right and
you know your fridge in your freezer
that's it so in two days you've got no
food with no electricity for example
right it's that you know it's not it's
not just the lights it's it's a whole
bunch of stuff what came up for me was
like the Amish and how they are very
selective about what technologies that
the greater society implements they will
adopt and it's in it's fascinating I was
reading a book that was
um the title of the book was called what
technology wants and it was talking
about the technology as a sort of a
living organism and and it but it talked
about the adoption of technologies by
the Amish and not been the process that
they go through this person had spent
quite a bit of time talking to them and
like one of the things I didn't know is
the Amish have adopted the use of GMOs
because there there was a specific thing
that it was a something very specific
that they deemed as it being a enough of
a benefit that eventually they adopted
it and and I was like I didn't know that
you know like a and you know they they
and so it was one of those things of
like because they have this specific
evaluation process of there might be
somebody who who gets one for a
particular reason like in this kit the
other example that they were talking
about is someone in the Amish community
had a cell phone because he was part of
the volunteer fire department and so he
he got it in order to be able to be can
connect contacted for participating in
the volunteer fire department within the
community and and but the elders were
being which is interesting that it
brings it back to the conversation about
elders being very deliberate about
evaluating how what ultimately was being
used to decide if it was something that
the greater community wanted to adopt
it's not Amish wide though is it I mean
they can make very different decisions
one one small community to another I
mean monkeys you might doctor particular
technology and another community said
nope that's not for us so is that I
really I really like that I really like
the freedom of their tonight I know a
little bit I haven't read that book when
I know a little bit about a couple of
articles about this and they they're
overriding thing is about the community
right there's it is it going to increase
togetherness and and you know bombs
within the community or not that's that
sort of the oh there was something these
washing machines like they rejected
washing machines right because it would
mean
people wouldn't be out doing their
washing and hanging there washing up
together and it would reduce community
ties and they're all they weren't going
to have washing machine something like
that they didn't mind the labor saving
but it was the dis it was the
possibility for reduced connection that
they didn't like something like that
that's right the humane thing I think
was about it's saving labor which
allowed them to have more community time
or something like that it that it that
there was something that it there was
something it saved them a bunch of time
on which allowed them to be more to
participate more in community just
because that's like a beautiful example
of why people want elders and also why I
in no way want elders just like it's I
love the idea of wisdom deciding on
something especially based on our shared
values and I want to be able to decide
can I use the washing machine right like
you gave me your guidance and then I
decide for myself but that's a very
individualistic and not about the
community right I want the washing
machine you all can go in communicate
will you wash your clothes
I'll get connections some other way but
it's that like feeling power over as
opposed to community with that's my like
that's because it's beautiful that that
works yeah doesn't community with
sometimes involve putting what you want
aside as being part of the community
right I mean I again it's it's it's it's
you know there's a balance right you've
got are you gonna let people be
themselves but at the same time people
have to give up some of that because it
doesn't you think there's a line there
absolutely is and I mean there's certain
things I would give up and wouldn't give
up and that's because if if the central
body decides then there might always be
a deal-breaker for me right but if I'm
not necessary part of the central body
but I get to choose so we have decided
washing machines aren't under our
guidance but that might be the one thing
I do because it makes me more of a
community contributing member right if I
have time to do this then I can you know
like it might make
me a better person and able to do it and
so I can choose different than the
guidance is different to me then right
but we've decided this community our
intentional community we have some
guidance around you know like kids and
tablets in the common house and then
there's also like right I don't live
here I can't send my kid home to do this
like there's a certain level of if it
doesn't work for you we can work around
it that doesn't happen generally in
those type of communities because it is
about you've you've someone given up
your individuality for the group rather
than at being a feedback this is the
guidance and then yes we understand that
if you're not doing that there's
probably a reason why and there's a
point that breaks right if everyone's
doing that all of the time and
everyone's not following 99% of the
stuff 99% of the time why do you have
rules but if everyone doesn't follow 2%
or 5% but it's a different 5% right
between us there can still be cohesion
just depends on what those rules are and
how stringent they need to be well and
the the part that I the thing that
popped up in in my head with that is you
know talking about the Amish in terms of
that like because they have that that
thing probably gonna say it wrong but
Rumspringa where they they leave the
community for a year and go out into the
world and see all of the things that
they you know that they aren't you
basically making the choice to give up
by staying at part of the community like
there's a the choice is still there yeah
and it's you know and from my
understanding some people to you know
some people don't go back yeah many
numbers are from my understanding the
majority go back right yeah that's
really cool I mean I really so it's a
year is it I knew about it I didn't know
it was as long as a year so they spend a
whole year just right okay that's very
cool as I say that that reintroduces
choice and agency back into it right i'm
i prepared to give up these trappings of
the outside world for the intimacy of
community you know what I mean which
which is actually more important to me
and making that decision in full
consciousness that's very cool I like
that I don't like run track
as well the concept of it yes mm-hmm
and the year is good as well right here
gives you a proper taste I mean a year
any sort of indoctrination or whatever
that you've had a chance to get free of
that and make eyes wide open sure it's
like yeah it's very cool I like that lot
well and that the like you know the the
concept of you know it's like the the
air what's it called the year where
you'd like skip and you don't go
straight to college you like take a gap
year that's it that's the word I was
thinking of like that idea of like doing
some exploring before you make a
decision or a commitment to what it is
that you know you want and I think the
unfortunate thing that happens in our
greater culture like with with the
concept of room spring and like you you
go out and then you come back and it's
pretty you basically give up all of
those things and that you were had
exposure to and you know come back into
your community and you're fully accepted
back into that community but like with
that gap year unless you have like
family who can afford it for a lot of
people they go out they get expenses
they get a car and then they can't go
back to the they don't end up going back
to college because they've got bills to
pay because the structure isn't as
solidified I think as it is in the
concept of Rumspringa it's like you know
if you're wealthy yeah it's a little bit
more defined but if you're not yeah you
you you go out into the world and you
start building a crutch moment or a
wrench or whatever and then I don't want
to go back to the authoritarian parent
you know living with my parents in order
to go to college or being under their
thumb to go to college yeah do you know
how they support themselves on Mon frère
they get jobs right and like pay their
own rent and
I'm not entirely sure I I don't know all
of the details I think quite a lot of
money the Amish I daresay they can they
can help with financing they've got lots
and lots of money I believe do they give
them an allowance especially with the
men that takes place like a lot of
alcoholism and addiction that develops
during that year obviously might be part
of it if they get an allowance right and
so they don't so it's like they go from
being Amish and working 24/7 basically
with community to being connected with
other people who either on Rumspringa or
chose not to go back to community and
that's a very like very night and day
lifestyle right working constantly -
okay well now I have nothing but time on
our hands and board and there's this
thing called alcohol that we've never
tried before yeah and I googled it it's
actually two years the Amish I thought
alcohol was allowed do they not drink no
as far as I know they don't know
intoxicants of any kind
yeah they smoke they smoke darling I'm
pretty sure I've seen them walking
around with pipes they smoke don't they
yeah and and perhaps your question Eric
it looks like 80 percent go back right
okay thank you for that I was curious
thank you that's actually I wonder if
cuz cults right like what we consider a
cult for so I don't know how you
distinguish in a religion to call but
like they where they do use the cult
tactics right but they don't let you
leave they don't let you talk to people
because then the outside world might
entice you back how many people from any
calls would leave spend six months to a
year away with their family because it's
the opposite right your family's on the
outside and choose to go back whereas
this is they do have your family in your
community you can still be a part of
that if you choose not to go back up for
Rumspringa but at this not the same way
right not your kids are gonna be raised
with their kids and so it's it's very
enticing your culture in your community
being on one side and you know this
other other part of the other side but I
love the idea that's an interesting
question you raised
much context are they allowed with the
community if they choose not to go back
I mean they can resume early go back and
visit their parents and have lunch with
them or whatever - there are their kids
welcome their kids go back into the
community when they grow up if they want
to what's what's what's the deal with
all that you know you're a few people
grow up not Amish and convert to that so
but maybe because your cousins might be
there I dunno if you choose not to go
back you can still have contact with
your family but if you choose to go back
and then fall there's a thing where you
just cease - I didn't exist they'll
ignore you which is like a death right
it's like well they which was this
documentary I was watching that was they
this guy got that done to him because of
his he was reading the Bible in English
and they were it's like old German that
they read it in and there was this whole
saga for a bunch of them but then like
when his wife went to church but she
wasn't kicked out they were like sent a
pie home that was like like like Oh what
if someone else eats it like that's like
like just this like really their kid got
cancer and they went and like clean her
house and did all this stuff but like
they still kept that this guy still
didn't exist at the same time they were
still very supportive of them in their
time of need it was very beautiful
documentary that I have no idea what it
was even called support I find it again
I'm fascinated that our conversation has
has a conversation of needs has gone to
a place of talking about the Amish
Rumspringa like well you know I mean
that's an interesting like evolution of
how that is how that has come about is
like you know I think that that brings
out something like that the right Eric
you mentioned the rites of passage it's
like those how do you know I think that
that is actually a thing of like yeah
being able to have those like kind of
more sacred or intentional rites of
passage than we have as a culture
currently
yeah I mean this is that notion of kind
of committing to a path you know what I
mean that's part of maturity isn't it is
is okay I understand who I am and what
I'm here to do and I'm now going to
commit myself to earnestly pursuing that
that vision for myself as best I can
something like that right and so a rite
of passage we wear and I mean rice
passage tend to occur at particular
chronological moments right have
particular ages or whatever right there
at the occurrence of particular ends but
it doesn't have to be like that and and
you know because you've gone through a
ceremony and committed to a path you
know commit decided to commit yourself
doesn't mean necessarily that you're
attached to it the life right and can't
ever leave that path you know like ten
years down the road you know what
actually I think I'd be better suited to
this and maybe you take another ceremony
or not whatever but but it's you know it
it should be a serious commitment but it
should also not be like a life-or-death
commitment right like you're you're
you're shunned by the Society for
changing your mind down the road a
little bit that that that also is too
much so again it's finding that balance
right between being sufficiently weighty
and serious that it has meaning and
consequence but at the same time not
being a prison and they seem to be
somewhat diabolically like we're we
don't have that right of passage because
you can leave your life at any time
right you go to university pants popped
out of money to do it but like you could
not be a doctor and not be a lawyer you
can stop being a lawyer an engineer even
though you have all this debt and all
this no obligations no payback and so
you can't really have that choice
whereas because the Amish have such a
high price to pay when you break the
rules later that they meet you know what
I mean they need this like drastic two
years of you can try this before you
make that decision and we feel like you
have that choice your whole life so you
don't need that drastic part and it
would be great to have the best of both
worlds for like you get this time to
find out what you really want I mean
there's this idea of what are you gonna
be when you grow up what are you gonna
go to school and become and my kids like
I don't know I don't see both really
knows it doesn't know books I don't ask
because I'm like you be it now why would
you wait till you grow up to be
you're a ballerina dance if you're you
know an artist create events do what you
want to do now why are you waiting
and yet then that doesn't honor the
rites of passage like you know she's
wearing makeup at 7:00 because she wants
to do it it's her body and I'm like I
don't have a reason to say no like
there's no right of like when is this
allowed well it's your body so it's
allowed when I said it's your see it's
we lied when you say so it's like the
need for rites of passage and you know
our society with all of its freedom and
all of its they're not mutually
exclusive Jude I mean using using your
example of your daughter there right
yeah no today she wants to be a
ballerina so go dance go dance and then
maybe you know in a few days you don't
want to be a ballerina I want to be a
fireman or whatever you know what I mean
and and and but the at the rite of
passage she's seven right so this is
this is perfectly fine she's exploring
and playing and figuring out the world
and all that and then that's exactly
what she should be doing
older she's tried all of this stuff out
he's narrowed down the things that she
likes and doesn't like maybe now is
ready to write this is this is the path
I want to set myself on at least for now
right because also the rites of passage
are only the mainstream rites of passage
right graduating going to university
your first house your driver's license
these kind of things and I was thinking
when they were showing um you know those
news stories that come on to cope at 19
like here's someone thinking
innovatively and doing it was a drive
through graduation ceremony I was like
thank God like you imagine not having a
rite of passage at all like we have so
few in society and this one is just like
like at least at least a drive through
is both its unique you're the only year
to do that you're the first year and
also but like all of them should be
doing that like I can't believe there's
any high school or any university that's
not doing anything because they're
really specially her high school because
you could go to different colleges and
grads whereas theoretically you only
graduate from high school once and for
them not to get that rite of passage and
people giving birth right now and
marriages and they just don't look
anything like the very few rites of
passage that we do have I have a niece
who's a senior in high school right now
and you know my sister's been trying to
figure out how to handle that
I just want to it's coming up to the
hour this is our fourth question to
explore out of five so next week we're
exploring the question what am i ready
and capable of giving up giving up so
out of those five right it's the burning
question it's like what am I willing to
release to let go of and I would love if
the three of you were back because I was
I was saying before we started that the
Eric and shila's comes the last two I
think here you came to the first one so
the fact that it's the same people
rather regularly I think would be really
powerful to end it with with the same
people but that's just an invitation
just put it on the universe that would
love for you for you to come back I'm
saying no it's not an invitation is an
obligation turn up or else or else
you're never invited back ever what's
the what's the last question what do you
what are you ready to give up but I feel
like ready and capable is the question
because it's like if you're not capable
of it it doesn't matter and if you're
capable but not ready it doesn't matter
so what are you ready and capable of
giving it greater I was just concerned
another way of asking it might be what
am i cleaning too well only because that
doesn't really that's not with the other
four it's like I'm what am i brilliant
to release right because yes it's the
other part of that right for sure
different way of framing to me anyway I
certainly find that an easy way to frame
it in terms of answering it the
interesting thing is is I'm part of a
mastermind like a meta mastermind group
and so the idea is like you form a group
of like three people friend and you do a
two-week sprint and the idea is what's
one habit I want to add one what's one
thing I want to give up and what's one
and a gift and then you might pick one
or do you know if you're in a group
where you really feel like you can you
might do all three but it's kind of that
similar idea of you know what's
something I want to add like adding a
meditation practice
in practice or something like that
what's something I want to give up what
something that I want to like watching
that you know giving up Netflix or
giving up one night a week of Netflix or
something like that and then the gift
and it's like so you're that question of
of what do you want to give up maybe
think of that so that'll be something to
talk about next week I hopefully will be
there but I'm gonna be traveling so
we'll see the gift is very much in the
spirit of the burn as well so I actually
really like what you just said Kyra yeah
it's there's a way to straighten those
three and we're in question I'm down
with it but the idea is just it's the
fourth question of the bird right of
like what why don't have all of this are
you ready like one of you of their
people of your purpose of what's not
working in your life that you maybe is
now a watch and was a need and like what
are you aware of and ready to go let go
of right in just technology not honest
it doesn't again these things aren't
ever fully answered it isn't about
Nestle giving up Netflix one night a
week I'm never giving up that's why nerd
my cold dead head but yes you're on bed
back next week that would be great and
then I would like your feedback on these
five questions I would like to do an
eight-week session of having and the
fact that it was the same people it
wasn't planned that way but the same
people kept showing up which is now that
I'm focusing on creating maybe creating
these little groups it is kind of like
we were a little group that you can
watch and we had some amount of
relationship before we started because
of the the idea cafes but still the fact
that the four of us were together you
can see more of that as we go he's cool
mm-hmm I like it all right let's go
does anyone have any clothes the closing
thoughts they would like to share before
saying goodbye to YouTube by YouTube
aren't
you