welcome to the stoah the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge what's happening now
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
all right everyone we're gonna begin
welcome to the stoah I am your host and
the the Stewart of the stoic Peter
Lindbergh
I run a stoic group here in Toronto
Canada and we obviously can't meet right
now so I'd launched this space which I'm
viewing as a digital campfire where we
can Co hear and dialogue about what
matters most at the nice edge at this
moment and I'm also doing this as an
experimental space inviting a lot of
friends and people I trust to do all
sorts of different activities practices
psycho technologies and today my friend
Jared Jaynes from the both end podcast
it's going to do a meditative experiment
there's this meme going around I think
it started in Canada called care
mongering so instead of fear-mongering
like you know let's replace it with care
mongering and Jared is gonna do a
meditative spin on that so I'll hand it
to him in a moment it's going to be
about 30 minutes today's session and
then I'll do some closing announcements
so that being said I'll hand it over to
Jared all righty
hmm can you see me all right
direct I thought I used the nice mic as
opposed to my little Apple things so my
beard isn't my courting beard isn't
scratching all over and things but yeah
well well thanks for coming today
so as Peter said there's this meme of
about care mongering and I think it's
powerful to me in a lot of ways but the
main way being that in these times of
kind of uncertainty and adversity when
it comes to the actual way that we act
in the world to work together to move
forward
I think care needs to be at the center
of our experience or maybe the
predominant place that we act from and
so when I think about this the funny
thing is is that so much of our
experiences is both kind of a mind and
body thing we're not just Minds if we if
we get lost and thinking all the time it
can be we can gonna find ourselves
outside of our body and not knowing
where we're acting from and so and as
you can imagine care usually comes from
the heart center you know there's even
certain cultures in the past that
thought that the self was located behind
the chest not the head this is a Western
predominant Western concept that we live
from and so it's possible to kind of
live from multiple areas in our body and
so what I want to do today with the
meditation which will be right around my
thinking I'm thinking about 15 minutes
is talk a bit about how care can act in
its most kind of wholesome fashion and
couldn't focus just on that that space
but I think one of the important things
to realize at this moment is that
there's going to be a lot of other
things in our experience that are
demanding our attention and we can find
ourselves acting from them as well and I
think when care is is most informed it's
it's it's getting feedback from all the
aspects of our experience mental
physical and and so and there's a few
predominant areas that I've noticed kind
of very overtly in the way that people
are communicating these days the first
one is kind of the most foundational
human one which is just this raw sense
of survival right this is our gut this
is this is the thing that grounds us to
the earth and in times of like this
where we kind of are reminded of some of
our fragility that that we won't last
forever we can this the survival
mechanisms and sense to to come up and
that usually comes like feels like it's
our you know maybe our stomachs moving
up into our throats or something like
that and and so this is going to kick in
a bunch of survival mechanisms and that
can be very valuable you know we need to
make sure that we're healthy that were
we have what we need to to be careful
toward other people as well and so this
is an important part of the equation but
if we get constricted in this this space
where we're only acting from our gut
then you know it starts to feed back
there's a feedback loop that starts and
when you start maybe being a little bit
more in a paddock this usually
represents in one of three ways fight
flight or freeze right some people are
depending on everybody's predisposition
they can fall into those categories if
they're only activating this survival
part of their experience the second so
then
moving up to the heart center one of the
things that you know predominantly it is
about the connection to the larger world
and mostly in our experience because
there were social creatures that means
other people but but it definitely goes
to nature as well and right now there
might be some really challenging aspects
of this part of our experience in the
sense that you know we're kind of self
eyes isolating ourselves so we might be
feeling a little lonely we are hearing
stories of people who are struggling and
feeling a little bit sad and and these
can be hard to sit with but this is kind
of this is the yin to the yang like this
this is what comes with being in
communion with other people and being
able to act from care and so so yeah if
we find ourselves in a challenging spot
with our heart we know that we can act
in the positive opposite of of this of
what it's like to be acting from the
space and then also include some of the
the gut stuff too you know sometimes the
the best way to care is just to make
sure that you're healthy that you're
your family's healthy something like
that right and then the last space I
want to talk about is the the head right
this is where most of us live for spend
most of our times and I think a lot of
people might be for the first time in a
while getting out of their head you know
I might realized that they were kind of
daydreaming and thinking about all these
future possibilities and the way things
were going to go and now there's so much
uncertainty that it's kind of pushing us
back into our bodies and I can be a bit
jarring and I think the head when it's
in its most natural state it's very open
right so in times like this because it's
very open or when it's very open there's
also a lot of confusion
these kind of things come together and
when we only spend time in our head that
confusion can create a lot of want for
certainty we can look to certain
ideologies or dogmas or things that
comfort us a little bit and that can be
helpful
to a certain degree but really I feel
like the head is more its role is more
to direct our attention think about the
consequences of certain actions and and
certain scenarios and what we should be
doing but at the end of the day like
once we're ready to actually make a step
and act it has to include the rest of
the body
and so if we get lost only in our heads
we're going to feel quite aimless quite
confused and and if we're resistant to
some of those elements - like confusion
it can actually create more of the
process right you know one of the weird
things that if we're running into
challenging parts of our experience will
usually find that the things that we're
resisting are the things that are the
most present in our experience so if
we're really resisting being uncertain
there's going to be a lot of uncertainty
for really resistant being compassionate
toward others then we're going to feel a
lot of sorrow and if we're you know soso
and if we're denying our survival
maybe that's by being reckless or being
running away from the problem or not
taking it serious or any of those things
yeah I can be can be tough so that being
said so this that's kind of like a quick
I tried to summarize I know it's a bit
all over the place but hopefully you get
the general sense of what its act like
what it's like to act from each of these
places and the key here being that when
we're we're moving forward I think it's
important to make sure that all of them
are being considered all of them are
part of the picture so not to get
centered in one space so we're gonna
kind of take a tour in this meditation
of each of these areas
and in the future you know if certain
areas are you've less contact with or
there's some confusion around it those
might be some some things to spend some
time with in the mornings or nights or
whenever you have some time it doesn't
have to be anything super formal you
just sit down and kind of get in touch
with it and hopefully we can this whole
two or give you a bit of an idea of what
exploring some of those the sensations
in that space are mm-hmm one little
caveat here I would say is just to make
sure that not to make sure but to strive
to notice when what we're feeling
becomes less part of the focus and more
about and it becomes more about labeling
what it is so as soon as we start to get
very conceptual about what we're feeling
that might be a time to realize that
we're getting lost in our head maybe get
back down into our body and so it's
really important to be able to process
the stuff and to allow ourselves to feel
fully from each of these spaces by by
being with this in sensory experience
and so not as much about the ideas about
them at least when we're sitting
reflection is good time afterwards a
good thing to do afterwards but yeah
so yeah I think that's I think it's a
good kind of little foundation one kind
of quick little I guess
disclaimer would be just that since we
are going to be exploring some of these
places that could be kind of sensitive
if you don't feel like you're ready to
kind of like really dive into your
emotions then maybe this isn't the right
meditation at the time for you and
there's a lot of things that you can
find I'm sure right now calm is and a
bunch of other apps are available and
finding a more soothing soothing
practice is very very easy so this one
might be a little it could be
challenging we could push us to go in
some areas that we might not be super
comfortable with but I really do think
this is what it's going to be required
for us to act fully as we move forward
so yeah all right so yeah it looks like
we're just at 15 perfect
just set a timer here
just sit up nice and straight
make sure your your spine both from the
very crown of your head all the way down
to your seat into the ground just try to
try and imagine it being as straight as
humanly possible and that might mean
your chin can fall forward a little bit
more than usual might even feel like
you're looking down a little bit but
really just keeping a very clear focus
on that spine being straight now just
take a couple deep breaths each breath
kind of taking in our surroundings
becoming aware of what is happening in
this moment maybe even bringing some
gratitude to it and then releasing it
without any reservation completely so
these breaths the spine becomes straight
and then out we relax into our space
into this moment now I would just start
by just noticing any kind of tension in
our experience but we'll start at the
top of our head maybe move down to our
brow our eyes our nose mouth cheeks just
notice if there's any any contraction
here and see if there's something that
can be relaxed a little bit deeper
moving on to the neck the shoulder
the throat hmm a lot of tension gets
held here a lot to be released down into
our chest we're back mid back around to
our abdomen slowly settling down to the
base of the stomach releasing as we move
down its the hips at the but our legs
thighs knees calves and do our ankles
and our feet all the way down to our
toes no just kind of get the sense we're
gonna like we're not no intention to be
moving we're just completely relaxed in
this moment
now let's start to very gently focus in
a little bit closer in our stomach area
it could be really deep it almost feels
at the seat I almost knew our seat or it
could be somewhere in the middle of our
stomach or the top upper end just notice
see if there's anything that's
noticeable
you said might even notice that there's
some tension there are some constriction
that you didn't see the first time we're
just gonna try and let it be as the most
natural version of itself maybe that
means we can just let our belly be as it
is sometimes we hold it back notice if
there's any movement and if there are
any sensations that you've noticed start
to see if you can find the boundaries of
them - like where do they where does it
start
what is the constriction start where
does it end
we notice there's maybe some confusion
even around that question which is
totally fine because there's not really
an answer here and if you do
stuff getting lost in a thought at any
time just maybe send a little smile to
yourself laugh at your mind for getting
distracted for a moment and very gently
go back to that man
abdomen see if anything's changed even
if that's having a hard time finding
something to pay attention to just the
looking in that area is very important
now very slowly let's start to move
closer to our heart let's see if we can
find a center to it maybe it's just you
most of our sensation in our heart area
is just kind of a the chest in general
maybe you can feel there are more solid
on the left side where it resides I
start to do what we did in the gut and
by kind of surveying this whole chest
Center trying to notice certain
constrictions we've noticed that we've
been holding on to some breath that we
can let go a little bit further
a lot of movement in the chest very easy
to follow
we'd be easier than the gut see if you
can kind of like notice the difference
between what the in breath now breath
feel like there's a receiving quality to
the in breath almost a surrender on the
out-breath it seems to be felt a lot and
that our area sometimes I can notice how
solid the heart is maybe if you've been
feeling a little lonely or something you
might even feel a little achy this here
which is fine too
maybe we allow that ache it's kind of
just crack open our heart a little bit
so that it can radiate so it can be
itself
[Music]
now let's slowly start bring your
attention up the throat up to the top of
the crown of the head see we can notice
up here they even notice the space
around the crown of the head the mind
its natural state is actually quite open
very different from the heart the heart
was so solid grounded connected the mind
doesn't have a ton of boundaries it's
almost like you could feel into the
space around you just openness without
any distinct quality maybe even some
confusion comes with that when one is
openness but we realize like the more we
allow this confusion to be as it is
broader our awareness becomes you can
reach out in all directions above below
to the sides
you
you
this open mind is what will allow us to
act completely our whole embodied self
its attention must have an awareness of
each one of these centers the survival
of our gut the compassion and care of
our heart means the openness of our
minds
you see if we can feel all of that
everything we've explored bring it all
into our attention how's the gut
informing the heart that was the mind
providing the space between the two
sometimes the mind might get pulled off
into a thought and when that happens we
just notice the space around it bring
back come back to the moment and see
what's happening in our bodies
noticing how different it is to feel
into our experience than it is to think
about it the mind might even become very
small portion of our experience this
moving breathing body feeling body
there's so much information there step
into if we're paying attention now as
we're starting to wrap up here
now that we've felt into the wholeness
of our experience start to figure if we
can somehow channel that experience like
it like the heart is kind of gathering
information from the whole picture and
would it be like - maybe I want to be to
experience from our Art Center instead
of our head
maybe a call to connect with others to
help to be helped by others or ourselves
now let's slowly as we're holding on to
this heart centered focus expressing
ourselves through this heart center
slowly let a little bit of light into
the eyes
keeping contact with that heart nope you
up a little bit more keeping our focus
kind of soft
looking more aware of our surroundings
but experiencing it through the art
you
knew you'd open our eyes all the way Wow
concentration or focus to go wherever it
wants but feeling like it's being
directed by heart
we can even put our hands on our chests
over our heart just feel into it a
little bit more just become acquainted
with it no I think that as we move
forward we can keep the totality of our
experience in hand and when we act act
from this sense of compassion in
connection maybe even some sorrow or
sadness that calls us to compassion as a
purpose they're not separate all right I
guess as we move forward I guess I do
yeah that's just a reminder of if we
find ourselves getting focused in one of
those areas and remember maybe one of
those areas is not very available it
might be a good trigger for us even
during the day to just kind of bring our
attention to more than one space so we
can act from a very broad perspective
thanks for uh thanks for going on this
little exploration
I guess I'll hand it back to Peter Jared
if you have any maybe resources on
meditative practices you can send it to
me you know include it on the email to
everyone and I'll also add on the show
notes so if you'd like to we're gonna
upload this on youtube to the stoy
youtube channel so if you would like to
do this meditation guided meditation
again it's going to be there and I
recommend checking out
Jared's podcast both and it's pretty
pretty sweet podcast I was a guest on it
and a lot of great guests on it and it's
a much-needed podcast for these times so
Jared thanks again for for coming that
was that was really nice
announcements for upcoming sessions
there's three of them coming up tomorrow
we have John reveille key doing is
sharing his latest thoughts on the
meeting at Kairos
that's what I think it's how it's
pronounced something about the meaning
crisis you know like something like I
was suggesting to him maybe was talking
about the meaning opportunity and so we
have in this thing called the meaning
Kairos and then there's gonna be a Q&A
and that's the 6:30 Eastern time
tomorrow and then Jordan Hall is going
to do another situational assessment at
the stoah 12 p.m. Eastern Time on
Thursday and then Colin Morris from the
tsiyon 2.0 podcast jaren eyes friend
you're gonna do an existential dance
party that's on Thursday I think at 7:00
p.m. so just go to www.upalliance.org to
provide a gift in return you can go to
that website and just go to the gift
economy at the end all right so thanks
again Jared and thanks everyone for
coming today and have a have a blessed
day
[Music]