Jamie wheel has made it his life's
mission to crack the code of human
potential
he's the best-selling author of stealing
fire and director of the flow Genome
Project which looks at how to harness
the magic of flow states those moments
of being in the zone where we go beyond
ourselves I've always been interested in
sort of the esoteric and the places
where the sort of the mainstream meets
the alternative and what your book did
really really well was sort of reframed
that as the cutting edge which I thought
was fascinating yeah that was a very
that was a deliberate decision we made
which was rather than saying hey
esoteric techniques have some scientific
validation now we said hey red bull
extreme athletes and special operations
military guys are using it and this is
their secret sauce and so we
deliberately smuggled in esoterica into
you know undeniable heat performers that
have a sort of a mainstream
marketability and kind of halo effect
and then say well if they're doing it
you know maybe you could maybe you could
you know wrap your head around it - mmm
because in a way this is kind of like
you say stealing fire is referencing the
idea that Prometheus steals fire from
the gods this is an eternal thing
something this is something that happens
throughout culture can you explain that
yeah I mean I know you don't presume to
have an answer on it but it does seem
that anytime people pursue and cultivate
and propagate ecstatic technologies just
everything anything that raises energy
levels enthusiasm inspiration all the
way to transcendent and non-ordinary
states via everything from dance and
music to psychedelics or substances
sexuality even charismatic transmission
you know a specific person or something
that can sort of light other people that
and almost never ends well mhm and and
so that recurring battle or dialectic
between the sort of the priests that
give the keepers of society and and
inspiration and the Prometheans the
folks looking to steal it and put it out
there for the masses
that just feels like a back-and-forth
battle that's been going on for ages and
and so why that is is a whole you know
that would be a life's work of inquiry
my sense is this just it's a it's an
unstable element you know that The
Ecstatic is not designed to build houses
with it's designed to burn them down and
so that that very thing that makes it so
magnetic and say what peeling also
renders it very volatile and then the
other is just all the human stuff you
know then when people latch on to this
stuff I mean sex drugs money power you
know they all become places where we
stumble as we try to bring this into
culture and it's very hard as the old
lord acton you know absolute power
corrupts absolutely yeah
the one ring and and it's not just
hobbits by the way they're interested in
that thing so so I'd say that mean
that's that's a broad brush but we can
we can we can start with that but you
also say in the book that you think this
for the first time it could end better
than it has in the past yeah and I just
don't know I mean I mean I wrote that
somewhat optimistically two and a half
years ago and then had an increasingly
and increasingly disillusioning series
of experiences with the psychedelic
polyamorous Burning Man community let's
say so so let's just say the
intersection of sex drugs rock and roll
and and and libertarian ideals and
realize that those poor bastards can't
get out of their own way to even just
build something like cryptocurrency so
so my concern these days is that we are
out of bullets like we've tapped we have
stolen fire from the gods who who we
have absolutely taken ambrosia from
Olympus and a meaning well just meaning
the collective sort of you know quote
unquote transformational culture and
that's everything from EDM and
transformational festivals to the
Burning Man world to Silicon Valley
high-tech space to psychedelic therapies
to I would say anything other than just
sort of MBSR mindfulness so sort of
actual mindfulness mindfulness practice
is this some teeth and are actually
still trying to get to non jewel states
not just help work
he's alleviate their stress and not
calling sick so often and that we have
access to the most potent aggregation of
transformational tools and technologies
that any humans anywhere on this planet
have ever had and we're still crawling
up our own asses into narcissistic
feedback loops so so for me the analogy
these days is you know particularly I
mean well I would say sort of
psychedelic Gnosticism is creating the
same way over prescription of
antibiotics created super flus we are
sort of over prescribing ecstatic
techniques and creating super egos so
instead of eclipsing our senses of
ourselves there are this you know 5%
left and then you stop taking the
medicine and then they come back
stronger than ever and so now we have
people thinking that they are the second
coming things that they do have a
hotline to divine intelligence think
they know they do presume to say what
the universe is about and how it
operates thing they can in fact sell and
sell workshops and enroll you know
punters online to follow them around so
so we've ended up with a very
problematic late stage issue which I
never would have seen coming which is
the resurgence of egoic virulence in the
midst of transcendent technologies I
actually posted something on Facebook
the other day that Jordan Pearson has
said which was psychedelics can give you
too much responsibility than you know
what to deal with yeah and I mean even
just phrase it that way implies that
you're aware of the weight of it and the
responsibility of it I think a lot of
people James Fadiman the fellow who is
the pioneer of micro dosing that he was
on Tim Ferriss his podcast and he used
the analogy of overexposing film and
sort of you know let's say there's one
exposure on a bit of celluloid and
that's reality and then if you take a
psychedelic that's another exposure so
they said that bit of film has more
information but if you keep doing if you
do three four or five six times yes it
has more information recorded on it but
it's just a blurry mess and the ability
to separate signal from noise or
transcendence from imminence or what the
hell do I do on Monday or am I still an
asshole to my family those things get
blurred out
and so you know I think I think what
Jordan Peterson is cautioning about is
almost a fairly advanced and relatively
mature stage which is that I've seen
more than I can handle but I acknowledge
both of those things and I'm and I feel
the weight but but I think there's a
whole degree of you know lowered levels
of self-awareness where people are just
getting lost in the fairy lights you
know and there's sort of this cautions
about that in a lot of mythological
traditions you know whether it's sailors
being seduced by the rapture of the deep
and the mermaids and getting sort of
going off to their doom or you know in
the sort of English tradition the Celtic
tradition that the fairy lights in the
forest and being enchanted by them and
wandering off into the woods never to be
seen seen again or come back and what
only seemed like a minute and it's a
lifetime you know a way I think those
are the kinds of the cautions that were
facing and sort of freshly now I mean
there was all the train wrecks of the
sixties and all the cautionary tales
about just following your bliss and
doing that but we're coming back around
to that point and going hey wait a tick
you know there's baby more going on it's
not just gonna be instant instant
liberation for all yeah this is again
fits very much with what I'm saying at
the moment it's like we're we're in
another level of enthusiasm about
psychedelic science for example I've
I've done stories about psychedelic
science and as far as I can tell most of
the people who've done stories about
psychedelic science so far enthusiasts
because those are the journalists who
are following these stories they're the
ones who are interested in it and so
what you're actually seeing is a very
one-sided again and one-sided tale of
psychedelic science which is not showing
the dangers that you can that they can
create as well like psychedelics for
example the the the kind of metaphor or
the paradigm at the moment is that you
could do a couple of psychedelic
sessions and overcome your depression
whereas actually what you generally do
is a couple of psychic sessions may just
overwhelm you with the stuff that you
haven't dealt with for example so it's
kind of this idea of the psychedelics as
a magic pill it's kind of now coming
back in the culture which just seems
completely but we haven't learned
anything from the 60s yeah and it's been
couched in the terms of better than
Prozac which it clearly is but but
certainly not a panacea
I mean so in addition to the sort of
psychedelic superflous idea
I also wrestle with the notion of the
sort of Assam the asymptote problem you
know the idea that and we know and we
report on these as well you know the two
to three episodes with therapeutic
interventions and structured
environments have these amazing and
life-saving impacts for people suffering
trauma and depression and and
end-of-life issues and yet you know what
happens when you take it from 3 to 33
and people now levitating are they
demigods or they yoda is no they're not
they're just candy flipping ravers and
so where where is the you know where is
the ROI and where should we actually say
that's probably enough and and my sense
is is that their problem there is
highlighted and you know there's a
degree of sort of libertarian enthusiasm
everyone should have access these have
been repressed and controlled for a long
time and now we're finally kind of
coming out of the Dark Ages or coming
out of prohibition this is a renaissance
and I think there's a whole bunch of
reasons to be enthusiastic and hopeful
about that and hat tip to maps and the
folks that have been leading that charge
long slow difficult work Robin cohort
Harris or all the folks that are really
doing the disciplined legwork for the
rest of us and I'm almost you know I'm
sort of sort of telegraphing ahead a few
years and I'm taking a stand probably
now and increasingly clearly on
regulation and restriction and that in
fact there's probably 10% of the
population that should never touch the
things there's probably only 10% of the
population the ditch that should
encounter them more than 1 to 3 times in
a lifetime and there's a huge fat part
of the bell curve that we should
re-establish rites of passage so imagine
if and you know and obviously we know
that confirmations and bar mitzvahs and
all these things have just basically
fallen flat and we end up with a bunch
of rudderless humans wandering in
between chapters of life whether that's
boomerang kids in their 20s or empty
nesters or midlife crises or whatever
they are you know or women and aging
into their crow and use whatever it
would be we have shitty or non-existent
rites of passage and
what would it be like to simply program
yeah three to five there's a
coming-of-age one where you go from
child to man or woman and that's who
knows maybe that's a full visionary
psychedelic you know that could be a you
know a bluesy and mystery stuff and I
loose it in the end only sitting in
mysteries like this is the nature of the
world welcome to it and then perhaps
there could be a marriage one in that
you know you could you could calibrate
the compounds or substances that are
most appropriate so clearly some form of
MDMA therapeutic communion could be a
beautiful thing this is the essential
nature of your love together you know
there could be something either at death
or in preparing for death or another you
know life transitions but in general my
sense is if we're gonna try and play the
long game with this stuff and integrate
it back into culture there were no
indigenous cultures that were just
gloves off how about it kids and that's
how we're doing it these days and and so
there's actually this in fact I don't
know if you've come across Richard reg
Lee's stuff out of officer and he wrote
a really cool book called essential
substances and it was basically an
anthropological was basically like
you've all her re on acid I'm sure was
it was essential substances through all
of human history and culture but there
was a tribe from New Guinea who
basically had nine levels of initiation
and it started with ginger so there were
three levels of ginger and then three
levels of tobacco and then three levels
of mushrooms and each level became fewer
and fewer people invited into that level
until by the ninth level which was the
highest octane psychedelic mushrooms
basically whatever visions came out of
that was a literally equivalent of like
a PhD and the spiritual practice of
their culture but whatever came through
in those visions was then considered
living scripture and added to the
equivalent of the Bible
so rather than burning those fuckers at
the stake like the Christian tradition
did like no no no no one gets to have
any more insights they was a living
tradition but it was also hierarchical
and selective so once you're introduced
into a substance at the level you were
initiated you had free free range and
accidents but you weren't allowed to
jump the gun and try stuff that you had
no business trying yet and so when we
see the advent of DMT and five Meo DMT
and all these absolute paint peeling
entheogens being dabbled in by
absolutely clueless twits I think that
that's you know that was from
be good lessons for us because let's
actually start putting some structures
back in the place versus just saying
this gonna be a free-for-all that works
out well cuz they tend not to so it
sounds like you've gone on a real
journey since releasing stealing fire to
where you're at now well in what way
what were you curious about you you said
you're you're less enthusiastic about
the potential of is it only of the
potential of psychedelics or of your
views change in any other way ah shit
man me look at the look at the vim half
groupie phenomenon I mean people don't
know what to do with that stuff a good
friend of ours has actually been what's
the run responsible for bringing him
into you know high end neuroscience labs
and the first place it was like half of
this is bullshit how this works he
doesn't know which is which and you've
got all these folks and plunging
themselves into inflatable kiddie pools
just to feel something just to feel high
so you can throw in respiration you can
throw in any form of quote-unquote
conscious sexuality the pub the
polyamory movement which is you know
everything from sex at dawn to God knows
what I mean the varying books you know
even a stair peral's work which she's
coming from a very ground at their pubic
space but sort of gives permission for
more expansive and exploratory sexuality
that there's a lot of that that's wildly
problematic so really I would say
anytime you have a a persistent and an
efficacious technique of ecstasy
abstracted from cultural conditions and
prohibitions thou shalt and thou shalt
not see is how to use this powerful tool
we end up with shit shows and now we're
in depth with intersectional shit shows
so you throw in as I said sort of a you
know polyamorous state seeking
psychedelic friendly Burning Man or
transformational festival culture which
is sort of around the world at this
point no boundaries nobody tells me what
to do so it's antinomian there is
nothing I bow down to and and and in
fact and there's and there's not
necessarily higher good than my personal
fulfillment in this moment and and that
create as long as I engage in nonviolent
communication as long as I share my
feelings and state my needs all that
stuff then it should all be fine right
and and I'm also not sure that is and
I'm also not sure that again back to
asymptotes that the this might be kind
of share the idea or like 80/20 woke to
broke
is that is pursuing that last 20% of
your supposed enlightenment or
fulfillment or personal growth actually
becomes highly narcissistic and almost
unconscionable when you think that
that's gonna take 80% you get you know
you get 80% of the return for your
initial 20% of your investment in
personal growth I would advocate
listening at least is a thought
experiment but people don't stop there
they get hooked on the catharsis they
get hooked on the x-star says they get
hooked on the community arts they like
bio it feels so good to break down and
break through it feels so awesome to
touch the Sun and it feels so amazing to
be around my brothers and such as my
tribe you know and so and and yet
they'll then spend 80% more time effort
money resources chasing the chasing the
uncatchable of their own completion and
some story or tale that when I get there
I will be free from pain I will be free
from insecurity anxiety you know poverty
you name it I will be whole and life
will be perfect it's like now fuck you
that's not how life works and in the
meantime you're blowing 80% of those
energy credits on yourself when you
already know enough I said what you got
to do and there's people drowning behind
you so lifting those folks up is going
to provide infinitely more net good than
polishing and you know polishing the
last little corner you know on your
statue there is also the sense that that
polishing the last little corner is
actually an illusion that's not human
we're trying to transcend being human
and we can't transcend being human
exactly so they can embrace it and
that's where spiritual teachers like
Pema Chodron you know Tibetan Buddhist
who's very much into I mean we even
ended a bit of stealing fire with that
you know there's a crack and everything
and and embracing our humanity embracing
the messy and perfections of this and
it's not I mean you should have I'm
hesitant to say the other half of the
sentence because it becomes so glib but
the idea of like therein lies the actual
route to wholeness and realization it's
not continuing to climb the mountain
it's that it's the you know Zen exciting
parable like returning you know to the
village with helping hands and the idea
that it's all still about me and my
process and my journey you know sort of
fuck your journey
and I think that that kind of loving and
backhand is something that this extended
movement needs much more of which is if
you're not if you're not making the
world materially better and if you're
not serving harder done by folks than
you then Instagram photos of your
hashtag blessed life you know you can
just fuck off with them because that's
not there's never been the point and the
only humans that have ever had access to
these tools and techniques have
generally been within Marshall and
monastic traditions and there's always
been a code and an ethics and and a
point as to why you would even have
access to them in the first place and I
mean a lot of this sounds quite Jordan
Peterson asked what's your attitude
Jordan Peterson yeah I mean I'm glad
he's out there and I think that you know
I mean I think at a minimum there's sort
of three different jordan Peterson's you
know there's Jordan Peterson the analyst
and academic which actually nobody ever
heard of there's Jordan Peterson the
kind of contrary and public intellectual
which sort of you know kicked off in
2016
and then there's sort of Jordan Peterson
sort of raw shot and a lot for the
culture wars which both left and right
wildly distort who he is what he's
saying and what it and what it means for
them and so we get we get the the second
and the third ones completely mixed
although the first one you know
University of Toronto and hop near
former Harvard professors the one that
gives the credibility and the weight to
the other two dialogues so in that
respect I think as I what I imagined him
to be as an actual man is a pretty high
integrity principled person who likes to
think for himself and likes to speak not
just truth to power but but also likes
to remind his audience whether it's
students or broader than that what what
is you know what is it what is the life
well a good life well lived and now
there I think there are there are
problems in how in the age of soundbites
and hundreds of hours of footage and
tons of speaking and those kind of
things that become problematic and I'm
not in any way convinced that if i sat
down with him and said hey mate what
about this bit that he would actually
stand a defendant but impressions I get
would be that
is I think he sometimes over
catastrophize is the slippery slope to
Marxism in the sense that that all that
you know this way lies Stalinist death
camps therefore we cannot give one inch
on concessions to progressive ideals or
agendas although having said that I have
also personally experienced the almost
Chinese Communists like Tom Zeng
struggle sessions of political
correctness in in the Academy and in its
kind of left-wing you know left coast
idea so it's not that I don't see the
peril I do I just think sometimes he
uses the slippery slope argument maybe I
think it pulls it out just sometimes a
little early there's the bottom line
without necessarily enough conditions to
justify it he sometimes in my experience
I think I remember him on Joe Rogan
doing the life is nasty brutish and
short the kind of Hobbesian it's always
been this way therefore any efforts to
try and recalibrate or rebalance the
scales are fundamentally flawed
delusional and by the way lead to the
Stalinist death camps without any more
nuanced socio-political critique of
practices and policies so for instance
concentration of wealth and the 1% and
even the percentage of 1% has been
directly traceable in at least in the US
over you know tax and tax and corporate
law various various deliberate policies
that are fundamentally different in the
70s and 80s and have now resulted in an
incredible skewing an aggregation of
wealth in the hands of the few for him
to skip over that and go to lobsters and
serotonin feels like skipping some
critical steps and also skipping some
critical places of potential
responsibility let's think there's a
couple more there would be another one
would just be where it where is his
insight coming from and so we talking to
you when you were describing hey you
almost sound a little bit like Jordan
pieces I mean in the sense of yeah I
mean if I had to describe my worldview
in a nutshell it would be sort of a
Neoplatonic
so there was a mere platonic stoic
mystic Crist agnostic
so the idea of Neoplatonic i believe i
have always just sort of felt like there
is a a realm of ideal forms stoic do the
suck it up fat kid and do the hard thing
hundred percent gnostic there is a
certain ineffable experience of being
and then the mystic Christic is some
some reflection on the judeo-christian
Western tradition but nothing to do with
2,000 years of bureaucratic
administration and everything to do with
what is nominally the metaphor of Kairos
and Chronos the intersection of kind of
sacred and profane time in human form so
in that respect yeah I would track with
with Peterson my sense is for me my you
know gnosis or understanding has come
from X ptosis has come from peak
experiences and my sense for him at
least as he shares what he does of his
life has come from catharsis has come
from the suffering it's come from
battling depression it's come from
staring the abyss in the face versus the
view from the summit and those are
ideally come full circle and reinforce
each other but if I had to sort of
delineate maybe where is his
transmission anchoring from it's maybe a
little bit more the staring the abyss
and and and surviving it then then
calling up coordinates from the
mountaintop interesting and I guess
you've seen the whole intellectual
darkweb concepts or just grow and become
kind of mainstream yeah I mean that we
interestingly the the glitch in the
matrix document show put out was
subtitled intellectual dark web Jordan
Peterson and the mainstream media two
months ago and then the New York Times
did a profile on it and then we
published something said that said the
intellectual dart web is dead because
did yeah
because as soon as the New York Times
published i publicize or something on it
then there is no intellectual diet web
it is now mainstream so I was actually
in the process of kind of putting
together an intellectual dark web
documentary and then off the back of
that we kind of had a thought about it
and realized that for me the
intellectual dark web so you've got kind
of like Dave Rubin the Weinsteins Ben
chip
Oh Jordan Peterson then I realized I was
sort of starting to think about what is
a deeper resolution like that that seems
to me like a really important stage of
surfacing this kind of level of
conversation an integral conversation or
something on that's emerging naturally
and then we came up with a concept of
the intellectual deep web so what are
the and what are the knowledge what is
the knowledge that that needs to be
integrated and I came up with names like
Stan Grof Richard tarnis and I would
also add your work into that what do you
what do you think about that as an idea
of there are thinkers who've been who've
been doing really great work do you know
Richard Hannes yeah we've been doing
really great work on the fringes of our
culture for an awfully long time and I
personally I think these are the people
we need to integrate to get us through
the next five ten years yeah I mean
that's a neat distinction you're making
I think I just read a piece in box I
think this morning which was basically
it was felt a little snarky and it was
basically saying that the internet was
response to the New York Times piece you
know is basically saying oh the
intellectual dark web were just a bunch
of embittered losers on the on the outs
and and and effectively they've been
marginalized by the people who should
have marginalize them and they're really
just angry because they've been they've
been sort of knocked off their perch or
denied a platform and that's just I mean
I don't know I mean I bet we can do
actually and a data analysis of this my
sense of Jordan of Sam Harris of these
guys is not that they are embittered and
on the outside banging on the door
they've just done done on an end run and
their actual reaches infinitely greater
then I mean just retweets views clicks
likes shares you name it any any social
static my sense is that their reach is
is exploding massively know that they've
been sort of shut out from the
chattering classes so I think there's
there a very there are and back to the
Rorschach blot idea there was the sense
of these guys are saying saying the
unconscionable and should be shunned so
the intellectual deep web is I mean it
doesn't quite have the mystery of the
dark web but but as far as like the
distinctions of content
I think it's really neat and we are we
kind of saw this in the 2016 election
both Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump did
an runs around the Democratic and DNC in
the RNC and they said if we can reach
our people via our own distributed
economic platforms we are no longer the
holdin to the donor class we were no
longer beholding to established and
entrenched you know political platforms
and choice-making and we can just and we
can make we can amplify via the
democratic system our impact and i reach
and you see that with musical artists
these days you see that in email even
with yoga teachers if you've got a big
following on Instagram and you don't
need to kowtow to some lineage which you
know has lots of problems as well
because all of the vetting of the light
web you know if the establishment did
have a solid degree of quality control
to it so you tended not to get absolute
howling ly bad or irresponsible folks
showing up in that space but you also
missed a shit ton of innovation so you
know to your query of is is the access
to the intellectual deep web something
that is going to be helpful in guiding
our way forward my my I so I would I
would go as far as saying that would be
like my only hope for a kind of glorious
of a revolution of us is a bloody reign
of terror if we can simply if the people
and the ideas and then the actions can
just do an end run around the
established balances of power and again
you know but it would be an example like
what is that true progressive centrist
who is you know socially progressive and
fiscally conservative and
internationally
I wouldn't say pacifist but certainly
just ethical and globally concerned with
interconnected issues like climate like
refugees excetera how many people would
sign up for that I think a lot I think a
lot I don't think there would be a just
forget third party candidates you would
just end up with an uprising and the two
existing parties would be left you know
holding their dicks so the question
becomes how do we do more of that and
and how do we and how do we provide
enough of a clarion call that people can
reorient around those things you talked
in your talk before
it sounded quite pessimistic or almost
quite apocalyptic about what might be
about to come are you you pessimistic or
optimistic hmm I would say I am highly
pessimistic of human culture and
optimistic of human nature and that's
Browder that's about as precise as I can
get because if I if you if you run the
maps and models and you see I mean the
thing that blows me away about identity
politics these days is you know we have
some things to do people and if we
quibbling and scrapping before we even
get to the starting line of the race for
our lives what's fucked and so you know
as of last summer I went from well I
mean that was soon of you know the
steaming fire just come out there was
all sorts of interesting companies
conversations and that kind of thing and
then I would say I had a fairly you know
not dare I say it was my equivalent of
my red pilling where I was like okay
whoa I thought that generally everybody
left of white identity politics was
fundamentally a sound and solid human
being we're all run in the same
direction and realized oh no you can
actually be kneecapped with a degree of
virulence and spite and entitlement from
the left
that shouldn't by all accounts live
there and it seems to be so in that
respect I literally went from oh we're
going to save the world via blockchain
and distributed and decentralized
autonomous organizations yay whoo just
that was close to no no no even those
fuckers can't figure it out either and I
should dig the well in my new house in
the mountains 400 feet deep not 200 feet
deep and definitely let's get a tesla
powerwall
and be off the grid so mentally that's
where I've been which doesn't mean I'm
not going to keep fighting the good
fight it means I'm absolutely planning
the rearguard action and the lifeboats
for the people I care about the most so
I can stay engaged to the last possible
minute and what do you think of the
either ideas or thinkers or practices
that we need to integrate to get through
the next sort of 5-10 years mm-hmm
gosh well I mean I think
you know the simplest is to say we need
a lot of credible thoughtful voices from
significantly different points of view
and perspective so I don't always agree
with Sam errors but I appreciate he's
out there and I appreciate he thinks the
way he thinks I don't always agree with
Jordan pieces I don't always agree with
you of all her art but I like the fact
that they're doing their thing so I
think that there's a significant
component of that that we just need a
bunch of credible thoughtful informed
people bringing their voices as
skillfully and visibly to the problems
at hand as we possibly can I feel I mean
again to just restate Pema Chodron some
folks like her of her ilk people who are
expressing the human condition not as an
infinite escalator of successes and
perfect abilities but hey here we are
this is this is this is blending heaven
and earth you know and and this is what
it means to be woken broke and can we
celebrate that those are the kinds of
things that leave me there's about I
would say that's about the only place I
feel hope I feel hope when people come
together in their mortality in their
humanity and then something beautiful
happens so it's the true kind of
redemption songs you know idea it's its
gospel music it's those elements where
we're like oh my god I was weeping last
night but here we are giving praise here
we are singing beautifully here we are
dancing and clapping and stomping like
that's kind of it and everything's Shia
that to me feels either
you know less deep than it might need to
be or problematic you no matter how
flashy or sexy it seems at the moment
problematic and destined to fail at a
later date with more consequences I get
a sense that the journey we're going to
have to go on is actually a much deeper
one than just the intellectual one it's
going to be like we all have to
integrate and process and and and go
through stuff I feel that we're almost
inevitably going to have our own crisis
points and need to work through stuff
over the next few years what does that
look like do you think
I mean I think it's basically you can
either use X tossus or we will be served
up catharsis so it'll either be the peak
experience that renders people to have a
global centric perspective and then come
down you know come down for the mountain
with helping hands oh shit I got it I
got the message and here's the work to
do and I'm gonna conduct it with the
agency that my long-range vision tells
me is potentially prudent we ignore that
that seems like most of us are including
the people that are getting lots of time
up at the top of the mountains if we
ignore that then we will experience
enough pain and lesser until that wakes
us up instead and what degree of
cultural collapse destruction tension
needs to occur or will occur in order in
order for us to get to that spot who
knows but that's where I'm not wildly
comfort like that's where I'm I would
say at a minimum deeply concerned
because um the notion that even the
things that are potentially helping us
these days like ecstatic techniques
culture and practices unplugging nature
retreat you name it I mean but the
classic clichés is you know let's go to
Costa Rica or Mexico or Nicaragua and do
yoga and ayahuasca and and talk about
our feelings and even unplug from our
phones but even those things are being
then sold commodified refracted through
Instagram post and through social media
and so even when people I mean I just
read an article today on how basically
Instagram culture is creating a huge
spike in fatalities in Colorado's 14,000
foot Peaks because people are going
there they're shooting Oh Here I am
zooming along this knife rages this
awesome ranch shot look at me I did it
and then other people are de-risking the
process and there's one mountain near
Aspen where where five people died in
six weeks and that's that's analogous
that high territory which then seems
safe and approachable is there's no
different than hearing Joe Rogan on a
podcast I mean how many CrossFit MMA
guys you're now hitting DMT because
they're like Joe said I said it was cool
you know you're having these kinds of
experiences and even the things that are
potentially our salvation are becoming
commodified refracted and distorted by
the very tools we're
you're trying to get away from with
those new solutions so in that respect
we've almost trashed ourselves up with
no escape and that one baffles me you
said you go to the top of the message or
you saw you go to the top of the
mountain you get the message what's the
message I mean it's impossible to state
it succinctly without it being cliche
but I would say stay awake and build
stuff you know and do the hard thing
above all be kind that's Huxley's bit
you know I mean that's more than enough
to start with you did the end of your
talk say that you thought we might get
it together just in time yeah well
funnily enough like that that's to me
that that phrase actually was a little
bit of an incantation so it's not even
just in time like in the Nick kind of
thing it's maybe in Chronos in linear
mundane time and that we might get it
together I suppose at that intersection
of Kairos and Chronos you know that if
we can anchor ourselves in that in
sacred time we're past present and
future are all Co arising and nothing
needs to be done and we can have faith
in the fact that in fact this does work
out and I don't mean faith in the sort
of sort of blind hope I mean like actual
Gnostic in this you Tori certainty there
we have seen how this all goes down and
light prevails then then we can come
back to our day-to-day lives and to me
that you know you mentioned the loose
Indian mystery is like to me if we could
initiate or have as many people around
the planet initiate themselves as
possible into that knowing that hey this
all works out all we need is 51%
goodness truth and beauty over the long
arc of this whole game it doesn't matter
how dark the varying chapters get if we
know we've we see in the resolution
we've seen the redemption then we come
back and we're like hey everybody it's
all gonna work out we can exhale now
that doesn't mean there's not hard shit
it doesn't mean there's not critical
shit and it doesn't mean there's not a
my pot isn't absolutely
and me to play it balls deep if you know
because it's only 51% so I don't get to
phone it in just because I saw how the
film ends we're all required and and to
me that's what I actually have hope in
is that if if enough people can come to
that realization then then we wake up
and not in some bullshit evangelical
megachurch kind of way of being born
again but in in a truly initiatory way
being born again of like I know my
purpose I know my part and I'm willing
to practice resurrection I'm willing to
offer my life fully and freely in love
in every moment and and if needs be in
the face of injustice and if needs be in
service of the things I cherish and and
then we're invincible like then we can
turn things on a dime if we do this
incrementally if we get hung up around
identity politics if we imagine that
technological progressivism will save us
at last man I think there's an all sorts
of crumbs on that but if there is a
chance to do it I you know ironically
out of time in in that sacred space then
we have a chance to do it in time you
know well the clock is ticking yeah the
people that I've found who've done the
most or seem to have got at least far
enough down the path those who've been
through a sort of transformational
community but the guy who as I who's our
mentor guy called raffia was part of the
Osho community for many years which was
sort of experiment with all of these
kind of transformational technologies
but they were doing it within a
community of people for two decades who
were all refer who are all doing the
same thing reflecting stuff back and it
took it seems to have taken that level
of intensity and reflection and shared
purpose for them to have done the
transformations that they have like
they're almost know like it seems
striking to me like how much work we've
seemed to have to do to get to that
place does that make sense
like that sort of reflects back to what
you were saying about sort of the
psychedelic communities it's like it's
not the it's not the transcendence it's
the deep interpersonal work that we have
to do of intense interpersonal
with with communities like I think we
have to build that kind of community
yeah for sure and that you know the
catharsis plus communitas is another
cul-de-sac I mean we know a number of
communities they're very deeply into raw
intimate inter subjective communication
and a everybody ends up banging
everybody and there's tons of drama
around that and then be everybody you
know if I can just getting your lunch
takes an hour and a half because
everyone's sharing how they're feeling
in the moment and you're like okay that
too is a necessary but not sufficient
criteria and and that sense of you know
back to the 80/20 I think what traps so
many of the people who are into process
based communities is that they get the
cathartic hit for the first you know
they and that's 80% of the with their
20% investment but they hang on and they
keep going back to ring the same bow and
I mean the same that's like no of course
we need to be able to be aware of our
feelings and of course we need to be
able to process stuff and stay as clear
as possible and of course we sometimes
need to check in with infinite sin
absolutes just to make sure we're
keeping time and then there's that
element of integration and service yeah
let's go slip the whole stay awake build
stuff like if we're not if we're not
doing those two things in concert then
the just staying awake just becomes an
exercise it's fiddling while Rome burns
and if we're just building stuff but
we've lost connection to the one then we
might be we might build wonky lopsided
stuff that doesn't doesn't stand the
time