[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis last time I had a very
lively and interesting discussion with
Christopher master Pietro on the
semiosis of the zombie and how the
zombie is a cultural symbol for
expressing but in no way resolving the
meaning crisis and we got to towards the
end the idea that that generation of a
new mythology to lose in fact said the
only modern myth is the myth of the
zombie why that emergence of the new
mythology is a symptom is symptomatic of
the meaning crisis and what would I'd
like to invite Chris back and we're
going to talk more about the symptom
ology of the meaning crisis what are the
various symptoms of the mean crisis and
how can we organize them in an
intelligible manner and this is actually
part of the book that we're currently
working on unsheltered which is the book
that is going to be the follow-up to
zombies in Western culture a 21st
century crisis so welcome back Chris
it's good to have you here again and so
what I'd like to do is write typically
what's often happened is I'll talk about
various you know things that are
symptomatic of the meaning crisis and I
tend to do this in something I don't
like doing in general because I've
argued against it I'm just sort of a
featureless I do I do this I do this in
interviews right and and what I'd like
to do now is is try and create a more
schematic organization and try and give
them a much more coherent and convergent
argument that also I think is
explanatory of the symptom ology of the
meaning crisis and so I think what we
might want to do is begin with like
laying out sort of the the the
principles were using that we're going
to be making the organizing principles
by which we're going to try and lay out
and schematize the symptom ology of the
meaning crisis so yeah okay so I think
we should probably begin by saying that
we've we've this
- metallic the symptomology rap is so
complex and so very yeah that can
centering it into any kind of proper
structures it's taxed very very it's a
task right and and so there are a lot of
ways that perhaps we could have got
about organizing it but I think the way
we opted for which i think is
intuitively right for both of us is to
understand the symptoms on a continual
reaction and response and we're also not
going to be right where we're gonna be
gathering the symptoms into clusters
that's right yeah yeah so this isn't
gonna be a feature list it's going to be
symptom types right right and symptom
types that are or ease of symptoms
organized substantially similar right
that's right that's right so I think
that there the premise of our thinking
is that some categories of symptoms are
best understood as instinctive and
largely unreflective reactions right to
the crisis right so stated visceral
reactions to the crisis okay so we're
gonna begin all the way okay so this so
you know what we should do we should
just draw one big line okay draw one big
one one big line right across here okay
okay so the idea about this line is to
reflect a continuum continuum continuum
flows in this case from from left to
right okay okay so on one side of the
continuum we have one we're calling the
reaction right which is exactly what
I've just described right an instinctive
largely visceral often impulsive often
impulsive was about see responses are
response a kind of an almost em like
almost reflexive yeah exactly that's
what I think I was cast not reflective
but reflects reflexive that's right
that's right and that's what we're
trying to capture by that kind of that
kind of unreflective sometimes conscious
sometimes unconscious but unaware
responds and then we have response
proper and I think what we mean by
response proper is there some agency in
this there's some directedness to it
that's right and even if even if the
individual
perhaps internalizing the meaning crisis
hasn't fully framed or construed it
right hasn't conceptualized it the the
effect is quite conscious and quite but
it's it's it's pronounced enough to
elicit a conscious sort of directed
attention there's some aspect of
deliberation to this yes okay that's
right another on the far end we have
what we're calling a reflective response
right and this means that we're
understanding the affliction of the
meaning crisis obviously in terms of a
certain amount of suffering and the
reflective response is one in which the
individual there's an attempt to find
identifying with their own suffering
also identifies it with some kind of
communal subject so it's not it's not
isn't just happening to me this is this
is a condition that is felt also in and
around so to two aspects here it's not
just the ego centrism of pain there's an
attempt to connect out and there's also
an attempt to ameliorate to address
right right and some fashion right so in
an organized fashion which I like is the
difference right this kind of response
is often unorganized right or if it's
organized it can sort of accidentally
organized it's often spontaneous
and we're gonna be talking about that
this I think is this is actually
unorganized spontaneous is a better way
of thinking about it because it could be
very organized spontaneous is a good way
of thinking about response right this
could be spontaneous too but insofar as
this has a certain amount of this can be
this can be concerted but it's just not
concerted with a with a finally
diagnosed understanding of the patient
right so it's more that category so in
earlier versions of this argument I was
often talking about negative and
positive responses to the meaning crisis
I think what we're doing here is is is
much better and like I said because it's
gonna schema ties as opposed to just
simply contrast whereas the negative
worse
to be you know things like suicide and
mental health and the positive where's
going to be things like you know the
mindfulness revolution of the
psychedelic revolution and but now we're
gonna take that we're gonna we're
improving on that we're trying to get
something better something you have
developed right because that's not quite
right because some especially this
middle category as we'll find you know a
lot of responses that are spontaneous
they might not be as reflective as you
know something like the mindfulness
revolution right but even though they
might be insufficient they might have
some productive value right so yeah the
negative positive economy doesn't play
it's too simplistic I get that I think
that's an important criticism right okay
so so we want to start at the far end
here and I think that the and the first
one and certainly most and this goes
back like sub one is suicide right right
so we actually have this divided into
two I'll talk a little bit about them in
terms of nodal we're calling the pure
suicide no moral evaluation there right
and then the the one that's mediated
through depression yeah okay so I'll
talk a little bit about this two central
ideas here this goes to some important
recent work by psychologist who's doing
some of the best psychological work on
issues of meeting crisis this is the
work of touching yes now and and she has
the shown recent research showing that
contrary to what you might think right
that what happens in suicide is that you
know it's because people are suffering
clinical depression that they find
things meaningless and therefore that is
why they commit suicide now it's
important to understand how much meaning
in life is a protective against suicide
and the fact that right although
globally suicide is going down it's
going up in North America it's going up
for young people worldwide child suicide
in the United States
just recently doubled in something in
like in the last five years all this is
very telling but what's important is
that's actually mixing two things up she
has evidence that the experience of
meaningless in and of itself without it
overlapping or causing what we now
identify as clinical depression right
the experience of meaninglessness in and
of itself can be a cause of suicide
now of course depression yeah yes yes
trying to pick up on that now depression
carries within it a sense of
meaninglessness but what's interesting
is and of course there's other things
that probably contribute towards the
suicide from depression and I don't want
to claim that it's just the
meaninglessness but what there is is
clear evidence of the meaninglessness
per se being able to cause suicide and
therefore that's an important piece of
evidence for right the emergence the
increasing presence or lack of presence
of the meaning crisis yes yeah it's a
vacuous present yes there's a bit of a
yeah yeah okay so I move to the next one
yes this sort of feeds laterally right
into the next category in that and
that's just more generally the mental
health mental crisis it is that more
specifically mental health crisis and we
talked a little bit about this also in
zombies in Western cultures right and
how what you got are increasing rates of
anxiety disorders depressive disorders
increasing suicidal ideation amongst
adolescent people and so this did the
anxiety and the and the depressive
disorders of course overlaps with some
of the other aspects of this right so
this is why we're trying to get the idea
of a continuum right but the point
nevertheless is that things like
depression of course clearly point to
this anxiety also points to important
ways in which we
fundamentally disconnected from
ourselves each other and and reality and
important ways so I think it's very
clear that that's also it overlaps with
this it's a distinct category but it's
also pointing towards the effects of the
meeting crisis on people please continue
okay and again further along this
continuum but very much related to the
two previous categories raised there's
an Ian there's an e in there right so
the increase in loneliness
yeah the increase in the lead which is
exacerbate about social media in many it
is exacerbated not caused I would argue
but definitely exacerbated by social
media it's interesting that we talked in
our previous video or made mention of
this idea atomization of time all right
they're arguably the same phenomenon has
happened with spatially right the way
that we live right we actually don't
live as communally as perhaps we used to
spatially and physically were much more
distanced from one another and yes the
social media that sort of the
compartmentalization of social life and
the digitization of social life mm-hm
certainly adds to that sense of
isolation right sort of they Co hearing
effective communities is diminished
secret right so this is definitely a
loss of communication so yeah exactly
and this goes towards air starts idea
about how the West really lost God so
her argument is that what has actually
led towards atheism nihilism I don't see
it as a comprehensive account I'm not
saying but she's got a very important
point that the countries that are the
most secular the countries that are the
least religious are also the countries
in which people live atomically in which
they tend to live the most alone and and
she argues that what happened one of the
things the Industrial Revolution is done
and then of course it's been exhaustive
aided by social media and the car and
all kinds of things is this atomization
that Han talks about is that we tend to
live more and more alone and that is of
course been
reinforced by mythology of us being
rugged individuals and all this I would
call it in some very important
ways and so and the idea is as we lose
as we lose this connectivity to other
people as we lose communitas as you said
in the last episode what we lose is we
lose the capacity to internalize other
people other perspectives right the loss
of fighty but I'm also arguing it's
gonna impact on right the loss of
respectable and participatory knowing in
powerful ways right right
and the loss of the mechanism that
actually allows us again to we talked
about this in the last video that allows
us to to to elastisized perspective yes
right yeah and to be able to to mature
into new perspectives right we grow in
concert with in a community precisely in
the way that we in our interplay with
the people around us and so to be
deprived of that isn't just to be
deprived of good company it's to be
deprived of an entire matrix within
which we grow and yes so are our develop
our ability to internalize perspectives
participate in different existential
modes is truncated and therefore our
capacity for appreciating self
transcendence and appreciating training
it and training it right gets
significantly undermined and input and
of course the thing about loneliness is
it reflects how constitutive of our
sense of value and personhood the
connection to other people lives I mean
you one of the ways you can punish a
human being is by putting them into
solitary confinement and and the problem
with loneliness is you do not even have
a Facebook Facebook the problem of
loneliness is you don't even have the
comfort of the jailer you are put in
basically into solitary confinement for
no apparent reasons right whatsoever
that's right
that's right right because whatever
patterns your whatever patterns are
available to you within that environment
become the patterns that you internalize
right right appropriate so if you're
actually living within a community that
allows for a certain amount of self
corrective self corrective feedback
then your capacity to actually exceed
into new kinds of perspectives or new
behaviors is is expanded significantly
as opposed to if you're you know your
feedback is limited to a few choice
persons who are curated and selected
carefully that's that's part of what's
happening with this but there is
digitized social life well but there is
an overlap here because because of the
digitization the automatisation because
there's increasing evidence that the
more time you're spending on in social
media especially things like Instagram
has a deleterious impact on your mental
health it tends to exacerbate depressive
issues anxiety issues feelings of
unworthiness it tends to also make
people feel more lonely because they see
all these other people out in everybody
else yes exactly exactly exactly and we
all I mean it's a it's a joke now
because we all know that it's false
doesn't matter yeah but we all it's so
salient exactly it's it's so
salient that you can't help yourself you
can't help but to buy into the illusion
it's very attractive illusion and it's
also exacerbate assort of mortal
confusion because we confuse having a
number of likes or having a number of
connections with actually being in
community with things right that's right
exactly because it changes that it
changes the tenor of our relationship
with not only with other people but but
by virtue of that also with ourselves
right we talked a little bit about in
the last video the I know I was going to
say the enemy exactly we get fixated on
the me and they lose touch with the I
that's right and what symbols in the
previous video and he has this idea of
idolatry I would argue that what we're
doing fundamentally the way that we
relate to our digital sales is a form of
idolatry weight we relate to ourselves
as objects that were able to pursue the
either to cultivate and because of that
not only is our relationship with other
people so really constructive but our
relationship to our own capacity our own
promise our own our own variability in
terms of our identity and perspective is
severe it's it's a stick see right right
just wanted to pick up on the idea about
the
as different from the icon and I know
Jean of Mary Ann has also talked about
this but especially in telex sense right
the symbol or the icon right is that has
that translucency and it takes you it's
designed to take you beyond whereas the
idol is okayed you only look at it and
you are fixated on exactly and you
become and you become the movie that the
idol actually stops the motion of
transcendence right exactly and whereas
the the object of the the object of
sacred wisdom practices right philosophy
ax being one is to undertake a unto
undertake an education that allows you
to be able to symbolize yourself to
symbolize the way that you organize your
identity and identification to be
deprived of the conditions for that
training to be deprived of by Lea for
heads of india Sophia to be deprived of
Phi Lea is to be deprived of that entire
cultural training that an entire
mechanism that allows you to be able to
educate the capacity to symbolize and
because of that all you're left with is
an idolatrous version so the meaning
crisis has significantly on your mind
and we talked about this last time and
they argue a lot of ability to relate I
think this is part of Jonathan Pazzo's
work to relate to the symbolic world and
the function of symbolism and that is
now being exacerbated and this is going
down again not to just something we
believe but into our very participatory
sense of agency connectedness to other
people yeah a very sense of identity
it's it's funny you say belief because
belief is a word that's essentially
become credo propositions right when
most people say I believe I mean I think
this exert those I assert this right and
so we I get in our forthcoming book for
instance what one what the distinctions
were going to make is a difference
between a difference in how we frame
belief but belief as a this is a little
bit of a tangent but it's somewhat
somewhat relevant a belief that right
which is which is the which is the
proposition of thank the assertion of a
position and the belief in which is part
of the original meaning of the word
belief to give you heart to share to
identify in so I think and so this this
is
to use the from right that modal
distinction or I thou is distinction
right belief in is what we really mean
by the participatory involvement that
the submit is right and the belief of
that has to do with that proposition
it's much much more an expression of the
idolatry be exactly the inverse of the
single so now we're moving towards
response yes and we're gonna have to
make some room actually yeah okay so we
talked about the loss of Pylea and and
the perversion of eros we talked a lot
about that in the previous video so we
don't need to go into all of that again
one thing that all of this obviously
tends to is the phenomenon of addiction
okay so do we want to do we want to
right let's do I'm gonna pass this over
to you because you're closer to that one
right um let's do this one and then
we're going to have to go back at me so
I'm what I'm asking is do we want to put
addiction this far to the right of
response or is it actually sort of
situation it should be here but we're
running out of space so I'll do this to
indicate that I think that's right it's
not a response right but if there is a
beginning of response so the idea here
is that what's happening because of the
undermining of the agent arena
relationship we can see addiction
increasing both because it overlaps with
the attempt to escape which we'll talk
about momentarily but what we have here
and here's what I'm putting again Marc
Lewis's idea of addiction is basically
anti right and agog a right and this is
the idea of addiction as reciprocal
narrowing so the older model is the
disease model the chemical is inside of
me it's like a disease and the chemical
inside of me is compelling the behavior
now obviously there is a biochemical
aspect to addiction but that model of
addiction doesn't cover most and I've
talked about this just to remind
everybody
the idea of addiction of reciprocal
narrowing is that it is this degradation
and perversion of the agent arena
relationship right
my agency gets truncated in some fashion
the kinds of identities i can assume
right the way i can reconfigure
restructure myself in order to change is
being diminished and then that reduces
options in the world and then as the
world's options decrease right i lose
more of my cognitive and my existential
identity I lose options into who and
what I can be the world loses options
and eventually it comes that there is I
can't be other than I am and there's no
opportunities for difference to change
my world becomes locked down I become
locked down and we get this whole
addiction spiral which is basically the
opposite of an agog a so as we lose as
we lose the agent Iranian relationship
that meta meaning affordance in the
meaning crisis we would expect this kind
of thing to become more prevalent and of
course it is going to overlap and right
let's be very clear there are also
clearly political and socio-economic
drivers to addiction just like we're
talking about a lot of different things
here but let's recite what Durkheim
showed in his famous book literally what
is it like around 150 years ago or
something that write a suicide is in
addition to and he was never denying his
book was called suicide because what he
showed with really conclusive evidence
and nobody's really undermined it right
is that in addition to whatever mental
health issues people have their own
particular socio-economic issues there
is a cause of suicide that has to do
just with the undermining of right the
orders the noma logical normative and
narrative orders he called that a know
me the law a know me is directly related
right a know me is directly related
latin to the the normative especially
the normal logical order this is the
loss of of order totally ordered and
so all along the way we're not claiming
that the meaning crisis in any of these
is the sole cause what we're saying is
the meaning crisis is going to
contribute in important ways all along
to the increase in all of these things
that we are finding right now and we
that the so the argument here is you're
going to see addiction rising things
like the opioid crisis other forms of
addiction rising precisely because we
are in a situation of antia and agog a
because worldly attunement is being
significantly undermined okay so let's
let's let's let's erase and right and
we'll we'll sort of slide things well
what we can do is we can write at the
center of that continuum yes we're going
to talk about the virtual Exodus which
is just to remind everyone we will be
putting up the completed panel so you'll
be able to see the whole thing we're
just trying to unfold it so you
understand the intelligibility you'd
understand how we're trying to schema
ties and the symptoms of the meaning
process it's a good point you made too
and it's worth it's worth emphasizing
that we're not you know we're not
presuming to give a wholesale account of
any one of these yep phenomena any one
of these symptoms and we're certainly
not making the claim that the meaning
crisis is the soul is the sole cause or
the sole way of understanding them
probably you did you sort of did that
yeah but it's worth it's worth nodding
to but we're simply indicating that
there's a there's a they are together
forming a pattern there's a fairly it's
a fairly well defined pattern once we
actually plot it out right and the
packets it's the it's the pattern third
the gestalt view of the pattern that is
so that is so that's so defining yes I
totally agree with that I think that's
well said yeah okay so let's keep going
what we can we now put right yeah so now
we're going to talk about the idea of
virtual Exodus we've already kind of
touched on this so so we're putting that
where where do you think um maybe just
to the right of the media right okay
yeah
it's pretty close it's pretty close to
addiction most to addiction the virtual
Exodus it's pretty because because
virtual Exodus espouses itself has it as
an addiction yes so what we mean by
virtual Exodus is a retreat into the
virtual world as well as a compensatory
response so you can see this in books
like the book there's a book in fact
entitled the virtual Exodus there's a
book entitled reality is broken and it's
trying to document how many people are
moving are restructuring their lives and
moving out of interacting with the real
world and real people and moving into
virtual worlds either the game world or
social media world etc that's right
that's right so one of the things we're
talking about video games the moment and
I have to preface by saying that I
unlike most people I know actually
didn't grow up like I watched my son's a
lot yeah minimal expertise I have a good
friend Patrick who would be aghast to
find me talking with any expertise but
video games because I consider him to be
the expert but um fundamentally is and
it's worth saying here before we get
into it that we're not saying that these
these virtual Levites have no value in
fact they can have quite a bit of value
trinsic and instrumental down no we're
talking about the accidents not just the
virtuality that's right that's right so
we're not this is not to say that
virtual exercises aren't worth aren't
worth the time right it's not to say
that virtual exercises have no value
it's to say that the their use as a
compensatory response to the meaning
crisis is the issue it's not the virtual
exercise or activity it's the it's the
very complete shifting of your engine
yeah and I and well I think it's it's
it's it's it's it reflects a choice
right using a using the the virtual game
as entertainment or education is not the
same thing as the existential choice to
say reality is broken to use one of the
the titles of the book I choose I'm
gonna choose to live here that's right
that's right so we're talking about that
aspect of this phenomena that's right so
I was going to say about video games
because video games are interesting
because they you've talked about the
three orders are radiological the Norman
area the the the mini physics of video
recreate those orders so much it's going
back into the axial world right it's
governed by a set of very very
consistent very legible rules that fit
you or your avatar it levels up with the
normative order right right there's the
ANA GOG it descent that happens at P
junctures and all of it unfolds approach
and their flow induction machine and
their flow induction machine but it's a
flow that of course has nothing to do
and you're constantly improving and
you're constantly self-correcting so
it's an incredible incredible like font
for narrative but it's also a mechanism
for for attunement right but
unfortunately what you're tuning with
fundamentally isn't correspondent and
then in the world of the verdict of
these virtual realities is exactly what
right we can't fit into the scientific
worldview and that's why those worlds
often have a fantastical component to
them right that you know point back to
well yes and we're going to talk about
the fact that pseudo religious
mythologies always yeah
yes that's what makes them worthwhile
substitutes now of course this is close
to addiction because as I mentioned
before the the World Health Organization
is seriously considering making video
games video game addiction a bona fide
medical disease that needs to be
acknowledged because of the way in which
it can be so disruptive and destructive
to people's lives and that of course is
I think makes sense because of the way
as we as we've been arguing it gives you
it satisfies it's like junk food it's
satisfies without there being any any
actual calories it satisfies the longing
for the orders it satisfies the longing
for flow but of course it's hijacking
and perverting that and in a way that is
sort of definitional of what it is to
fall prey to an addiction so we've
already talked about social media a
little bit when we talked about
loneliness
obviously the
these two these two points on a
continuum are correspondent to one
another and so we don't need to tread
too heavily on this topic again suffice
it to say even within this topic there
is a continuum sir because video like
gaming in the broad sense of the term
and especially the narrative component
of gaming is actually collapsing into
social media yeah the idea of operating
within a narrative and with things like
Instagram sort of bleed between these
social media and being a video game yes
very much so
it actually deepens the virtuality and
it deepens its participatory right I'll
learn right yeah because you get both in
one now it's good to be social you get
to subject your communities but you also
get your three orders and your flow
induction rights and so you get them
both together and that's why I like it's
so incredibly powerful right because you
can you can you have the ingress into
the axial world and you have all the
community asks you of course you don't I
was going to say you have a will you
have you have a specter of the community
I remember I asking my younger son of if
he actually wanted to meet with the
people he was playing with online and
this struck him as odd yeah yeah a very
odd thing to do what why would I want to
actually interact with these people no
no it's like nobody wants to call each
other yeah yeah a version of the same
reason yeah because our entire our are
as part of the our mode of the
atomization is being be figured by this
it's being retrained yeah and you know I
I mean I wonder in like 10 20 years just
how much of that sociability will have
been rewired even beyond recognizability
yeah cuz right now we're kind of
straddling both but um anyway so yeah
the I think that the intersection of the
sociability and the and they order the
ordered metaphysics and the slow-mo yeah
all collapse and coordinate to create
something that is what its irresistible
sure
okay let's keep going okay okay I think
here's our big category and we're going
to need all the space that we can
possibly get so we'll just draw a little
straw at the center to continue them or
in the center section maybe a little bit
more to the right a little bit more to
the right yeah okay
okay please remember this our use of
left and right has absolutely nothing to
do with the political connotation oh no
it's simply that we read from left to
right yes ah the Neo Gnosticism yes
we've been talking about this quite a
bit not to be confused with this right
yes we're using to have very positive so
there was all episode Kristin which I
tried to distinguish between gnosis and
ostracism yeah okay so this is
essentially where we're trying to we're
trying to redraw the map of the world
fundamentally in a narrative sense we're
trying to retry to reintroduce a
meta-narrative that is as participatory
as evolving as cohering as the
meta-narrative and world the attunement
provided by actual religions broadly
speaking in our case I think we're
speaking very very much within the
Christian paradigm so and and because
there's been the declension of that
right because it's for treating further
and further and further away from us are
the sense of being the sense of being
disoriented is our our experiences right
with disorientation precisely because
we've lost that coherent that's not that
coherent canopy so we're involving that
we're using the term narcissism know to
bring with it the sense the of
entrapment and the sense that this
attempt to create the meta-narrative
is it is that the Vaculik
that the the vacuum that were suddenly
voiced with right like the canopy above
us right the coherent set of stars that
map the world not the cosmos etc they no
longer bring us the orientation of a
meta-narrative right now it's sort of a
by analogy it's akin to looking up and
seeing a black and sky
all right and so that's part of why
you're next focused on the shelter yes
as the sacred canopy now removed leaves
with it a sense of again the sense of
declension a sense of having having the
narrative of the cosmos retreat away and
also falling away ourselves right
minutes famous quote okay so it's what's
that relate to Gnosticism but I think
that because of that because in the
absence now of that meta-narrative I
think one of the responses to it has
been the the it's almost as though we
want to punch our way through that
blackened it's a it's a barrier belated
enemy right it's like it's it's obscured
now it's an anew belated sky and we now
feel like we have to punch through it
right so we we max where that's where
this is not conspiratorial nature it's
bad yeah it's it's a barrier as opposed
to a vacuity right because at least a
barrier we can try to break through
that's right okay so right listen that's
right and now what if that is the MIS
framing - right it's a Mis framing
because it's taking a vacuity framing it
as a barrier and then it's like a mirage
right yeah you're shooting for it and
you end up going right through it um
well let's put yeah flat earther
phenomenon right so a lot of these are
going to have sort of a conspiratorial
edge to them as well then right so it's
the substitution of the meta-narrative
right so jonathan pazzo did an episode
talking about the flat earth phenomena
and about how people right I think we're
taking a slightly different take on it
but there is some convergence on areas
we both see it as a response like we and
Jonathan both see it as a response to
the meaning crisis and summarization
yeah that's right so like let's list
some particular examples of this here
who do we put in here
well we have seen we have rink now we
have bundled into this right the
phenomena that we're calling pseudo
religious ideologies ideologies right or
we could also say mythologies right
right but the term ideology is often
used to because they primarily Express
identity participation narrative in
political terms and political merit and
political structures right okay and so
getting back into the the the agent
during the structure of the worldview
attunement right even talked about
medical men and meaning system does a
lot of this has to do with because we've
lost the overarching meta meaning system
right the co hearing government right I
think that there is a visible and
repeated attempt in various arenas and
various domains to take meaning systems
right politics is a good example of that
right that political framework is in
itself a system that governs us to try
and make an intention omission and what
you can't do because it so this isn't
this is a classic category mistake right
it's the ideas we're taking we're taking
something that depends on a meta meaning
a particular meaning system and we're
trying to make it be I'm not a meaning
system and take the place of the meta
meaning system and it can't because it's
not structured to actually function that
way that's right that's right
and you see that I mean you know to
speak of politics just for a moment and
obviously we're not going to talk about
politics in depth because this is
politicized too much already and then
mentally it's not a political problem
but it does manifest itself in political
symptoms right or rather the nature of
politics is a symptom of it and you know
we I mean we saw the most canonical
examples of this available to us writer
Marxism and Nazism but you know we're a
political system
assumes the the what we might call the
residue of religiosity and the role this
is the role and responsibility of
formerly what a religious system
provided fundamentally it doesn't have
the it doesn't have the complexity to be
able to accomplish well it doesn't I
mean as the episode I talked about like
with the Nazi the Nazism and Marxism is
although you have a lot of you have a
lot of religious symbols and ritual
behavior you you nevertheless have no
articulating articulation within the
ideology of of participatory knowing of
respectable knowing of of trance
formation all that all of that machinery
is actually lost because we're stuck at
the level of the of you know of the
level of willful assertion of
propositions that's right that's right
and a lot of it has to do with the way
in which we are identifying ourselves
with and through these systems right
right so another exists so so our gonna
say about politics is that you know if
you look at the way that the behavior of
US politics is very interesting
especially to us as Canadians we very
quite understand it often because we
it's difficult to understand I think for
us just how religious US politics yes
which is not the same thing to say it's
like the Christian Right it's the no no
no no then that's not what I mean at all
I'm not referring to any any end of the
spectrum one thing that I often think is
especially observing usually during
their presidential elections and this is
either side either party is that the
best way of understanding the role of
the US president is as the role of a
church leader yes the role of a
religious head not a governor right not
someone that governs right or introduces
policies etc though it's the
identification with the religious leader
that I think espouses the deep deep
pregnancy of how meaningful that that
office is as a symbol right but the fact
that that is now degenerating into
adversarial gridlock Paulette right
because that system cannot accommodate
the religion right again Casa T with
which it's been
voice right it can't be a meta meaning
system cannot be a meta meaning system
right - it doesn't have the same breadth
of identification it doesn't have the
same ritual practices it doesn't have
the same symbolic affordances right it
doesn't have all of that machinery that
the religion the actual religions for
instance had to be able to cohere people
properly to be produced wisdom to be
able to produce discourse doesn't really
have us you know coordinated sets of
psycho technologies for transforming
consciousness cognition character and it
doesn't it's but de-facto it because
there's nothing else it has the it gets
inflated as complex as that right and as
important and as as much scalable impact
on the world and on people I think it de
facto has assumed and this is this is
really true I think of the presidential
office is that it has assumed the
importance and the valence of a
religious system and of a religious
leader right and that's why so much so I
mean a world of importance over every
four years is is channeled through that
right that system so what are some other
examples we want to put in here well
when we're talking about pseudo
religious mythologies the example of our
fantasies right now in our modern
fantasies right our superhero myth the
superhero mythos the Star Wars mythos
although so I think you know we might at
some point do a whole session on the
Star Wars mythos yeah it's leave that
one in the offing for now but the
superhero mythos is arguably the most
then the the the overwhelming successive
endgame of the anti yeah exactly yeah
but it but see what that what that's
doing right that project right marvel's
project right the cinematic universe
what it's doing is it's casting a
meta-narrative yes yeah very much that's
why the share of the universe yes
continuous narrative that binds together
a universe right right right and think
of everything that goes in so not only
does it have not only does it have an
entire universe in a continuity of that
universe and now of course they've that
universe as we now know is is has
a dimensionality to it that tends to the
level of synchronicity tends to this
people's mix structure dress up right so
then it has that right it has the
participatory element all right
convention play the conventions right
people identifying very deeply and then
look at the characters themselves
they're an interesting synthesis of
Bronze Age gods in some cases they argue
Bronze Age gods axial virtues yeah and
and this is really interesting to me and
modern second technologies right right
the title character that begins the
entire universe and arguably more than
any other character who frames the
universe right the commands only star
character is one who's whose excellence
and who's whose destiny and whose wisdom
and whose agency is bound to his use of
cyber technology yeah the epitomized by
the suit and all that stuff yes so so
right he's like he's literally sir he's
literally encased within identified with
it he's cyborg commands right and he and
his cosmic journey his his sort of is
his cosmic narrative destiny right the
his that's interesting is an agog a so
you get the Bronze Age the axial age and
you get to say all about all in case
literally right within a character who
we then identify with and who's
essentially charts an entire universe
worth of important we're running out of
time so let's get to our last category
renewing gnosis right
so this are people who are trying to
create responses to the meeting crisis
by giving us new ecologies of practices
new psycho technologies like so we've
got people like wave Kelly who is doing
you know the idea of movement practices
being a mesh within ritual or I talked
about you know appeal people like Peter
Limburg the authentic discourse trying
to create new ways of talking and
discussing with each other do the
secular monastery like one of the great
gifts of the series in fact is I'm
meeting all these people I'm get to meet
all these to all these people who are
trying to create right basically a new
culture a new set of psycho technologies
ecologies of practices communities right
that will allow them to renew the
machinery a participatory perspective
annoying bring about gnosis you know try
and get an agave going again and so
seeing more and more of that happening
right now right right and what's
interesting is I think a lot of these
what a lot of these are trying to do is
to is to to rescind a lot of the creedal
arrogation that's been characteristic
yes
there's generally a move into the body
there's a movement to flowing discourse
the level of meaning system arbitrarily
right they're not basically
superimposing they're not inflating some
system into a motivating something to be
endlessly meaningful or to use your
terminology to be endlessly or
ultimately relevant unto itself
righteous against Horo Tillich's term is
that idolatrous instinct right yeah
there's a there's a deep resistance to
idolatry in the renewing gnosis projects
that's right that's right it's it's and
that's why a lot of those practices and
practices are and there's sort of
another somewhere here which we've kind
of glanced over for the purposes of time
is this idea of serious play right right
the serious play of the space in which
to reengage a state of play that is
characteristic of the phenomenon and
that's in a lot of these a lot of these
tenets in a lot of these right now
because one of the ways of understanding
the creole ossification of religious
praxis is understanding how the Credo
the set of constraints that were meant
to condition the state of play right a
mnemonic device that no Vokes you into a
state of connectedness end up becoming
the end to the practice instead of
conditioning the arena for play they end
up actually enclosing on it and so what
I think this is trying to do is open up
the arena again right bye-bye and open
up by the agency tune by slapping in the
grip that this yet these Creed's have
yes but open up both of them right so
yeah it's a pattern and I think these
are only accumulating more and more
these are kinds of reflective responses
so yeah I think we've got serious play
there and that and that's overlapping
with renewing nauseous so I also see
that there are people who are doing
serious play and renewing Nasus with you
know with the framework that's been sort
of tired to endure like Christianity and
I'm thinking of people we mentioned him
multiple times
Jonathan party no I think of the really
interesting work that Paul bender clay
is doing in which there's an attempt I
die I give them a lot more credit than I
think they do I think they're they're
attempting to bring these elements or a
claim that these elements can be found
rehomed within Christianity and revived
Christianity as an attempt to do that
yes and in a very certain take a symbol
again like to use the example of the
Christian framework to take a symbol
again you know and this is only one
dimension of the complexity of that
symbol but taking a symbol fundamentally
that has been constricted someone by the
ossification of the Crete that surrounds
the praxis that surrounds yes Timothy
burn conductivity of that symbol that
has been inhibited by that the V the
sort of the burgeoning fundamentalism
and atheism right those twin totally
confused responses to the diminishment
of the power of that symbol and to try
and take that symbol and not to act
certainly not to extricate it from its
mythos because it has to be couched to
some degree in a myth Asin
order to be viable but it's about
figuring the mythos in such a way as to
free it from what have become a
parasitic sort of creedal impositions so
we would put things like the mindfulness
revolution here for example right
because it's an attempt to write
especially if they're trying to situate
themselves within a community a ecology
of practice not just meditate so they
write relax or reduce stress but if
they're pursuing it as a philosophy as a
transformative way of life then we've
got that also going in I would think we
might want the like I said the authentic
discourse would be like I mentioned
Peter Lindbergh's work right and we've
got the wisdom and Renaissance there's
more and more people talking about
wisdom ways of life and trying to bring
about not only in the popular world
where like stoicism for example is
becoming something that is becoming more
and more about rebirth right but
unfortunately it's it's a mistake in the
law but it's having a revival and but I
was also going to say the and I'll get
to talk about this later in the series
the the academic scientific interest in
wisdom has now come back what about the
the psychedelic Renaissance I think this
is also an attempt to renew gnosis it's
an attempt to use psychedelics as long
as they use it it's interesting because
the use of fair enough so what I would
argue and what I've argued is where
psychedelics are being set within again
a set of psycho technologies with for
the function of bringing about a higher
state of consciousness and bringing
about some fundamental Avenue and
affordance of self-transcendent the
cultivation of wisdom then we're getting
that kind of thing here right that's
right okay so yes that says use the
psychedelics as situated within a
practice of some kind that trains it and
in culturing so I think all of this end
is very I'm for me with its very hopeful
but I I want to make a criticism here
and it's meant to be a constructive
criticism not a negative criticism I see
a lot of this and again I'm not trying
to detract from the value but I see a
lot of this as being very very bottom up
right and that it there's a lot of these
practices emerging but how they should
be coordinated and how they should be
integrated related together and how that
is supposed to ultimately fit back with
right the the scientific worldview that
is the dominant worldview of of the West
so what I mean is there isn't we've got
the the bottom-up processing but we
don't have the top-down wait we don't
have anything that is yet analogous to
what the sacred canopy is and what I'm
and so what we're still struggling with
right and when I talk to people about
this they write some of these people
this comes out that which is what I've
talked about this hard problem right we
we this is still taking place against
the backdrop right of the socio-economic
crisis right the ecological crisis all
these things that are a very exigent
right and so it's having to it's also
it's an uphill battle because what it's
also doing is its having to it's it's
it's it's having to somehow
circumnavigate all of this right because
especially they mean this species that
sort of that what we call generally neo
Gnostic but that the general responses
tend to speciate a lot of independent
meaning systems tribalism is sort of a
very much very much a having mode having
an identity right a lot of different
systems that all ascend to the level of
meta meaning and they're all now in
competition with one another that's
where the tribal that the issue of
tribalism currently right these single
modes of identification that want to
fashion themselves into prisms through
which to to in like like you know
through which to see and interpret all
things right right and they update and
so any effort to try and there's there's
a tension with there there's an aspect
in which this could be sucked into a lot
of the bullshitting that's going on here
so there's there's that difficulty
there's also the difficulty of trying to
do this with wit and avoid the right the
the totalitarian trauma that a lot of
these things have are associated with
right but but also a lot of these people
the nostalgic attempt to go back to an
organized religion is no longer
available to them so here's what I'm
saying they they are pursuing and I
think sincerely and and not in
effectively but they are pursuing a
comprehensive transformation of
consciousness cognition character and
communitas but the only thing that has
successfully done that for us in the
past is religion they they find but the
the Orthodox existing religions are not
very powerful I mean we you made a
reference me just quote about grammar
you know in our previous video and it
yeah it's like we still we still speak
and think in the length so there are
people trying to break out of that like
I know Jordan green Hall is trying to
get break out of that grammar and some
of his work but what we're saying is
trying to not get sucked up into the
nostalgia that is almost imprinted on us
because of the grammar we don't want to
go back to the pseudo religious
ideologies that Trent's the world in
blood and so these these nascent right I
don't know what to call them these
nascent cultures or these amazing
communities or whatever right there
there they are they're you know they're
they're that they're facing tremendous
difficulty on in terms of what's the
template what do they pattern themselves
on in order to try and create the
overarching structure that will organize
the bottom-up change because arguably at
the center of that structure the way it
has been right our legacy from the
actual religions is that does that that
structure is anchored bias by some
fundamental symbol that has enough by
valence and complexity well at least
sets of symbols like the two worlds
mythology and all kinds of things but to
be able to to be able to conduct that
entire structure so in the absence and I
think that's why there's an attempt to
salvage some of those axial symbols if
not the entire practices not the entire
mythos so what degree you can separate
them is a really hard question right can
you remove some desk from the matrix
that has essentially birthed it and
nurtured it and have it this is a little
this is this is running through the
whole series
did we to which we can salvage things
from them so what degree can we is that
is the question but there's an under
attempt to salvage something because
otherwise it's as though it's as though
we're working from a blank canvas right
okay
that was excellent Chris thank you very
much for the the dialog and way of
trying to articulate the symptom ology
of the meaning crisis and I hope that
the viewers found this helpful both as a
way of giving a deeper understanding of
what the meaning crisis is and how they
can identify its effects in both their
individual and collective lives thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you
you