[Music]
Jordan Peterson psychologist philosopher
and now pop star the tragedy I've made a
couple of documentaries about Jordan
Peterson including glitch in the matrix
you keep him from where I came in from
London last night then I discovered
someone had done a musical remix of it
brink of the frames they'll be put to
the major break break of the French
there's a bunch of the major break break
of the French there's a glitch in the
matrix a DJ based in LA a cure of the
dawn a week later he happened to be in
London this is our talk when you're
making music and writing and stuff
oftentimes you quote the Great's and you
know you quote a hunter s Sampson are
you quote young or whatever but they're
all dead you know knew they didn't they
were audio if there are audio recordings
of them they're not very good and there
aren't that many of them and here we
have Peterson like spitting
napalm on a daily basis like dropping
like an hours of audio every day it's
all brilliant it all incredibly
quotable and it's also incredibly
sonorous musical and beautiful and
important and necessary right now if I
did nothing else in my life even if I
didn't even eat I could just sit there
making Peterson music forever so it's
been a bit of a roller coaster journey
like I put out the glitch in the matrix
documentary and then Jordan Pederson got
in touch to say do you mind if I put it
on my youtube channel is that how that
happens yeah then it kind of raced to
about 400,000 views in a couple of weeks
and then I found this remix of a glitch
in the matrix before he posted it by the
way oh well that was I did that a good
couple of weeks before and it was
fantastic I was very excited when I
found it I actually stopped what I was
doing I normally get up have a steak go
into the studio and I got up and I was a
salting my steak and I that came up in
my YouTube
thank you to the YouTube algorithms I'll
get into this in a bit but I put it on
and then ended up just watching the
whole thing rather than going straight
to the studio and it was fantastic and I
knew immediately that I wanted to do
something with it musically which are
not done before was normally I find sort
of pieces of audio to tell a whole story
that I already want to tell or
what-have-you but you'd basically done
something that I wanted to do and you'd
done it perfectly so it was like okay I
just need to get the right music for
this and it'll be a wonderful useful
thing yeah because I first saw it and I
thought oh wow someone's put a backing
track to the documentary and I thought
that's pretty cool but then I watch it I
was like no there's some real production
skill in here
[Music]
yeah that's been that's been the
reaction all over
I think that was Peterson's reaction he
was instantly like thought this was
gonna be silly and was mute and then was
like oh this is actually artful and I
were now it's actually proving useful
and that's generally the reaction from
people came to the memes stayed for the
amazingness or whatever you think it's
gonna be silly and they did it and then
it has silliness about it I suppose but
it actually works on a on many levels
silly without the fingers with that is I
pretty much know almost instantly as
well what this sort of sonic palette was
which was this sort of sci-fi dystopian
vapour trap synth thing which is quite
specific and then it's a case if you
like my themes you know them fix with
your voice and it fits with the
Britishness that comes to it there's
particularly now I've been away for
three and a half years and I came back
and things are very disturbing it's like
it's like a kind of a ZZZ BBC drama of
the future aesthetic has become the
truth this idea we used to have of what
the future might be like if things went
a bit wrong but you're living in America
so you've got your own dystopian fantasy
to worry about the American dystopian
fantasy is kind of sort of a Technicolor
almost Jack Kirby kind of like pop art
thing and the British one is this kind
of like grim it's like the more sort of
George Orwell I guess oldest Huxley yeah
Huxley had it completely right but it's
it's like it's a lot like the movie of V
for Vendetta being away for three and a
half years coming back it looks and
sounds and feels like that
yeah he has really yeah basically
basically it's like him in Grant
Morrison it's kind of the Orwell and
Huxley thing you have these two ideas
and they're both kind of right although
I would say brave new world has thus far
turned out to be a more accurate
representation but we don't get sexy
drugs we've got technology we have two
we have the the cocaine rush of the
facebook-like versus actual good drugs
that was one thing I was disappointed
lots of the future has come to pass in a
way that I hoped it would but drugs in
the future of rubbish terribly now
you've just got this little dopamine
rush of a light and that's yeah that's
how drug nowadays yes there's a little
coke bump and people the actual drugs
people take like government versions of
drugs we had in the 60s so like
government speeders in the shape of
adderall and government cocaine and
government what would he call xanax
smack government smack is the grip drug
of choice for the youth of today which
is a very depressing state of affairs
you might as well stay indoors like
harvesting likes yeah anyway where were
we yeah glitch
yeah the beautiful beautiful glitch the
beautiful vapor trap which and yes so
one has to find a musical sort of tone
an aesthetic and then one has to make it
work harmoniously and key you scoring
the thing here but it also has to kind
of go on the emotional journey and kind
of hit the points and sort of accentuate
what's already there a lot of the effect
of these things is subconscious you know
I don't want it to be people sometimes
hit me up in like are you should do or
achieve Fingal you should do like the
caffeine oom and like remix and make it
you know make it a big banging trap
thing or something but there's lots of
people doing silly things like that on
YouTube I'm trying to do something a lot
more subtle so it's a case of just
slightly retiming the speaking so that
it's in time with the music
cutting out homes and ours and things of
that nature
occasionally repeating things for
emphasis and occasionally like just
timing you know timing retiming and
things of that nature
makes you really appreciate peterson
even more he's very easy to work with as
his voice is an instrument because he
speaks very deliberately and sonorous ly
and rhythmically anyway he actually
speaks in in a kind of form of rhythmic
poetry sometimes he is actually rapping
you don't really need to do that much
retiming on him sometimes and you've got
like bits of a rap song he just does
that nationally and then other people
don't necessarily do that you'll you
will feel very good as you don't do but
you know you've you've got a training so
you're not humming an aria and what have
you some of these subjects of your film
did require a lot of tidying up to get
the more musical nature of what they
were doing and some less so communal
package is very funny I'd wanted to do
something with her icon I imagined she'd
be like a speed garage oh she's
brilliant and I've been running I was
thinking of doing a mini package away of
anyway she talks about aesthetics a lot
it's just like perfect for that world I
don't how much you know about that but
aesthetics is aesthetic is a big part of
the vaporwave think it's almost the core
of it it's the aesthetic I don't really
know what vaporwave is I saw that on
your on your bio you'd like it it's it's
it's ironic some have pointed out to use
it well use aspects of it because it's
postmodern music and this original idea
was a postmodern idea in her a lot of it
was used to sort of its attack
capitalism or at least make statements
about capitalism and vacuous Ness of
modern culture and stuff but it's
involved so initially it would take a
bit of music and sort of slow it down
and loop it forever for like eight
minutes like a bit of a Diana Ross song
or something you sort of slow it down
and then loop it and sort of drag out
the pathos from the thing and you would
twin that with visuals and the visuals
would be like sort of pink and blue and
Evian Wars of bottles a bit of a wind
95 logo or something call these like
bits of our culture that kind of sort of
could be interpreted as sort of dead and
purely caps a list with unsold us but
then that created a whole subculture if
then it creating brilliant music as
these things always do my take on it was
fusing it with a low fire hip-hop and
some other things I like liked rap and
contemporary sort of music production
ideas to create soundscapes of depth and
length when I first came across it I
assumed that you were American yes and
it ironically I didn't really put this
into the glitch documentary so much but
a lot of what I was talking to Peterson
about with synchronicities yes
synchronicities are like meaningful
coincidences that seems somehow to be
related to the structure of being and
then I saw your remix of the documentary
and then you happen to be coming to the
UK for the first time for two weeks
after this yes I've been here three and
a half years but though Here I am and
here you are of course these things
always happen Grant Morrison would say
we did say that the first step to
becoming he's a chaos magician as well
as a writer and the first step to
becoming a magician is to knows his
synchronicity you start noticing that
and the more you notice them the more
they occur yeah it's kind of you're
you're aware of the fabric of being
Muhammad Malcolm X said when you're
noticing synchronicities you're walking
with Allah was his thing on that so you
know as it's always been that way
whenever I'm doing anything in life
that's correct and I find I am on the
correct path and you know when you're on
the correct path then you know his
synchronicities all over the place and
some would say that that's proof that
we're living in a simulation and some
would say that's proof of God and
there's many people have all sorts of
thoughts about this but all the the
observable fact is that when one is
observing these things like meaning
becomes ever more apparent and
the worth of what you're doing becomes
ever more apparent and then it just
spawns more stuff interesting that you
say as well that Peterson has a very
musical or a very performative aspect to
his speech because that also ties into
that's what I really like about his his
philosophy is that he talks about
performing that performance or aligning
yourself with the truth and if you're
aligning yourself with the logos of the
creative principle you would expect to
be for that to have an effect on your
actual performance but he feels like a
very embodied speaker when he's on stage
like he's fully inhabiting the stories
that he's that he's telling and that
that performative aspect of it is seems
to me at least also related to what he's
talking about the logo of something
incarnated more in your life and
incarnate and more in your in your being
yes and watching him become that over
the years because he was not always as
as confident and able to just now you
know you freestyles right he's his whole
career yes all careers really reminded
me of it's very $0.50 for example got
big off the back of drama there was
created drama you know beefs with other
rappers and being shot 13 times and all
this stuff which draws people into the
story but then he had this huge body of
work and that kept people there Peterson
did this Peterson had these public
dramas and that brought people to him
but then when they got to him they there
was this huge body of work for them to
get sort of lost and immersed in it
Peterson has some kind of drama like
every week at this point he's like the
ultimate sort of contemporary battle
rapper he's at war with all sorts of
people at all times it's it's brilliant
very interesting and if you're inside
you know if you're a rap fan or if
you're a what would you call if you're a
intellectual dark or whatever the hell
it is fat it's like this guy's getting
incredible beefs every week right and
there's a new sort of super villain to
root against every week three guards to
him or if you're on his side or not you
know it's the whole thing's very
entertaining but then he pulls you in
and then there's all this meaning and
this huge body of work but he's quite
new on this lake if you watch him
like 15 years ago it was a bit awkward
and sort of he was very charming
and he knew what he was talking about
but the absolute beast that he
has become as a performance creature who
can now just rock up at an amphitheatre
and just like freestyle the new to our
lecture off the top of his head and he's
very into not repeating himself too much
in his lake you go see a standard
chameleon you'll see pretty much the
same set every week for like a year or
something he won't do that
he's more like a very good DJ you know
he has all these yes like a fistful of
things that you know his works together
and they're linked and he can take you
on these different journeys but
depending on who's in the room and where
he is he will create a new and
transformative always experience yeah
and he also describes that as a dialogue
even if it's Oh even if he's the only
one speaking he's speaking deliberately
and if you watch some of the lectures in
his classroom you'll see him pick out
one person at a time to speak to and
then he'll change what he's saying based
on their facial reaction as their
response if he says something that's a
little bit too much you can see him
correcting himself in the moment or
adding a bit more context so it is very
live yeah I'm a very good DJ and if
you're a very good DJ that's exactly
what you do you don't just go in there
and like play thirty records in a
sequence that you've already preordained
you go in there and you you have some
idea of where you want to go and maybe
where you want to end up taking these
people but it's all very different
depending on who's in the room and who
walks in at any given point or how they
react to one thing at any given point
and all that and yeah he's become quite
masterful at that so he's a great battle
rapper he's a great dude yes he's the
kind of this is yeah he's like the
perfect contemporary pop star and now
pop stars are also neutered and boring
yeah I mean for God if you look at if
you look at rap now compared to rap in
the 90s the stuff that biggie was saying
that he would do to you and your mother
and all that sort of thing you just
don't it doesn't happen anymore even
rappers have just become very very
self-conscious and scared to offend so
there's certain things they're allowed
to say in certain groups they're allowed
to say things about that they stay away
from the most part of stuff which is why
instrumental one of the many reasons
instrumental hip hop is now the biggest
your honor on YouTube
can you talk through the process of
making say the the 12 rules for life
piece which I've played a few times and
keep getting more out of it this process
of making 12 rules for life was
completely different in the pro that my
previous process which was tell I wanted
to put across Peterson's ideas in the
form of sort of arcing stories over a
low fire music that would take you on an
emotional journey that was doing a
similar thing so I would find little
bits of lots of different lectures and
I'd often find him talking about the
same thing but over the course of 20
years in different lectures tell that
story from lots of little pieces so what
was his response because you you said
you've been in touch with him what did
he what did he make of it yeah he really
liked he loves it he says it's very
surreal he asked me to come and perform
with him at the all few minutes Angelus
he wanted me to come down and sort of DJ
and open the thing but unfortunately the
Orpheum wouldn't accommodate that as
such late notice but yeah he had that
show and my whole thing with 12 rules
was to get it done in time to be around
the time he put the book out and so that
when he played in Los Angeles it will be
ready and yeah yeah he was very into it
and I spoke with his wife Tammy and
afterwards since she said they're both
loved it and we're really kind of amazed
at how he was actually good and sort of
ridiculous and he despised the whole
thing very very very very surreal and he
said when he writes me said this is real
ba he was thinking about using tracks
from it to like open his lectures and
he's going on tour later this year it
must be incredibly bizarre for him I
mean he's become sort of the most the
biggest internet meme of this year yeah
yeah exactly I must be a very strange
for decades and decades he's been doing
this very specifically very dedicated
Lee getting up at the same time every
day work until the same point of night
since 1983 I believe it was was at 83 or
89 there anyway
on the same subject with the same girls
and technology's just grown up around
him and suddenly there's a way of
disseminating all this stuff and he'd
been very candidly record
all of his lectures and keeping all that
and like we were saying so then he has
this vast vast library this vast back
catalogue so if you would just get an
answering which really everyone is even
over the past year or whatever you know
you could you could spend years going
through this stuff yeah and that's a
very powerful and transformative process
for anybody no matter what period of
your life I have a lot of people write
to me because I'm the music aspect of it
is very helpful to some people it's like
I had one guy write to me was like he
had a friend who was a smack ass and he
was trying to get him into Peterson he
couldn't be asked to read and he
couldn't be asked to watch a lecture and
then he gave him one of my mixes and
then he really got into it through that
and now he's off smack and he's like
taking acting classes and he's turned
his deceptive ways into acting and and
now he's got a bit part in a film and
this all happened in like three months
but I have a lot of people and I have
like a lot of old bit like a guy 70 year
old saying you know of this stuff I got
into it through the musical aspects and
drew my sign or whatever and this is
changing my life and I'm 70 and now I'm
really excited about the future and
stuff
a lot of people are terrified of the
future and a lot of people people think
that we're kind of doomed even Petersons
very kind of has very dark outlook but
also very hopeful one because the end
result of this this mass the conspiracy
types about 10 years ago would always
all talk about a mass awakening right
when we all worked out that the people
behind the news had agendas that the
people in control didn't really like us
that much and talked about this mass
awakening but there is a mass awakening
but the real mass awakening is people
just becoming educated on all the stuff
that the smartest amongst has worked out
over the past couple of hundred years
but wasn't privy to that many people
yeah the internet D democratized many
many things and the first thing he did
was with music and I was there and I saw
it happen and I saw record labels
collapsing and I saw my a an our guy
gets sacked after my first record deal
almost instantly because the bottom just
fell out
then suddenly anyone could make music in
their own home and anyone could upload
it and anyone could take it from
wherever and then that started happening
with TV and then it started happening
with journalism that's happening with
money because of Bitcoin is is happening
with everything and it's happened with
education now anyone can go on YouTube
and like learn something that previously
you had to go to university for years
and years to learn and you can get right
to the core of what you want to know and
you can compare and contrast with some
other smart people and the
smartest people you can have the best
teachers in the world right there so
there's your awakening you have yeah and
more especially since the intellectual
dart web idea I'm more reassured that
the internet does have this double side
because it's very giving your take on
that thing well I work in journalism yes
so it's it's terrifying to me that it's
destroying journalism like it's
destroying it takes time to do good
journalism it takes time to research it
takes takes effort and and I also think
that the filter bubble we've created
tools that reward the lowest aspects of
ourselves and narcissism our need for
validation our tribalism these are the
tools that we've got from the internet
with us far and they've been very
deliberately developed to hack our
dopamine systems to hack our neurology
for money it's like a late-stage
capitalism model for this this new very
very powerful technology and so I've
been very pessimistic about that for
quite a while yes and it's not until
probably quite recently when I've seen
the emergence of the intellectual dark
web which I talked about in The Glitch a
little bit as a kind of group of of
countercultural thinkers who are kind of
exposing the the way that a lot of the
media especially has been engaged in
groupthink which is why Trump came as
such a surprise with my bricks it came
as such a surprise and so it I'm now
seeing before I really saw the sort of
dystopian nature of well we're
destroying truth we're undermining truth
were undermining all of our sources of
truth now I'm starting to see that there
is a sort of self generated
best ideas winning aspect that's going
on at the same time that you're seeing
through like the Joe Rogan podcast for
example and the Dave Rubin show of these
guys finding each other the the Ben
Shapiro's the Jordan Peterson's the Eric
Weinstein's of this world are starting
to be self selected by the Internet at
the same time as you're having a lot of
things being eroded away and that's
giving me a little bit of hope
I still think things are gonna get
really rocky before because what we're
seeing is the destruction of all of the
structures all the structures everywhere
are being undermined by the force of
technologies anything there's a
middleman is what it is so the
universities with middlemen for
knowledge and then and what they do
what's happened - who said was it anyway
as this happens everyone pivots to enter
sort of being entertainment or gossip so
news used to just you know give you news
and then you can get news from all over
the place any random guy on Twitter so
news becomes a sort of entertainment
thing and it's got a slant and it's got
a gossipy angle and that's what it does
education has done the same thing they
all do that so you're not seeing the
destruction of the whole thing you seen
the destruction of the middleman or like
you know but the actual knowledge itself
isn't being destroyed and the access to
the knowledge is actually increasing and
while there's the initial you know which
is there was the meme that was put about
out by the media that was scared the
fake news me right well you can't trust
all these guys because they're not us
but that backfired on them because then
you can see a million examples of where
they have themselves deliberately
misinformed or you know been insincere
or whatever for deliberate reasons so
they kind of destroyed themselves it was
like the final blow was dealt by
themselves with that and then people
aren't as stupid as they've been made
out to be which also makes a little
sense it's like the death spiral of the
media because they're kind of audiences
of declining is itself now part of the
problem because they are being forced
into more and more clickbait II kind of
stories themselves because they've
become this clickbait
lunatic asylum but what that means is
like we say in the algorithm thing it
means suddenly you can watch a person
having a really really in-depth
conversation with another person and
they're educated on a subject you can
watch them doing it for hours whereas in
the previous model you could only need
to see five minutes you know the Kathy
Newman thing this is your world if
you're watching that on television you'd
see five minutes edit sit down through a
little thing and it might distract you
from your chips or whatever and get you
a bit annoyed but that it's on the
internet you can sit there and watch
that thing for an hour and then you can
really think about it and then you can
go watch both of those people talking
about other things at length and this is
a much more heightened state of
awareness and consciousness and sort of
being than anyone had previously you
know I think about but it also then puts
the onus on the on the individual as
well yeah there's a kind of
democratization of it yeah it doesn't
mean that everyone suddenly will be
super smart overnight and that like you
know the world is saved in that fashion
but it means that you have a generation
growing up who you expect something a
lot more something that was limited to a
very small number of people and in the
universities used to be for the
aristocracy now anyone with a smartphone
has access to pretty much all of the
world's knowledge exactly it's never
existed and this is at the Library of
Alexandria in your pocket at all times
yes everybody does I think you follow
the same stoic gum I love that guy he
follows me even if I was 82 people I'm
really hoping it's not too talking
because he would may be a great source
of audio material but that last point is
an important point because this was or
what Orwell wrote about this many years
ago there's a certain class who claim to
be you know fighting for and arguing for
the working classes but they actually
hate the working classes they they look
down their nose at them and they ended
breakfast breaks it made this so
apparent you know you've got this kind
of sort of elite core liberal core in
London who hate the rest of the country
and think that they're all racists
comebacks and have no empathy whatsoever
for their actual lives and what all
these policies have actually done to
their day-to-day lives there
they hate them and the only thing they
hate more than them is the really rich
and that was the case hundreds of years
ago and it's still the case the frame
that I look at things through is similar
to Peterson is sort of Jungian lens and
the idea of the shadow and the shadow is
that of all the parts of yourself that
you repress and deny and what it feels
like to me is that this democratization
of everything is allowing all of the
shadow aspects of our culture to come to
the surface and so the process we're
going through and this is so clear with
Trump it's like Trump you couldn't
design America's IDI
more more better than than Trump it's
like it's everything that America wanted
to deny about itself that the the
narcissism the the worship of wealth for
its own sake I mean all of these aspects
of America that we know a part of the
American character but Americans don't
really want to admit they're part of a
more liberal Americans don't admit a
part of the American character so I say
on so many levels we have these figures
emerging as the aid or the shadow of
these different and our our task is to
integrate them and so it's just kind of
say okay so what is what does Trump say
about me yeah or what does yeah or all
of these figures all of it's like what
part of myself is is Trump representing
for example but this is this is why it's
sort of it's it's a sort of the deep do
I think Peterson so interesting as well
that we need a deep mythological
structure to make sense of all this
archetypes and the idea of yeah this
sort of young who seems to have gone
deeper into the human sold and just
about anyone in the 20th century is like
probably the key guide that we need now
to kind of get through the next 10 years
or so yeah exactly
maybe maybe less just things that
happening remarkably speedily like
seriously you think like we went five
years it's like a different world
different world it's like if you look at
like meme culture and how important meme
culture has become like Trump was partly
elected because of memes meme humor is
black
is as dark as as anything it is is pure
darkness
yesterday a British man was found guilty
and is looking at a year in prison for a
meme you know you know about this guy
yeah what he did was he his joke to
annoy his girlfriend was teaching his
girlfriend's dog to respond to hit the
quotes by doing is doing a Heil Sieg
Heil or whatever whatever you call that
thing we are we allowed to find that
funny
iPhone I have quite dark humor anyway
and I you know I was I was a big brass
iPhone and now the world is brass i
right and that's is where we are but
this guy's going to jail but the thing
is all you look at any mean group on the
internet this is like half of Facebook
is what they call dankmemes which is
basically Hitler jokes and that used to
be work that was what John Cleese did
that's like that what's its vs. anagram
Lynam who's like very very vocals social
justice guy on Twitter like father Ted
was full of Nancy jokes and suddenly
Nancy jokes because they're being made
by Commodores with YouTube channels and
like you know they're they're awful like
all of meme culture is black and dark
and full of sorrow the all of
contemporary rap music sort of the
underground stuff that then influences
the mainstream is dark as hell and it's
all suicide and I want to kill myself
and just just goth Ness is vast right
now and that's shadow side of is the
biggest thing within culture everywhere
within comedy within music it's saying
it's kind of erupting out of everywhere
in everything in every aspect anything I
look at any of the worlds that I pay
attention to and I saw this coming
because 2010 was the high 20 2010 we
were quite psychedelic the biggest
musical force culturally was Odd Future
who wore tie-dye shirts with unicorns
and cats on them and they were they were
multi you know they were like black kids
and white kids and they didn't have any
access to grind about anything to do
with race or anything like that and it
was all very jolly and nice and everyone
was doing Molly
which was ecstasy sorry and everyone was
doing mushrooms and acid and after a
psychedelic thing
always swings back to a nihilist dark
think it culturally it's usually about
every seven years so it was definitely
gonna go goth and lo it did and now all
the drugs people are taking it kind of
like speedy cokie type drugs and
everyone's dressed in black and talking
about suicide and all these things are
erupting but this is coinciding with
this technological shifts are it's the
biggest we've ever seen this happen and
it's happening across the whole West so
it's like it's it's it's a catalyst or a
magnifier this is the technology this is
partly us looking through the kind of
wrong end of the telescope and and one
of the things the news media does is we
look back it's like a fractal pattern
and the fractal pattern is just getting
bigger and bigger and bigger because we
look back at say the late 60s and we
think oh wow it was tie-dye it was acid
it was everyone was doing it it's like
no no the fact that we know about it
means it wasn't everyone doing it the
news media will will focus on what is
unusual so maybe like 1/10 of 1% if that
are doing this this culture whatever it
is and we look back at kind of the acid
period of the goth period or the Punk
period and we assume these were eroding
meaning everyone was doing it no these
were aro defining but because they were
unusual it was a small group of outliers
every time but every time the pen you
think of it like a pendulum I think of
it like a lump hammer on a rope
right and it's swinging back and forward
and every time it smashes the wall a bit
bigger and every time there's more
people like hanging on to the thing that
it's and it does this like every 7 years
you can look back at history and it does
it but now it's vast and now
it's like a nuke and every time
it smashes on either side it like it's
like a new truck so it's gonna we're
gonna go full-blown psychedelic again in
a couple eight three years or something
we're gonna come out of the dark
nihilistic lunacy thing we're going to
be integrating our shadows in a
ridiculous Technicolor thing on mass
because we're all now completely
connected we're all completely sort of
digitally fused in some fashion
and everyone's kind of used to it by
this point so that's when you have real
radical societal change and that's
when it's I would say likely to be
incredibly positive hmm he positive or
negative about the future yeah are very
positive this is the best time to be
alive in recorded human history for
everybody
more people drinking clean water more
people with access to information
children not dying immediately like
women able to wander around outside
without like rocks being thrown at them
without being fully clothed like
whatever it is any aspects you could
think of is massively better now than it
was even like 10 20 years ago you know
is it's an incredible time to be
alive those really saying we all have
these little machines with us that you
can look at the negative aspects if
there is fine but the potential positive
aspects of them is bonkers but
it's also I mean I agree and I also
believe that it's true that like Eric
Weinstein sorry Bret Weinstein said
about the the evolutionary tools that
are brought us to where we are are
likely to end in a catastrophe unless we
evolve beyond them and I think George
Michaud in the green wall I yeah I think
us I hope so I hope so
when you look at sort of politics or you
look at kind of what's playing out on
the on the the more structural level
it's it's easy to make a case for that
that we're not as long as I've been
alive we've been like this close to
Armageddon at all times if you're
watching the six o'clock news so if
that's all you're looking at then we've
been doomed for our entire lives and
that's just always the case there's
always like some tin-pot dictator or
whatever who's gonna drop a bomb or
something you know whatever the
that's always gonna happen everyone in
the 80s was terrified of nuclear winter
and I read where the wind blows like
everybody else did as a small child and
was like for whatever that's always
been going on there's literally always
been the case throughout and the
entirety of human history there's always
been some barbarians at the gates or
some like Drake calamity or some great
flood or whatever the it is but
what we have now that we didn't have
before was all of this that we've just
been talking about we have all of this
being available to not just a tiny
minority of the population but to the
actual majority of our Western
populations and now increasingly the
rest of the world
they every major continent and
the results of this I think can only be
brilliant
so I think yeah I'm very excited about
the future and I think you know we're
gonna see some wonderful wonderful
things just in the next few just in the
next few years what is it that you
personally get out of Jordan Peterson
what what what resonated for you when
you first started listening to Jordan
Peterson I think the same thing that
resonates for most people which is
meaning and purpose meaning and purpose
and glory of discipline the that whole
thing if we've been fed this just
 just vast diet of Rights forever
and the whole personal responsibility
and it's always been a big thing of mine
my whole first album was about the
individual and the right of the
individuals and the necessity in the
individual to change the world and be
allowed to be them which sampled the
prisoner a lot and stuff and then the
second one was kind of more inward and
about like all of us all together and
the importance of that and then you kind
of come through that and it's back to
the individual and like personal
responsibility is the thing only what is
that I used to say I used to wonder
around things myself only you can save
mankind because only you can only one
person taking responsibility for their
life and everything around them and then
their family and stuff can actually
change the world you can't change the
world it's sharing a big shouty mob it's
just it's just too messy and that is a
one and it's just wonderful to see
someone communicating the importance and
the this sort of like transcendental
majesty
of personal responsibility to a mass of
people all at once just at the point
when we needed it most which is which
again goes back to the nature of the
internet I think that's that's what's
amazing about Peterson is that he's
genuinely sort of crowd-sourced in terms
of his response that he's got from from
people he and I what I'd love to ask him
about this because I have a sense that
he also is quite least quite spooked by
that because the fact that he's rocketed
to fame so quickly shows how needed that
message is yeah let's say he cries every
time he talks about it
every time you talk it he talks about
that aspect he just starts crying all of
us immediately because this whole you
know he has a son and a daughter I have
a son this whole like the stuff that
they're this is foul poison they're
trying to put on half of the human
population it could it have been
completely ruinous and the Overton
Window was so far in one direction and
he's almost single-handedly moved the
Overton Window like Alma like back over
here and if we keep going along this
course and now all these other people
are being listened to
like the Overton Window can we move back
to a point where we're certainly not in
danger of like actually completely
destroying half the population in an
irreversible fashion and then we're
completely and then we can get
back to the thing where we all work
together then we respect our differences
it's male in female and we like work in
glorious unity to further the human
experiment and go into the stars would
be like wonderful creatures out in the
universe and I'll be cool and awesome
and wonderful we would literally got to
the point where it was like right you go
like have the viewer evil scum and
should be treated accordingly and should
be ashamed for existing you and
like people are starting to think that
there's people like thinking that that's
true but I think we've been saved from
that precipice and I think Peterson
actually will go down in history as
being instrumental in that well that is
something even just from the the men's
work that we've done so far it's
interesting that there are a lot of guys
from my generation and maybe lower
younger than me who yeah you get that
sense of kind of internalized shame
around themselves as men yeah which is
really kind of dark it's like a
yeah isn't very unhelpful or nothing
comes from shame I mean nothing good and
nothing good comes from like I've got
say this is people who didn't do
anything being made to feel bad for
something that some other people did no
no it was it's not like the Harrod sorry
the Weinsteins are in a kind of inner
interment in a majority it's
bizarre what got you into the hole
man's work thing I've been doing various
sort of personal growth work for quite a
long time right I experimented with
psychedelics quite a lot University and
then when I went into my first sort of
personal growth workshops what I found
open up was a very similar space like
the space of freedom and reprogramming
myself and kind of really examining my
beliefs and challenging myself and then
of this sort of sense of flow and
freedom would come in yeah we sort of
started teaching men's work at that
point I've been leading a men's group
and then we started doing a we did a
weekend a day long workshop and we
started doing weekends and it was then
at the time of the Trump collection I
was like wow these gender dynamics are
playing out on the the wider stage and
when I started kind of learning more
about you and the idea of the anamur in
the Animus and it's like wow this is
like this is almost like the secret key
to everything that's going on and I
really feel that men's work at the
moment is almost counter cultural oh
that was yeah that's my other point
about the other thing I think is
interesting is that like this stuff is
is the new counterculture it really
really is it is in no way like edgy or
rebellious to be doing anything any of
that social justice type stuff that is
the mainstream it's now rebellious to
clean up your flippin room
it is countercultural to have your
in order to choose a partner and stay
with them to work through things and not
just run off at the first sign of danger
it's countercultural to to say anything
about any kind of men's issue is there's
radical its met which is a bizarre
bloody thing this is half the population
you'd think if they're if they are so
bad you'd want them to be sorted and in
a decent shape surely that's helpful
like all this stuff that you're doing is
like punk rock this is the the punk
stuff now this is the counterculture now
you can't win the culture war and then
and then also be like counterculture so
the left is in this you know odd
position now of kind of thinking of
themselves is cool you look at YouTube
and stuff all the all the cool young
people on YouTube there
this world they're interested in this
stuff and they're talking about this
stuff the biggest young person on
YouTube is PewDiePie and he loves Jordan
Peterson dank memes and you know that is
that is the counterculture now it is the
counterculture and it's also I like what
Jordan Greenhalgh said in the
documentary I don't know if I used that
particular clip but he said that the the
left has replaced genuine openness with
an ideology of openness yeah and that's
really I thought that's a really
powerful way of looking at it yeah so
it's a dogmatic version of openness that
is no longer open to many things I mean
the idea of certain things are now not
allowed in that world be for example
intrinsic differences between men and
women it was a summer saying yesterday
some biologists saying that he used to
be fundamentalist Christians who were
the biggest like problems for him and
attacked his work the most often and now
it's the now it's the far left and this
is really what's happened you know I
think most of used to consider ourselves
very left and I was a Billy Bragg fan
and all this sort of stuff and the
people who used to attack the things I
liked used to be sort of fundamentalist
Christian types and now they're the
people who I thought were like me and
now they're the people saying you can't
say this and you have to say that and
you can't enjoy this and women need to
wear more clothes and all this crazy
 it's mental what I got most
from Peterson is that listening to him
mapped onto everything that I followed
already knew in a way like a lot of the
in my journey I think has been very
different from I even calling it a
journey kind of suggest I'm currently
slightly more personal development kind
of perspective but definitely over the
last 10 years well over the last 10
years as like as I've done a lot of
personal growth work when I listen to
Peterson I realized that what I was
doing was incarnated the low-cost more
in my own life that's what I was doing
more and more by and that allows then I
kind of realize that's what that's what
it's about is kind of the learning to
learning your truth and then speaking
your truth much more clearly and then a
lot of the shadow work that I've done
sort of Jungian shadow work is then
really integrating that sort of
integrating those sort of divorce parts
of yourself it's like within the men's
work the idea is yeah you've got this
kind of you've got a you've got an inner
killer I mean we we have to I mean Jesus
we we are maybe kind of a monster yeah
make yourself a monster or at least
extend you have that monstrous aspect to
you and get it working for you rather
was against you it has used in the world
yeah because if you're suppressing your
anger the world is going to trigger you
in some way where that anger is going to
come out and then you're then you're a
danger to yourself and others because
control of it and it's like this is this
is really countercultural stuff as well
it's like not the idea at the moment is
that men must suppress this kind of
aspect of themselves it's like red blood
yeah terribly Oh
like go whatever they do yeah it's like
no one's read a Hulk comic book or
whatever is like yeah and that's what I
don't know you said recently but the the
idea it's not that women and women
aren't pissed off with people men who
are in control of their monsters and
their shadows men are pissed off with
all these other dudes these like guys
who swallowed the whole propaganda and
are all thinking they need to act like
women and need to suppress key lunacy is
inherently toxic and they should and
it's those sorts of men that women don't
like and are annoying he's beets are
orbiting sort of like creepy sort of
well there's an article in Playboy a
couple of days ago about male feminists
yeah how a lot of the people who've been
exposed through the me to yeah they
won't turn out to be male feminists yeah
yeah it's like it's most of them
it's a ridiculous percentage it turns
out it's not these like sort of man's
man types who apparently awful it turns
out to be like the creepy little piece
of ones and it's because in a world of
sort of like dominance hierarchies or
what-have-you those who can't survive
through traditional means of masculinity
come up with sneaky ways of sort of like
getting around the edge of it yes all
right so if I can't be asked to like you
know like work out or whatever or
educate myself will become really good
at a useful thing because useful to lots
of people I could do like a sneaky thing
and kind of like ghulam onto someone
some ideology or something and then
maybe I'll get my dick sucked it's very
obvious when you see this you could see
in their flipping off nice
there's a terrible state of affairs and
it's nobody like saying women don't like
it
so what's your what are you trying to
sort of build here so you trying to take
your sort of the workshops you're doing
it means work on sort of global internet
level or something
I've been going off instinct so far I I
I know that like I'm really deeply
involved in ideas and love kind of yeah
yeah whole intellectual dark web and
like where are the conversations
happening that are the ones that we need
to have to help us evolve to that next
level and I studied philosophy but I
also know from from the personal growth
work that I've done that unless you're
living out an idea in your life it's not
real and so that's why the personal
growth workshops are about and I hope I
hope that it gets to the point where we
can kind of spread it much wider than is
at the moment we've run like a few
workshops so far and I think the world
is ready for something that's offered in
a in a none new agey none kind of sucky
aesthetic and the Brit and I think
Britain is ready for it as well because
we've always been very suspicious of
this kind of this kind of work in the UK
right he said rightly saying I also like
that about Jesus yeah yeah being similar
we say that as well he's like I don't
like he doesn't he doesn't like any of
that type of stuff he's very practical
man so you taking these sometimes nice
e'terica ideas but grandi living in a
very except you're a male kind of
accessory practical fashion very
practical you know and women have had
things for quite a while than ways to
get in touch with their sort of
spiritual side and all that sort of
stuff and like you yoga and all these
things and mindfulness and stuff and
there's a practical there's a brilliant
practicalities of Peterson's approach
which takes quite deep concepts and puts
them in a way that can be useful and I
think kind of taking that and the prep
actually people doing it in real life
and bringing people together so they
know that it's not really because if
when you're looking at things on YouTube
you can be talking to a thousand people
comments-section you could still feel
alone so bringing this stuff into the
world when I saw Pearson at the Orpheum
in Los Angeles it was a day Ruben came
in and introduced him and I'm really
seeing all these people that have just
seen on the internet they're all in a
room and it's that like 15 thousands of
people in that room everyone's like they
thought I think that that doing more of
that and then turning back into Internet
stuff so turning that into shows and
turning that into vlogs or what have you
do it could be really really useful and
kick things up to the next level because
I think this intellectual dark web thing
is just really really very much the
first stage of a much much much much
bigger thing is just just it's just the
very beginning it's just scratching the
surface of the potentiality of using
this medium and kind of like forsaking
that which has gone before which he just
assumed was the way things had to be
what I love about Peterson is he
introduced this idea of okay how does it
feel in your body when you're saying
these words exactly like this idea of
you you know if you really if you really
sent into how your your body's feeling
when you say certain things or when you
yeah that there is a deeper alignment
because otherwise it just becomes a sort
of intellectual game again it's
practical for an average person who
hasn't spent like 30 years like reading
young yeah like he's been getting
for that like you know people some
people say oh he's like a idiot like a
thick person smart person or whatever
you as if that was a bad thing like it's
bad to take like big ideas and translate
them in a way that a person who hasn't
been to university for thirty years can
understand that's what we need that's
actually what society increased the
priesthood complaining about him exactly
this is Lady Sacrament yeah how dare you
God is not for these them it's for us
only we can speak with God and only we
can commune with the divine and then let
the problem this is this is this
classism and this is why it's really
interesting seeing it playing in the UK
which is a very class based society it
really is that any intellectual classes
a minute
have you seen anyone else on YouTube or
online doing anything similar to what
we've done in terms of like you've
you've kind of created these epic mixers
of Peterson staff I've kind of made a
couple of documentaries about his own
but they will they're already started
yes I speak is it a coincidence that
they're both from the UK yeah yeah yeah
there's a point I wonder but it is it's
about to be a lot bigger and it's about
to be normal
yeah but this is kind of a new thing and
it was necessary you just do think it's
necessary right see when you going off
instincts and you're seeing all the
synchronicity isn't start for anything I
filled a hole because lots of people
just wanted this thing I have so many
people in like I had the idea but I
didn't do it I really was hoping someone
had done this people be literally like
googling like lo-fi piece and see if it
exists and glow it doesn't same thing
you're doing so you know let's do lots
lots more of it and lots of other people
will start doing it but I think you've
got a real potentiality for creating
something quite vast and important but
you just have to work you have to do a
lot you have to feed the algorithms yeah
YouTube requires content three times a
week at least over ten minutes and we if
you start doing that you'll see your
numbers going up pretty fast and this is
what I've been seeing like I'm putting
on like 150 subscribers a day on YouTube
at the moment just like every day and
doing like sort of 20,000 views a day
and the graphs are all like
resume like that but it's like as I've
started implementing like quite a rigid
sort of content schedule and stuff you
see it really rocketing any more Peters
and stuff coming up oh yeah yeah of
course thing with Peterson I mean I was
saying this to it to his wife it's like
when you're making music and writing and
stuff oftentimes you quote the Great's
and you know you quote a hunter
assumption or you quote young or
whatever but they're all dead you know
knew they didn't they were audio if
there are audio recordings of them
they're not very good and there aren't
that many of them and here we have
Peterson like spit
 napalm on a daily basis like
dropping laying in hours of audio every
day it's all brilliant and all
incredibly quotable and it's also
incredibly sonorous musical and
beautiful and important necessary right
now if I did nothing else in my life
even if I didn't even eat I could just
sit there making Petersons music forever
because there's so much material so I
will continue to make Peters and stuff
and they all continue to be useful when
there's also many many other things to
draw into music and make useful in that
fashion it's basically it appears to be
a new genre or at least a new way of
sort of communicating ideas and stuff
and I've always done it I've always made
mixtapes that brought in people talking
and bringing in ideas and made it
musical we're just like now there's a
real big appetite for it and thanks to
those lovely robots over at YouTube it's
just this expanding universe of
potential for people actually wanting to
listen to it and being able to do it
there will be a JB Petersen low finds on
row well there is well I mean you're the
only one so well no other people are
doing it now if you go if you go look it
up there's actually loads of people
doing it now - like the varying degrees
of sort of success but lots of people
are doing it and I've been doing you
know with other things and it's it's
called meaning wave now someone called
it that and of course there is a there
is a there was a genre it's now yeah
it's a thing it's called meaning wave it
combines music aesthetics of low firing
vapor wave and vapor trapping and cloud
wrap and with meaningful spoken stuff so
it's not just Peterson no it's now just
it's kind of like the intellectual
darkweb thing I guess but with music
I've been doing lots of them but now
other people are doing it so yeah what
if I mean this just in the past couple
of weeks I've did a thing with Jaco
willing Morrissey Bukowski I did an
audio movie version of Harrison Bergeron
and then I was doing that and I've
always loved that story and in my
research I found that Peterson had read
it in one of his fireside chats he just
read the story but I used someone else's
voice on that
anyway that's been very popular so yeah
I'm doing less of that stuff but lots of
other people doing it too and I'm
actually expecting at some point in the
not-too near future one of these things
will end up like transcending the
internet and becoming an actual hit and
then there'll be loads of it so yeah
what a time to be alive yeah I Karen
thank you very much thank you fully
David and so was born
[Music]
humanity itself
yes and then it's tens
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
you