collective insights as a voyage through
topics and technology is revolutionizing
human wellbeing groundbreaking
approaches for a better world and a
better life await you welcome to
collective insights welcome everyone to
the neural hacker collective podcast
collective insights my name is daniel
i'm with research and development here
at nirakar collective and we are really
excited to have dr. Andrew Huberman with
us today andrew is a professor of
neuroscience neurobiology at Stanford
School of Medicine which is one of the
eminent neuroscience centers in the
world cutting edge work in understanding
the brain when he and I first met he was
at UCSD in the Salk Institute and
transferred a couple years ago up to
Stanford and he also runs the Huberman
labs which is working on the
neuroscience of vision and here's a very
interesting kind of history with
studying vision and in the neuroscience
of vision and then sensory processing
and then as a result of that fear has
really helped develop the neurobiology
lab at Stanford and the tech there and
they have some really cutting-edge work
they're doing with VR and a number of
fun things and so we're going to kind of
explore today some personal development
related insights that come from formal
academic neuroscience and we're gonna
invite Andrew to be a little bit free to
be more speculative regarding what an
animal trial or an early human trial
might actually say down the road and
where these insights are likely going
then he probably gets to be in formal
paper publication and Andrew thank you
for being here Thank You Daniel I'm
delighted to be here first of all I have
tremendous respect for what you guys are
doing at the neuro hacker collective and
it's wonderful to see how much things
have progressed in the last couple of
years and I'm sure the is still to come
I enjoyed a lot of our conversations
Science and Technology and looking
forward to looking forward to more one
fun thing about Andrew is that in
addition to being you know an academic
researcher of the brain from a you know
third-person science perspective he also
has a long history with extreme sports
with bodybuilding with you know various
athletics and with the nutrition and
biochemistry and biohacking that goes
along with that and some fun things that
he'll share here and personal
development so he's got a first-person
experience and third-person knowledge of
the field so we we have a fun bit of
areas that we can cover so you know I
would I would love if we could just
start with talk about fear a little bit
and the work that you guys have done in
fear and specifically the fight flight
freeze responses the differences in them
courage a little bit about we've learned
there because it is one of the you know
deepest experiences for all mammals
obviously and for humans and that
cripples people the most and they're in
the presence of fear there are some
people that will be crippled than others
it won't be crippled by it there's some
insights that I think you guys are the
very cutting edge of learning regarding
this which is critical for everyone so
talk to us about it
sure so before I start I just have to
say I'm I I'm smiling because you
mentioned experience with body weight
definitely with extreme sports and
martial arts I guess I could probably
say that I'm one of the larger
neuroscientists out there but I wouldn't
I just I got involved in resistance
training and fitness pretty young for
reasons that we can get into later is
that I kind of relate to fear and I've
just been struck at how quickly the the
world of physical augmentation has
evolved not just in strength training
but in other areas of physical
augmentation and how what there's been
this lag into a cognitive and neural
augmentation but now I think we're in
the area where we're really going to
catch up so once it gets you a question
so I think it's so right so my
laboratory has two winnings to it
wing of the laboratory meaning some
people and some physical space there
devotes understanding how to repair the
nervous system after injury and that's
something I've been mainly focusing the
visual system to prevent and cure
blinding diseases like glaucoma that's
still a very active area pursuit for us
the other half of the lab is working on
things like why are certain visual
stimuli why are certain visual events
scary why do they suddenly trigger a
limbic response if you will that puts
people into a state of anxiety and we're
also studying at what I think is a
really interesting table is a new area
for us what we're calling visual empathy
or primal empathy which is the sensation
of of an emotion by virtue of what you
see somebody else experiencing visually
and that's and so so just briefly we got
into fear and my interest in fear
primarily because we're search of visual
animals I mean more than 40% of the
human brain is devoted to vision we
really traded out olfaction and chemical
sensing of things in the environment
through our noses for vision some people
are also depend on their auditory
systems a lot but we're so visually
driven so most of what I'll talk about
is visual fear I've been asked what is
fear you know there aren't great
operational definitions for a lot of
these things but to me fear is a
negative sensation in the body for which
you don't really know what to do in
order to alleviate it so if you you know
if I take a sip of this drink you know
which is tea and then you say oh my god
you didn't take a sip of that drink did
you and I said why why what why not is
it what's wrong with it you say that's
poison you got 15 minutes to get to the
hospital and that's I'm gonna be scared
I'm gonna be anxious I'm gonna you know
especially if it's you telling me that
because you're not somebody to to play
games like that you know and then we of
course have you know the writers have
described fear in a couple different
ways interesting with Stephen King I
think it was the one who said there's um
there's dread the thing that you're
worried about happening there's terror
there's like some as it happens and then
there's horror which is that after the
event the kind of the replay in your
mind that that was horrible it was
horrifying
you know that's some of semantics and
it's relates to language and it's
probably different across cultures but I
like that because
they all encapsulate something very
important which is that they that all of
fear involves kind of a negative arousal
like an arousal that you wouldn't want
to have and so my laboratory a couple
years ago we decided when I say we it's
really a spectacular graduate student in
the neuroscience program then it used
TST who is now in the neuroscience
program at Stanford Lindsey Salette
started using you know the typical
animal animal model for us is mice but
we also will now work in humans and we
have clinical trials of humans from
through my lab and um what-what Lindsey
did was a really simple experiment where
she took a mouse put in a little box and
then showed it an overhead expanding
black disc which to the mouse we think
appears something like a predator coming
in to eat it and when you do that too
for a mouse it has one of two responses
either freezes I mean just absolutely
stone-cold freezes or it runs and hides
in a shelter if it can and that itself
is interesting because we talk about
fight or flight but actually a fight
response to something scary is very rare
in an animal typically an animal that's
scared will will freeze or run so I
think we need to start to rethink even
though I'm most basic kind of um you
know cultural understanding of what fear
really induces it's gonna be freeze or
run the next really critical discovery
was scream the brain of these animals
that were scared and she asked in a very
unbiased ways what are the brain areas
that are activated and she identified in
this that region of the of the central
brain it's called the xiphoid nucleus
very few people have known about it I
teach her anatomy to medical students I
did that at UCSD I do that Stanford and
I didn't even know where this nucleus
was since right in the middle of the
brain right in the center and this
nucleus is very interesting because it
connects two areas of the forebrain
involved in thinking in areas of the
brain like the amygdala which your mold
and threat detection it also connects to
reward centers in the brain and I'll
come back to that so here's this area
that seems to be involved in the fear
response
and so then Lindsey when and used some
genetic tricks which allowed her to turn
on and off or increase
or decrease the activity of this
structure while the animal was
experiencing fear and what she saw was
really remarkable what she saw was that
mice that were once afraid of this
overhead looming object by freezing
we told us they were afraid by freezing
or running suddenly would ignore it or
would even confront it maybe even try
and rattle their tail which for a mouse
as an aggressive response that's
incredible in its own right because here
you know she discovered a brain area in
that very you know it's reasonable to
assume at least play some important role
in regulating the behavioral response to
fear or what we call the level of threat
that or risk that the animal will
tolerate right because we can't we can
ask them house what it feels but it's
not gonna tell us so but what we do know
what we can measure is how much risk
that animal will tolerate when you
stimulate this brain area and then the
the fourth element that was really
interesting
fourth discovery in this is she said
whoa what's going on is it something
that has to is the activation in this
brain area have to be coincide with this
the delivery of this fear stimulus and
turns out it doesn't she could increase
the activity of this structure the
xiphoid nucleus and then present animals
with a scary situation and they would
confront it they would go from fear to
courage if you will and that told us
something really essential which is that
so much of what we think about in terms
of our response to fear or our level of
risk tones is really a state it's a
state throughout the body it's a state
that's throughout the brain it's a
systemic effect it's not just gonna be
the activation of one brain area okay so
that was all fine and good and we're
excited and those data are been written
up and have been submitted and hopefully
we wrapped up and published in early
2018 things were looking good for that
you know Malcolm would and but in
parallel to all that we set up our
laboratory where and this was a postdoc
by the name of Malia illness who had
come to us from Harvard and then Caltech
really tremendously a talented postdoc
and she said you know all the stuff that
we're doing in mice if she done similar
work in my sister and her graduate work
she said I want to build a box just like
that but for Hugh
and so that's what we did we took you
know this is arguably one of the most
state-of-the-art human performance or
human behavior labs to study fear in the
world it's about a million a half bucks
to build a this laboratory where
essentially you put a human in there
they put on VR goggles I'll say why VR
and we've got motion tracking for the
body we're measuring heart rate
breathing sweating we're also measuring
pupil imagery how big the pupils are
which is a very fast autonomic readout
of a readout of autonomic activity or
arousal and so we then took it upon
ourselves to go out and collect the e60
video of different fear inducing
scenarios attack dogs Heights great
white sharks we can talk about great
white sharks some real-world fear some
real-world you know I wouldn't say
terrifying buts pretty scary stuff
brought that back to the lab and then in
VR you can you can get about as close to
the real world as possible in humans and
then measure their fear responses either
through these non-invasive things like I
just described tools like I just
described but we've also done
experiments in collaboration with my
friend Eddie Chang as a neurosurgeon at
UCSF we actually had patients with
electrodes embedded down through the
skull into the human amygdala while
watching these 360 experiences and
sharks and whatnot and can measure the
neural signals that occur so we now have
this parallel platform of doing studies
in the mouse and prepend studies in the
unit and this is where something really
exciting comes up first of all we now
believe that fight is a separate
response that's distinct from the fight
from the scuse me that fight is a
distinct response from the freeze or
flee response that fight may not
actually be on the fear axis then it
might that fight-or-flight isn't
necessarily the way it works you know
people always think if you get scared
enough you get backed into a corner
you're gonna fight that might be true
but there's another axis in which people
select to confront scary things and the
cool thing is there's a study that was
published in the sixties to patients
they can stimulate any area of the brain
that they want including a region that
corresponds to the xiphoid nucleus in
the mouse this is the central median
nucleus of the thalamus and
for the aficionados or if you wanted to
look it up this is a paper from Heath
1963 and published in science and so
these people can stimulate anywhere they
want areas of the brain that stimulate
sexual arousal the feeling of you know
that they're a little bit drunk all
these different brain areas they can
stimulate and they can because they're
humans they can report what they feel
the number one brain area now it's just
two patients but the number one area
that these two people want to hit the
lever on all the time so to speak and
stimulate is this area of the brain that
corresponds to the same nucleus that
Lyndsey was studying in mice that shift
them from fear to courage or from higher
or to higher levels of risk tolerance
and the subjective feeling that they
experience is one of mild frustration
and kind of effort and I find that
incredible what it says is that there
might be something innately rewarding
about wanting to challenge fears or
challenge the confront things and you
know we've taken upon ourselves to think
that fear is a bad thing and stress is a
bad thing and now there's some stuff
coming out about stress maybe being
positive depending on how you interpret
the event that is in our work but other
work and I find it so interesting that
as humans so much of what drove our
evolution was the willingness to
confront fear and take on us and here
now again we're seeing these brain areas
that people work they'll actually work
in order to stimulate these brain areas
just like mice will and so I've gone
long-winded on this answer but I guess
what I'd like the listeners to take away
is that fight or flight is probably a
misnomer that the fight access is
probably a distinct thing and that the
fear response has a lot more to do with
a state in your body and brain then it
does have to do with something
fundamental about your neural
architecture it doesn't necessarily mean
that you're a scaredy cat it means that
and what it points to is the idea that
if we can control state if we can
manipulate state in a very dedicated way
that we stand a chance to really involve
our species through higher levels of
healthy risk tolerance or higher levels
of risk tolerance where payoffs might be
advantageous okay so I think that this
is one of the most meaningful areas of
what it portends for
human possibility in human development
so I want to go deeper into several
aspects of the physiology so first when
you said that there's something
inherently rewarding about confronting
fear so you know we start to think of a
hormesis effect right that when you have
some stress on an adaptive system that
it increases the adaptive capacity of
the system and if you don't stress an
adaptive system then it decreases its
capacity because there's no benefit in
keeping it so we know that with exercise
and we know it with cold tolerance like
wim HOF work that you did but also when
someone confronts a stress that they can
actually adapt to increase their
capacity to handle they become a human
with more capacity if there's a stress
that they can't increase their capacity
to handle then it just becomes strain
and damages the system right so it's
just like if you lift an amount of
weight to just rips muscles that doesn't
build muscle so fear we can imagine has
a similar thing right which is the
ability to confront a level of fear that
we actually can process as opposed to
just become frozen and you know crippled
with and the in doing so we're
increasing our capacity and that maybe
there is a developmental reward around
capacity increasing mm-hmm
so then the question I have has to do
with maybe speculations on the chemistry
of this because you said not just the
xiphoid nucleus but the entire
physiology and state so when we think of
fear and we think of threat detection we
typically think of you know decreased
heart rate variability increase
sympathetic response decrease
parasympathetic and then chemically we
think of increased adrenal cortex
hormones and an acceleration of the
catecholamines converting from dopamine
norepinephrine epinephrine faster right
kind of roughly yeah we had in when we
think of reward we think of more
dopamine and dopamine opioid dynamics so
is there something maybe where instead
of dopamine can converting more quickly
into norepinephrine and epinephrine it's
actually staying as dopamine and may be
interacting with the opioids or
endorphins is it have you guys started
to explore what the chemistry of this
might be yeah so we haven't dealt
deeply into the underlying chemistry
right now we've mainly been focused on
trying to parse the neural circuitry so
really trying to identify you know these
brain areas that are involved in these
so let's say call it the behavioral
response to fear and the level of risk
tolerance because it's very you know
actually one thing I'd like to move
toward eventually we don't have to do it
in this conversation of course is that I
think it's gonna be very hard to talk
about emotions in any kind of objective
way it's hard to really know you know
how one feels I mean I can guess that
you feel ok but that's an a value that's
a valuation I don't really know what
happy is to you or happy as to me it's
very subjective but we can in a very
reasonable way start to think about
measuring states in an objective way so
what you're bring up is really
interesting you know arousal different
kinds of arousal there's a stress
response there's sexual arousal there's
arousal that's excitement if you're
looking forward to an event a movie or a
concert or time with particular people
for instance and of course you can blend
all those things too but the the
interesting thing is that from a pure a
purely neural standpoint it's very hard
to imagine that the neurochemical milieu
that underlies arousal is gonna be that
much different for a scary event versus
a an event that you want to be there for
for this I'm gonna steal a little
anecdote from my good friend and and now
business partner Brian Mackenzie who
some of you might know he's been a
number of Tim Ferriss his books for his
work on running and extreme performance
Brian and I doing a lot of work on
applied breath work now and implied use
of the visual system in conjunction with
breath work for controlling fear states
but Brian tells it like this so you know
but the classic example the lion taking
out but you know taking off in pursuit
of its prey and let's say an antelope or
some other grazing animal and you know
from a physiological standpoint there's
adrenaline in their systems there's
glucose is being shuttled to the muscles
you know the pupils are dilated it's all
systems go it's you know it's really a
it's on and both animals are really in
this heightened state of arousal that
you can say for sure but there's only
one difference
which is the lion actually wants to be
there for the lion the the loss or the
or that failure to catch its prey means
it can just go try again and for the
antelope the loss you know the loss of
that battle it's over and so you know
really you start to think about human
behavior and you start to think a little
bit about how the arousal response is
generated and neurochemically it's
pretty generic then as humans of course
you have this forebrain that super
imposes meaning on what just happened so
what maybe we'll get into this a little
bit later but you know I've decided to
put myself at various points in my life
into some pretty high stress scenario
certainly not the most stressful
scenarios that are available but some
pretty high stress physically
threatening scenarios like caged exit
diving with white sharks and things like
that because I believe that if it's done
with a certain amount of you know risk
control and you understand the
contingencies and there's some skills
involved that there's great growth in
those in those experiences the same way
that mountain climbers feel that there's
great growth in climbing mountains I
don't think they climb mountains just
because they're there or why do they
climb them because they're there I don't
think so I think that humans want to
climb mountains because they want to
take on challenges neurochemically I
think we're gonna parse different but it
must be that the dopamine system is
involved at some level I believe that it
must be that the adrenal system is
involved in some level just based on the
readouts that we see in humans and in
mice this expansion of the pupils which
is what happens under heightened state
of arousal the opioid system might be a
is an interesting system it's a harder
one for us to parse so I'm not sure I
danced around an answer we haven't
looked at this deeply we will get there
the mechanistic work is gonna come in
the fall at least out of experiments
nowadays it's straightforward thanks to
the beautiful work of my colleague
called I saw at Stanford who developed
channel options and ed Boyden who was at
Stanford ethno nifty light control over
neurons chemical control over neurons
and specific neurons that the next set
of experiments that Lindsay and to do is
to tickle just the neurons say in the
opioid pathway
that project out of reunions it's got oh
sorry out of die for unions it's very
interesting that this area of the brain
is also chock-a-block full of oxytocin
receptors and so I'll just take that as
an opportunity to say that I think that
the more generic conversations about
dopamine norepinephrine oxytocin and
serotonin they've been kind of out there
in the general public are gonna start to
become more nuanced because of course
all these neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators are doing different
things in different neural structures
and I it gets into a deep conversation
about how the brain works and that still
much of what we don't understand about
how the brain works but we'll get there
but I find it interesting that arousal
is associated with all these stakes both
positive and great so really key thing
in the lion Gazelle example is the
difference in the worst case scenario
right so when you think about the
amygdala and threat detection the lion
recognizes that the threat is it might
not it might expend some energy which
can be dangerous and the gazelle
recognizes that it might die and so they
both have arousal but they have a very
different sense of total worst-case
scenario threat projection so I'm
curious when you looked at the you know
the mice under these different cases or
the humans under these different cases
rather than looking at the differences
in the xiphoid looking at the difference
in the amygdala and saying of course
they're all going to be recognizing
threat but do the courage scenarios
involve some difference in the amygdala
where it's actually not processing the
threat as being more than it has
capacity to respond to because it would
seem like Courage's I actually have the
capacity to respond to this threat
versus not I'm so glad you asked this
question because it points to a really
interesting result that we have in hand
and then I forgot to mention earlier
this the xiphoid nucleus as I mentioned
earlier connects to the hello which is a
threat detection center it connects to
the nucleus accumbens which is stated
with dopaminergic related reward and it
projects to the four brain areas the
brain involved in cognitive processing
the
prefrontal cortex in particular Lindsay
did a beautiful set of experiments in
which she could tease out which of these
pathways when activated could actually
trigger the animal towards a reduced
fear response and increased courage by
increasing the activity of the xiphoid
to forebrain pathway in particular when
she increased the activity of the
xiphoid to amygdala he or she she saw
more fear sure less courage and so what
you really got now is a structure it's
sort of like an old school switch
operator and the telephones what some of
your listeners won't know what that is
because this is like something from you
know even before my childhood where
people take out plugs and put it so it's
like a switchboard where basically the
structure is integrating sensory
information not just visual information
but it's sensory input and then making
decisions about okay
under these conditions where there's
this certain amount of threat what am I
gonna do what's the best outcome am i
willing to take on some risk that's out
that the forebrain is making that
assessment and so this is what it's
really about it's not about going into a
heightened level of arousal to the point
where you lose your cognition it's about
maintaining clear cognition under
heightened state of arousal so this
brings up so many questions because the
forebrain of a mouse and the forebrain
of a human are not really good analogs
at all right because for brain of a
human prefrontal cortex the abstraction
capacity to not just look at our past
experiences and see which ones are
relevant in here but actually be able to
assess the scenario in a truly abstract
way I'm super curious about the
difference there yeah so prefrontal
cortex in Mouse is not nearly as evolved
and when I say evolved I mean it doesn't
have as much stuff there even there's
often prefrontal cortex you're not gonna
find in a mouse you're not gonna find in
a monkey
you know the massive expansion of the
cerebral cortex in humans which is why
has all the gyrating bumps he taken all
that and crammed it into a small store
as a mouse goes there mouse brain is
smooth because it's less surface area
for skull space essentially um so
there's stuff there that you're
designing in a fine in the mouse on the
other hand the mouse is doing some
thinking
in addition to just some reacting and by
thinking what we mean is that it you
know the forebrain is required for
assessing multi sensory input and making
decisions about which motor commands to
create and which wondered commands to
suppress the freezer response is
actually a very I mean it's an eight it
doesn't require the cortex we know that
based on our work and work from other
laboratories but it's a it's a very
active response even though the animal
is still it's very hard to stay
completely slow for any creature unless
they're dead and so you know that the
forebrain of the mouse is clearly
exerting what we call top-down control
over the behavioral response it's very
interesting to look at these animals
when they confront the fear response in
this nucleus to me they tail rattle
they'll pause as if they're gonna freeze
and then they and then they keep going
and they'll also start moving around
quite a bit more so they're making
themselves very salient very visible
very audible the tail Riley actually
makes noise it's the worst thing you'd
want to do if there was a predator it's
more like beating their chests than it
is freezing or fleeing or anything and
so so when we talk about prefrontal
cortex in the mouse we're talking about
a rudimentary kind of primitive
prefrontal cortex which is probably
doing some math of contingencies if a
then B and if B then C you know the
brain is doing math whether or not you
like math or not what neurons are doing
is they're computing things in space and
time and making assessments they're not
thinking there's a little person in
there the collective is the person or
the mouse but the collective activity of
those neurons but clearly the forebrain
is exerting some top-down control
they're good experiments for instance
where if you take even just an owl which
is a very visual and auditory hunter as
we know and you lesion the forebrain
input to some of these subcortical areas
that control motor reflexes they become
like machines if you go like this the
owl will look everywhere
think of a kitten or a puppy when my
bulldog Costello was a puppy I could put
anything in front of him and he pick it
up with his mouth
anything I could anything was a toy now
it's like you know he's older his
forebrain is is developed and for a long
time now he's just not as excited by
these little things this is what makes
puppies and kittens
Judis kind of they walk with walk along
they grab a quarter they roll over they
pee in the corner they do they're kind
of helpless in the fact that
everything's with stimulus as the
forebrain matures and myelin aids and
top-down control from the forebrain
matures and myelin aids animals become
much more focused and dedicated in the
actions that they'll take in that they
won't take think a predator a lion
that's waiting for the gazelle there's a
lot of active suppression it's making an
assessment which ones are moving quickly
which ones are moving slowly am I gonna
attack the flanks or am I can attack the
head these kinds of things those kind of
assessments are clearly for brain
assessments so there's some kind of
feedback loop that's interesting here in
this shunting from the xiphoid to either
more Minghella action or more frontal
action because to say that there is some
top-down control from frontal only if
the xiphoid already shunted that way or
there is a little bit that's already
happening so there's some feedback
process between the prefrontal and the
xiphoid that then helps inform the
xiphoid shunt more or not yeah have you
this question is where is the inte where
is the actual point of intervention nice
cool question you know that the fuel in
earth science has progressed so far we
can now control the activity of real of
neurons in real time in the whole animal
and make these kinds of assessments even
in specific neuron types very few
experiments including in our laboratory
have assessed these kind of the dynamic
interplay between different structures
in real time that's really represents
that I think in the next five years of
work not not to defer but we're just
getting to the point where we can do
that reasonably and but I think you're
right I think that it's gonna be
activity streaming through the xiphoid
to all three structures and then the
overall state of the animal will
probably dictate the extent to which the
balance of activity between you know
shifted towards frontal cortex can
suppressing amygdala this kind of the
battle of neural activation if you will
um you know it brings up you could bring
up an anecdote but it brings up a
scenario where if you've ever been in a
panic situation a very high-stress
situation and you're not trained to go
into an automatic motor pattern you
start becoming erratic with your
behavior
the fear response takes over is you know
I had this happen when when our dives
recently had an air air failure I was a
technical failure there's a really bad
situation
white sharks everywhere outside the cage
I was in the cage at that point safety
tank not available to me at that moment
for reasons we could discuss really it
was like the worst situation except for
not except for not being able to get out
of the cage so the decision was you know
you err suddenly cut out and my first
thought was you got to be kidding me and
this isn't happening it was kind of
disbelief second thought no joke was I'm
going home I'm gonna see Costello that
was really the thought that went through
my it was a cognitive decision wand I
going home
third go to the safety tank that was
what I'd been trained to do safety
didn't open go to the second safety tank
safety didn't open or his open lose
empty so now it's like so you
immediately go into these automatic you
know these OODA loop kind of responses
as the military refers to them and then
it was okay I guess I'm gonna drop my
weight belt and shoot for the surface
because I wasn't on scuba which is great
for getting back to air there's air at
the surface so I stay down 100% serhiy
I'm gonna die from lack of oxygen but
you're surrounded by large great whites
this is not a good situation they love
to eat things or go after things they're
shooting for the surface in fact the way
that you cage exit and swim with great
whites is by swimming toward them when
they come out at you and alongside them
you loom on them
and they're not used to their their apex
predator so they're not usually
comfortable with things looming on them
so they treat you with respect if you do
that if you act like prey they will
treat you like prey but at that point it
was really that was my only choice I was
fortunate enough that one of the out of
cage divers turned around and saw me and
made the what felt like a very slow
Traverse back to the cage and then we
did the you know sort of classic share
everything but even that of grabbing the
regulator and breathing off his air and
then passing it back and forth is
something that if you're not trying to
do in your dive training a lot of people
just hold on to it and the other guy
ends up dying there's a struggle where
they let go I mean you
you have to be calm enough and so this
was a situation which I could sense my
behavior starting to get a little
erratic as each of the motor programs
that I had been lined up or trained to
perform was giving me a an F like oh no
you're not gonna get air here you're not
gonna get it they're here Avery starts
getting a little Matic so I think what
happens is there's a number of things
happening this your state is going up
carbon dioxide is increasing in the
system and your behavior starts getting
a little bit more crazy if you will and
this is why people who you know they
can't even dial 911 under conditions of
emergency or they get tangled up in some
seaweed while diving some kelp and their
regulator gets kicked out or something
or their and and they they find them
dead ten minutes later it's not because
they didn't couldn't reach over and grab
it it's because you you start to lose
you lose yourself and so one of the most
exciting and interesting areas of
neuroscience that's really evolving fast
this is some beautiful work that's being
done by guy named Steven Leary Lee is
out at Harvard looking at vagal
stimulation and other people like our
lab they're looking an adrenal
stimulation is finally after years of
this mind-body separation and people
even talk about mind versus body people
are starting to look at how the
periphery you know that the vagus and
the adrenals and stuff that's happening
in the body is impacting neural
processing in the brain and vice versa
it's like and you might say duh of
course it's all one system but when you
and I were growing up it was mine versus
body where it was brain versus mine and
I think it's wonderful that we've now
discarded of that and it's like of
course there's an organ in your head
it's all working together that was a was
a good test experience that you had with
the Sharks I have to say I I got to the
surface I was vomiting or confident
below the water and I have to say as I
don't recommend that experience to
anybody but I am I am immensely grateful
and I knew that what happened over the
next 24 hours was extremely important if
my interpretation was very important
this more about the top-down control
I wouldn't wish for that experience but
I have a good friend who joined us on
the dive we insanely also cage I said
good friend Pat Dawson he came
to me afterwards and he said immediately
the first question he asked me has some
experience when to high stress scenarios
and he pulled me aside and said so what
you take away from that experience that
was the first question that I was asked
not are you okay or in that immediately
was like okay what do I take away I took
away check the safeties yourself don't
rely on it turned out it was a human
communication error really that led to
that situation and I also felt tested I
feel I'm actually grateful for the
experience in retrospect because I felt
tested it felt like a little bit of a
rebirth of sorts and it was actually the
next day that I cage accident for the
first time and people say even on the
bow they're like they really gonna do
that but look I'm a scientist the
probabilities are independent the
probability that it would happen the
next day is totally independent I say I
was on scuba so they're independent
probabilities right flipping a coin once
flipping it twice independent
probabilities and the second thing is I
knew what had happened and so when you
when you have the benefit of knowing
what went wrong you're in a good
position to to make different choices so
this when you say I'm a scientist you're
actually saying something very important
you're saying I have frontal override of
the rest of the response because I
actually have a rational process that
the probabilities are independent that
the things that made it scary yesterday
aren't gonna make it scary today because
I've adjusted it therefore I can control
my fear response that's right and and I
have to say that much of my life and
perhaps is why I eventually decided to
study fear much much of my life has
centered around putting myself into
scenarios that for me were felt
threatening and you know I always tried
to assume a reasonable sense of risk
reward trade-off you don't want to be
you don't want to be haphazard or crazy
I mean I look at Honnold right who climb
El Cap no ropes no nothing I mean but he
he didn't just do it what you know the
first time with no ropes I mean he
rehearsed it to the point where his
confidence he was doing you know he knew
all the holes I mean I think I'm not a
climber but I've spoken to some climbers
and what they said that's so incredible
about the fact that he did that
it wasn't just his fear suppression it
was the fact that he remembered all the
sequences that are required under
different conditions because it can be
different depending on weather
conditions and rock conditions etc and
those interact so I think that being
able to really reasonably assess risk
under high stress is important being
adaptive is one of the things I pride
myself on yeah and of course I was out
there with experts and we had permits
from the Mexican government to do the
cage acts that you're actually not
allowed to do it without permits and
this kind of thing you know there's a
lot of recklessness that goes on out
there that I don't support and at the
same time I that's right I think my
cognitive override process is a little
extreme I guess in the world of you know
you get sometimes go to the gym and you
see those guys who have huge upper
bodies but no legs
I have strive to not be the guy who just
thinks and doesn't feel you know I don't
want to be the knurl parallel for that
but no but there's there's something
important here you weren't saying that
you were gonna override fear for
irrational reasons you were actually
making sure that you didn't miss
associate what the source of warranted
fear was right you're doing realistic
assessment and most of the time what
happens is right it's our our adaptive
response fear obviously is it was
evolutionarily very useful to keep us to
have us avoid things it could be harmful
right and whenever we have pain then we
have fear around having that same source
of pain in the future to protect us from
something that could be harmful but we
usually actually get the causation wrong
so we go up for public speaking and we
have a painful experience and so then we
say well I'm never gonna public speak
again because public speaking was the
cause of pain as opposed to identifying
more carefully being concerned what
everyone thought of me and thinking I'm
not good enough was the source of pain
and I can actually change that and still
be able to public speak so one shrinks
your world unnecessarily the other one
gives you the capacity to say is there
something that I can actually do in the
presence of the stimulating yeah it's a
really really excellent point you're
making I mean I feel like one of the
fundamental things and I've spent the
last couple years because I'm
considering writing a book on
neuroscience for the general public that
brings in some of the more modern
understanding about how neural circuits
work there's some great stuff out there
but I think that we're getting a little
lost still in this idea of like lizard
brain versus thinking brain I mean these
things work as a dynamic interplay
they're not working independently and
and I enjoy talking about neuroscience
the general Republican and one of the
things that really you know I'm I'm
striving to understand or you know what
are the tools that are out there for
people to deal with trauma what are the
things that who to deal with anxiety as
a way to make my laboratory science
better and to bring better treatments to
people through all the tools and one of
the things that I heard and I find so
true to in my own experience and and
from what you're saying is that trauma
is often a confusion about who's
responsible or what's responsible Craig
in the shark thing you know it example
very unusual scenario right for most
people is to be in the pet go see white
shark rich territories and go into them
etc the but D you know the failure of
oxygen the day before the failure of
that they'd be thankful I mean I wasn't
that's not gonna that doesn't change how
dangerous a shark is Brandon are
independent and so I think for trauma
you know so much of it is a even if
people can cognitively say yeah you know
that wasn't my fault
I know I know I had every right to be
walking home at night at that time
people report this kind of thing right
or I know that you know I really didn't
do anything wrong they feel as if they
did something wrong because they were
involved and so the brain is somehow
linked to contingencies and said I must
be it somehow involved in a way that I
shouldn't have been and I think that so
that that failure of who's to blame at
an emotional level is really underlies a
lot of what people report as trauma and
otherwise it would just be look I was
wronged and so now I'm gonna take myself
out of the scenario in which I was wrong
and I'm safe but the brain doesn't do
that and so we were confused I think we
think that post-traumatic stress is all
just a replay of some circuit because
the experience was so intense look
people have been experiencing in 10
intensely scary and traumatic scenarios
since the beginning of time and they've
been able to dump those and keep going
in a bleep reasonably happy lives and
there's things like social support and
of course sometimes these mechanisms go
off and people need real reals
you know other forms of support medical
interventions and so forth but really
it's a failure to to dump the idea that
or you know that somehow oneself was to
blame and I think that that's you know
just by virtue of being there and I
think that that's something that in
animals you see there's like a condition
placed preference or condition place
avoidance if you give a mouse something
it likes in a location it goes back to
that location how my dog Costello does
that hell I do that but if you
experience something bad in a given
environment the tendency is to not go
back into that environment you know
nature likes to cut a broad marking so I
think this conversation brings up both
why cognitive behavioral therapy is
effective and the limits of its
effectiveness at the same time and so
when because there's a different
mechanisms happening right so we think
about cognitive behavioral therapy we
think about exactly what you did when
you said they're independent
probabilities one day on the next and
I'm gonna check the tanks myself and the
scuba hat means that you know I'm doing
the shark risk non oxygen risk that was
a straight like CBT kind of action that
said hey let's not make a fear that is
not actually a warranted appropriate
fear and in cognitive behavioral therapy
we look at things like getting the
causation wrong so over generalizing as
a classic one we were kids we trusted
our parents they hurt us and so we
imprinted everyone who you trust is
gonna hurt you don't trust anybody and
of course that represented like N equals
two out of all people and when we were a
kid and didn't know how to actually
assess for trustworthiness and defend
ourselves and speak up and etc so then
we grow up and we say whoa I've been
avoiding trust my whole life because of
this over generalization maybe it's not
true that all people we trust are gonna
hurt us maybe it's I didn't know how to
assess trustworthiness yet and now I can
so there's some increased capacity so
the CBT part is get the causation right
right so that you aren't over
generalizing
and the fear response is if we're not
clear let's make a very wide just don't
go anywhere in that area if you don't
know where the landmine is just don't
even go to that field right that's right
that's right
my sister is deathly afraid of sharks
you know she she's not scientist she's
it happens to be a therapist but she
said look the probability of getting by
a great white shark if you stay out of
the ocean she's not somebody was
typically quantitatively oriented but
she nailed it I think that the challenge
is that if you want to overcome a
certain feeling or even hardwiring it's
hard to know what scenarios to place
yourself in to do that and I think one
of the really exciting tools is going to
be are going to be the tools that are
allow to reopen plasticity something
that I don't we can get into occurring
this podcast I mean I think that you
know how to dump previous experiences
and take on new experiences as a
fundamentally interesting question I
will say one thing though before we if
we're gonna transition to something else
at any point one thing that I think is
really important for people to
understand and thinking about the brain
and just their lives is the role of
emotions you know I think we
fundamentally misunderstand what
emotions are good for I mean emotions
evolved to kind of move us towards
certain things kind of appetitive
behaviors as they're called or away from
other things a person or avoidant
behaviors but you know and here I'm
gonna borrow from my friend and very
talented trauma release therapist Ryan
swab whose album Florida he runs an
addiction treatment center out in
Florida which uses a lot of breath work
but also more standardized therapists
more traditional forms to treat
addiction mainly in the form of trying
to reduce stress first and then deal
with sort of familial structure and
things like that and Ryan you know has
this really impressive structure for how
to think about emotions which is under
you know emotions are sort of like
weather right they come and they go and
I think we've become a culture that's so
attached to the idea that feelings are
so important and they are it's very
important to be you know
we're not robots you don't wanna be a
robot but you know the purpose and
destination and what you're trying to
accomplish are probably more important
than feelings when moment to moment
feelings when trying to net navigate
decisions nodes of decision-making right
because if you think about your ship and
your head you set your destination in
particular location and then that's
kinda like your purpose your destination
this could be in the work domain it
could be in the relationship domain it
could be in any domain really you decide
okay
like for me I knew I had a kind of rough
teenage years for reasons related my
family structure even though I had a
good family growing up and I decided at
some point at 19 that's it I'm gonna get
serious about school and academics I'm
gonna turn myself into a professional of
something that was positive for the
world and I'm gonna have my PhD at time
I'm 30 I'm gonna be a faculty member but
time I'm 35 tenure but time for you
those were decisions I made like a ship
would pick destinations and there were
plenty of days in which things were
challenging and so what you want to do
in trying to navigate any course is when
emotions come up they're like weather
sometimes you tack down you know use
kind of nautical terms you you you know
you tack down the ship you know you wait
wait out the weather sometimes if I take
a different course but you don't
suddenly say oh you know I'm gonna steer
for a completely different Coast because
the waves are choppy or it's looking
really nice over there let's just go
over there instead and so emotions are
like weather and so you want to take
advantage of them when they're taking
you toward your destination but you also
want to think rationally about them when
they're not and I think that that's
something that's very powerful in
navigating any kind of series of nodes
of decision in trying to complete a
process whatever short or long term
process that is so this this connect
well to something I was gonna say about
your experience in with the Sharks issue
you said you felt tested and stress
testing is actually a really meaningful
thing to assess you know how a person is
going to respond and feature stress
scenarios to know how much you can
actually trust them
under stress scenarios right and so
specifically here when emotions get
intense
how much can someone continue to make
choices based on their values as opposed
to get hijacked by the emotion
and that's one of the like deep
questions is someone's ability to
maintain some some forebrain awareness
in the presence of the emotion so that
it doesn't completely run them right and
in which case they really lost abstract
clear thinking they lost their value
system as a basis for decision making
and so you know one of the ways I think
about it is you've got an emotional bell
curve that of states where most the time
people are here and right after
Vipassana or psychedelics they might be
like super elated and after trauma they
might be super upset but the states can
change instantly right you can hear some
news and they change and the kind of
stage of where someone's at emotionally
in their life overall is something like
the center of the gravity of that bell
curve but then we also have a separate
bell curve of their behavior which is
the shittiest they ever behave and the
best they ever behave and where they
generally behave in terms of how aligned
with their goals how consider it etc and
one of the things I look at for
trustworthiness is how much someone
separates those two bell curves hmm so
that their behavioral bell curve does
not respond to the emotional bell curve
meaning that they can get emotionally
triggered into a poor state and still
make good choices you know so that's
that's a really useful model I think as
there's so many of our conversations
Daniel yet you put things into it I
think that that's an extremely important
model for people to understand I need to
think about that a little bit more also
because I think right I mean you know
when I select people to work in my
laboratory I'm looking for a passion for
science because I know what's required
science is hard and it's also beautiful
and you get these incredible experiences
and I really believe that people are
gonna continued what will come to lab
and make fundamental discoveries if they
show up and work hard and and are
observant I also you know if I could and
of course I can't but if I could I would
also want a developmental history on
them and I'd want to know how they
reacted to stressful scenarios and
previously which is I think it captures
a little bit of your model of the bell
curves of sort of emotionality versus
decision-making I'm I'm gonna let you in
on a secret here if I'm hiring some
for a role where the trustworthiness
matters a lot right deep defect out of
trustworthiness could be really
consequential and everyone should pay
attention to that this should also be
something that USS for when dating
because trustworthiness matters a lot
and you want to assess it and of course
early on everyone just presents their
most trustworthy self and that doesn't
mean anything at all about who they
actually are so I want to stress test it
before actually going into a place where
there's any attachment or actual risk
and so what that look like is I want to
go to a place where our logistics get
 up they miss their airplane the
you know Eber comes late some waitress
spill something on them and I want to
see do they yell at the waitress you
know do they behave do they lose their
ethical standard and the question is
really the way I think about is what is
the floor that someone sets on the
lowest behavior they're willing to
accept of themselves
it's like someone someone can say I'm
just never going to hit my spouse when
I'm upset no matter how upset like I
won't allow it
and they can raise it higher and say I'm
not going to yell they can raise it
higher and but you have to stress test
it and see right yeah it's interesting I
mean I think that um you know so much of
our society and so much of life is about
these boundaries for ourselves and for
each other you know for instance I'm
somebody that can be highly motivated by
excitement and love and enthusiasm and a
whole set of songs that I listen to that
immediately just take me to a place
where I feel unstoppable and I have also
somebody who can work pretty damn hard
and um through from the place of you
know you're not gonna break me kind of-
a little more negative or gritty kind of
mindset i can switch back and forth
right I think one is more stressful than
the other perhaps but both work and the
album are what I care about but I know
for myself I have boundaries I won't do
anything unethical you know whole I
cheat or steal in order to get where I
need to go and what you're really trying
to assess to you know to what extent
people have clear boundaries you call
them values
really to what extent people are willing
to break protocol with themselves break
protocol with the group in order to
achieve what they want to achieve and um
you know one thing I a good friend of
mine he said you know you love rules and
ruin and you know it's interesting I
love rules for a pretty I was a pretty
wild teenager but not because I was
seeking fun I just I was seeking
structure and um you know I I do I like
rules I feel like it's been said before
and there's nothing profound about this
but you know it's like a playground with
a bunch of kids kicking them all around
but it's next to a road and so they
can't really play that freely but then
you put up a chain-link fence and now
you can really boot the ball as hard as
you want you can run as fast as you want
because there's a boundary there that
you know that you're safe right so it's
really all comes down to safety and the
tough scenarios I've had to navigate in
managing people have generally um been
you know have improved when I understood
kind of what they were really afraid of
afraid of failure or some cases afraid
of success or afraid of having to you
know what was gonna happen to them or
there was a backdrop of their life that
was more complicated I'm not therapists
I run a laboratory so you know there are
limits to what we discuss but you know
over and over again I think what you
find is to come you know Maslow's
hierarchy needs you know what people
feel safe when they feel like there's
some range on what they can emotionally
express themselves when they feel like
the group really supports them and
they're in the company of people that
have common goals I think people are
willing to start tolerating more and
more risk and in a healthy way in order
to achieve goals and so now we're
talking a little bit more abstractly but
I think having a system for oneself is
very important and I think that public
declarations are very important even
just think about the public declaration
of merit often a public declaration
they're really saying look even though I
might and if you just look at the
traditional vows of American marriage
most of those are saying even if I want
to do blank I'm not going to now they
never say I'm not going to want to it
says even if I want to I'm not going to
and nowadays people set different rules
for their marriages than people did 50
years ago of course there's a lot more
discretion and decision-making
personalized decision-making there but I
find it extremely interesting that you
know we we acknowledge in a lot of our
kind of basic ceremonies of culture that
what we want and what we're willing to
do are two different things and we make
those declarations publicly so that
culture keeps us in line
we don't want shame we want image shame
ourselves you know the one of the great
things about being a scientist and is
that it really is a pursuit of knowledge
and truth and so I'm very lucky to be in
a profession where sure there are some
egos and things like that
definitely when I love to win feels
great to get papers accepted and grants
funding that kind but fundamentally I
want to understand how things work and
so my powers of self-delusion are not
very strong unfortunately and so you
know we've just got to do everything
sort of you know sweat blood in order to
figure out how how this incredible
structure in our heads works and and so
everyone that comes to my lab is
genuinely devoted to that okay so we had
to take a short tech break there and
there's a lot that we actually wanted to
cover and I I think if you're open to it
we'll do a part two because framing up
fear you know was then a basis to say
well how do we really work with us and
how do we work with increasing
plasticity which is where a huge amount
of your you know work is and how do we
use breath how do we use cognitive
framing how do we use vision how do we
use all kinds of things to to help shift
it so we'll do another part on that I'm
actually pretty excited to hear about
the app you guys are developing as well
and some thoughts on the future of VR
psychotherapy and fear inoculation and
all that fun stuff but it's interesting
because we're talking about fear here
and you know in in general you talk
about having a orientation towards
increasing people's positive sense of
life and emotion and motivation so talk
about why is it actually important that
one understands fear if they want to
have a life
is positive and has increased capacity
and motivation why is it not just a
negative topic yeah I mean I think nice
to like we wait you're in discomfort
entirely but that's there gonna be
obviously stressors are gonna show up
and some of those are gonna be your new
stressors whether or not it's a medical
diagnosis that's scary or waiting for a
metal medical diagnosis or something
really acute like a you know like a
robbery or break-in or something of that
sort
where you have to really react or not
react and under pressure I think that
one of the things that's really valuable
it you know people have talked about
this much more that then I will hear
about the able kind of third person in
oneself and get out of the see oneself
in the scenario in order to make better
decisions
I think that's useful under for certain
professions and certainly certain people
I I think that what people you know talk
about capacity you know I think that
everyone could afford to have a slightly
better capacity for stress tolerance
especially emotional stress tolerance
because what you know we rarely rarely
not always but we rarely are punished
for what we don't do you know it's the
thing that we wish we hadn't said or the
thing that we wish we hadn't done it
often gets us into trouble and a lot of
times that's because we're just in a
level of high reactivity and I look at
reactivity as a moment the Attic
responsiveness it's it's not being
intentioned and I think that so
increasing our capacity is good there
also some people are just really
unflappable they're just really really
even and really stable that's wonderful
under some scenarios and and yet you
don't want to be you know you don't
wanna be like the Tin Man you want it
you want to have some emotion you want
an ability to feel into things but know
that you're not going to cross about
your own boundaries or other people's
boundaries in a way that disrupts your
your short and long term life plan and
so I think that the more that people can
understand that these negative emotions
like fear and stress and arousal kind of
fit in a package of things that motivate
the brain to take on certain sets of
respond
response violent verbal responses when
you start to really separate those out
and you kind of start to identify where
your own internal boundaries are you
start to feel more powerful as a human
being in the positive sense because you
know that you're in the driver's seat
you're moving further and further away
from reactivity when you experience fear
or something that's dreadful
or traumatizing as something that you're
carrying around or that's kind of
floating around over your shoulder kind
of a dark side that you know you have
and and that the world is a threatening
place but also that you have threatening
places inside you I think that that's
when you see people really becoming
debilitated they become almost afraid of
themselves they're afraid of what
they'll do you know it's like the public
speaking news sample the person who has
a bad experience public speaking isn't
necessarily afraid the next time they
can do it that people are gonna throw
tomatoes at them who them out of the
room or shame them into isolation I
think they're afraid of what they'll do
you know if you really probe people you
say well you're afraid of public
speaking they'll say I'm afraid I'm
gonna like urinate in my pants in front
of everybody I'm afraid I'm gonna say
the wrong thing and you say what do you
mean what would that be and they say
we're afraid I'm gonna offend somebody
so they're actually not even concerned
about their own well-being they're
concerned about somebody else's
well-being primarily so when you really
get honest about this stuff you start to
dissect it out you start to learn that
people are really just want to have
coherence with with themselves and with
their surroundings and so knowing where
those boundaries are and knowing there's
that there's a thick buffer between what
you think you might want to do and what
you'll actually do is very powerful and
this is the essence of a lot of martial
arts and military training and and you
know in therapy you learn to listen and
to react and none of us want to be
impulsive in that way and so I think
that you know this kind of alludes to a
bigger conversation I think we're gonna
have in a part too which is how do you
actually modify this and you know the
this incredible organ in your brain
you're in your head your brain so that
it works in your favor you know how do
you discard with previously hardwired or
seemingly hardwired action patterns and
thought patterns and how do you start to
create more automatic responses that
really serve you and serve those around
you better and I think one of the really
exciting areas of practical application
of neuroscience
the basis for your hacker collective in
part is to identify tools for plasticity
whether or not they're pharmacologic
whether or not they're nootropic whether
or not they're behavioural I'm very
interested in the role of applied breath
work and vision tools but also brain
machine interface as a way to reshape
contingencies or expectations of
outcomes it would be wonderful if one
didn't need to go put place themselves
in the dangerous scenarios in order to
increase capacity I think that's really
where the field is headed not just in
understanding you know how the brain
works but how to work the brain and how
to modify it and fear just represents
kind of one layer or entry point as in
that exploration but it's the one that I
think it's the one that creates the most
suffering and it's the one that if you
can overcome even just a little bit it
builds on itself really quickly and you
can start to see some nonlinear
increases or synergistic increases in
the amount of increases in well-being or
what one is willing to take on and say
what I'm somebody who I think has a
healthy fear response but there's very
little that is as scary to me as running
out of air underwater white sharks on
that kind of I'm grateful for the
experience because now when I'm in a
stressful scenario I think well ok it's
not as bad as that it poses me into a
calmer state and I can smile and move
forward so there have to be analogous
situations that one can put themselves
in that are not dangerous in order to
accomplish that kind of plasticity ok so
this is interesting you said something
that I don't think you actually meant in
the beginning which is that it'd be nice
if we could go through life without any
fear experiences I don't think that
would be nice at all I don't wish for
that world and it you know the David
Pearson the hedonistic imperative brings
up this can we just remove negative
emotions and have a gradient of positive
emotions be the basis of how we work in
the future with genetic engineering
one of the things that strikes me in all
of the ancient wisdom cultures was how
much more clear and precise their
distinction between comfort and
happiness was then the way we
I think there's actually something about
after the Scientific Revolution we
started understanding all of reality as
objective because we could measure
objective things we couldn't measure
subjective things so objective became
synonymous with real and we could
measure comfort a lot better than we
could measure happiness so we started
making the world that optimized for it
so we have more comfortable beds than
kings used to in transportation etc with
increased mental illness and you know
actual subjective problems because we
didn't understand how to deal with that
well and but one of the things that the
wisdom traditions all did was
intentionally induce discomfort to have
beings that realized that they didn't
have to be the result of their
environment and that they could actually
internalize their locus of control and
when you think about going into the
sweat lodge the key to a good sweat
lodge is it's hot enough that it
triggers the fear response I'm gonna die
in here but you actually know that it's
not that hot that the shaman is sitting
up at the top of it that's hotter than
where where you're at the people have
done this forever and so you learn not
to be controlled by the fear and in
doing so you actually learn who you are
beyond reactive patterns and you know
the Vision Quest the Sun Dance the even
yoga asanas so much of them is just get
in an uncomfortable position and then
find your breath and find peace and then
get another uncomfortable position and
so I actually love and you know I love
the idea that VR could be a way to
induce uncomfortable positions with no
real risk of harm but being able to
induce the discomfort so that we can
learn to internalize our locus of
control and because that is what
sovereignty is right if we are the
result of our environment so we avoid
fear by avoiding environmental stimuli
then we have no sovereignty it's a right
I didn't I just want to say I
I think it's an attractive idea at times
it's an alluring idea that a life of a
life without fear or pain but as a
practice as an experience it would be
terrible you know these days and frankly
my entire life I've tried to surround
myself with people that were seeking to
be the best possible version of
themselves there are times I did
do that myself and there were times I
didn't surround myself with those kinds
of people but in general it feels really
good to be around people that are trying
to become the better version of
themselves
I would assert that it's almost
impossible maybe impossible to become
the best version of oneself without
experiencing any discomfort or fear or
stress and I think that boils down to
the core missus idea it boils down to
the hans selye who won the nobel prize
for general general adaptation syndrome
yes you have distress any of you stress
but that you become a stronger better
neural organism you become a stronger
better physical organism by placing
yourself into reasonable scenarios or
sometimes unreasonable scenarios in
which you experience stress and have to
work your way through it survive it
compensate and show up better and so I
think that purely positive emotions
would be terrible and I'd go back to
this human study this Heath 1963 science
paper these patients there were patients
because they had electrodes in the brain
for other reasons but they were it was a
it was available to them to stimulate
any brain area including areas that
stimulate pleasure and they did
stimulate those brain areas but they
preferred more than any other experience
and was their preferred experience was
some low-level frustration on the effort
and I think there's something
fundamentally important in that in that
result it needs to be repeated but I
think that the human species evolved by
challenging itself and frustration and
confusion these days I think a lot about
how confusion and frustration actually
might be the neural circuits testing out
different arrangements of firing
patterns makes sense I mean we need to
test that we need to evaluate that in
first and animal models than the human
models to really get down to the
mechanistic guts of it but you know it
changes the way that I feel when I read
something and I go I didn't even absorb
and you know I'm gonna go back again
maybe this is my brain trying to absorb
things take some sleep wake up the next
day and boom you have the ideas it's
those small bits of pain and pushing
yourself up against the boundaries it's
not unlike physical practices so I think
we're we're rapidly gaining
understanding in this
not just in the science domain but in
the practical application of
neuroscience tools like the areas that
you work in and I think it's exciting to
see where all this is gonna lead a
episode that's what our species was
designed to do was to evolve itself so I
really love this 1963 paper that you're
referencing because from an Evo Devo
perspective the relationship between
about evolution and development natural
selection selects for increased adaptive
capacity that can be evolutionarily from
the point of view of natural selection
but also developmentally we can develop
increase capacity and now we understand
that you pass down the epigenetic so you
actually pass down there's a deeper
relationship between evolution
development you can actually pass down
some of the developmental dynamics so
that there would be a very deep pleasure
response of some kind of deep reward
response around developing adaptive
capacity given that that's the whole
thing that's selected for makes perfect
sense right and most of the other
creatures are tremendously more
hardwired than we are and so to be
creatures that have so much
developmental capacity and to see what a
deep set of positive responses there are
on actualizing that and why
self-actualization is at the top of the
pyramid it's a yeah it makes a lot of
evolutionary biology sense yeah you know
I mean again I we're gonna get into
plasticity our species what the way
we're different than honeybee or a bear
or another or a tiger for that matter is
that you know the duration of plasticity
and humans is extremely long and it
never actually closes down the idea that
there's a critical period that closes
completely as is false we know there's
plasticity as an adult it's harder to
access you don't tend to learn things
passively as well you really need to
focus your attention or mechanisms you
really need to if there's an adaptive
payoff you know if you have to learn
something in order to eat and survive
you're gonna you're gonna learn it more
quickly than if you know the rewards are
done or the rewards are trivial but and
that probably has to do with a 10
ultimately which probably has to do with
some sort of cholinergic drive and
really anchoring a lot of neural
resources towards particular stimuli and
understanding the contingencies like
what leads to what and really focusing
on those but in any case I think that
you know there that's what our species
was designed to do
and I love to take a step back and think
about you know this conversation and
other conversations that are taking
place and in the world now around the
future of neuroscience and the future of
humanity frankly and think you know and
realize that we're at the front edge of
our evolution
you know things some things might look
very primitive and they are but we're
really at the leading edge of our
evolution now and what's so exciting is
that with all these tools with all the
discussion and with some reasonable
frameworks we're really in in the
position to use our neural architecture
to reshape our neural architecture to
create better neural architectures not
just so some of it might be epigenetic
you can also imagine that the less
stress or higher capacity organism if
you you know select to meet the capacity
organism you have a child that child's
gonna grow up in an environment in which
parents have a certain understanding of
trust and reliability about the world
they're gonna be neurochemical millou's
and endocrine hormonal milieu in that
family line that are gonna be very
important I mean it sounds a little bit
eugenic but that's not what I'm
intending it's just you're gonna when
kids feel safe they behave very
differently than when they don't feel
safe same with adults right and adults
who don't feel safe feel the exact same
things that children do I think it was
Freud that's guys I looked there to
quotes and sort of run in parallel and I
always come back to so Freud had the
saying anxiety makes children of us all
and and I would add to that except that
as adults we use adult tools to respond
to pry and you know in our pillows or
some people might do that violence and
they say horrible things and they get
revenge and do all sorts of horrible
things
so anxiety makes children of us all and
I think it was I don't know maybe was
Vince Lombardi or maybe it was it was
one of the great boxing trainers that
said you
fatigue makes cowards of us all and
those are go hand in hand right I mean
fatigue the point being that the
opposite is also true that when you feel
secure you're able to make different
decisions about the kind of creative and
expansive life you want you want to live
you're able to give and this is all
sounding very feel good and kind of
generic
but you can imagine what it's like to
just spend a short window of your
developmental existence in one regime
versus another and then you can imagine
what it's like to spend a short and you
say wow you know I mean the outcomes are
distinctly different so it's our
responsibility I think as individuals to
what you engage in what I'm calling
self-directed adaptive plasticity right
you know to be able to find tools you
apply tools and for self-directed
adaptive Plassey there's no better
coping and better coping means that you
can navigate your life better you can
treat yourself better treat other people
better those are if if there are enough
people doing that right one of the great
those of the nirakar collective and
others as well is if you can if we can
do that insufficient than large numbers
of people we're gonna see a massive
evolution of our species
if we don't these are gonna continue
pretty much the way they've been going
regardless of the technologies that we
develop I like your self-directed
adaptive plasticity I think Rick Hanson
and Norman Doidge would really like that
term if you haven't shared it with them
yet it reminds me and you know we'll
we'll close there's so many places we
could go and that makes super excited
for number two when we come and actually
get into how to do self-directed
adaptive plasticity it reminds me that
we made this paper and we never
published it yet and I haven't shown it
to you but it was a literature review on
adult neural restructuring and so it was
neurogenesis Naruto faggy synaptogenesis
and synaptic cleaving and to show that
yes it's nice to get childhood right but
you're not screwed if you don't get
childhood right and that you can
actually radically through many methods
increase neural restructuring of all
kinds and so I'll send it to you
love to get your feedback on it maybe
before we do this next one on on the
topic yeah I'd love to take a read I
mean I think that it's true you know you
had this amazing window plasticity early
in life but for better for worse you
weren't in the driver's seat with no
adult and you start engaging the neural
machinery that you that you built and it
was built for you and but it maintained
his capacity which is to engage in a
self-directed adaptive plasticity or you
can just take what you got and run the
run the gears as they exist and so I
think it's our responsibility as human
beings because our species is a
conscious species to constantly try and
become a better version of ourselves
which is effectively saying or
essentially saying to constantly try and
update our neural architecture in a way
that allows us to show up better in the
world and better serve ourselves and
humanity and end the non the nonhuman
species on the planet as well I should
thank you
so Andrew thank you for taking the time
and being here and sharing cutting edge
research coming out of Stanford and
other related places that both really
kind of reifies a lot of perennial
philosophy and wisdom as well as
actually gives us new insights that are
refinements that we didn't have before
and that is leading to the development
of new tools I'm super excited for part
2 which will do soon so everyone who is
interested in this and it's like okay
great I'm interested in the increased
frontal override before your process how
do I do then we'll get into that next
time and thank you Andrew look forward
to it thanks so much it's been a real
pleasure and I promise that for part two
that the backdrop will be a little more
attractive than my hotel room and what
doesn't matter where I am but it's warm
and cozy I have nothing to complain
about but thank you Daniel and and
thanks to the neuro hacker collective
you guys are doing terrific work really
appreciate your time thanks man thank
you for listening to collective insights
for the full show notes on this
episode and for more great interviews
visit us at neuro hacker.com slash
collective insights if you liked this
episode please subscribe to the podcasts
and leave us a 5-star review on iTunes