welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where equal hear and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
yeah thanks Peter thanks Patrick and
everyone for coming as you guys know the
stola is a digital campfire where we
dialogue about the things that are
happening that are most important in
these interesting times you guys know
the drill you guys been here over and
over again Pat Ryan has I've seen his
slides for this presentation and it's
gonna I think it's gonna be really
interesting you guys know how it works
keep trying to keep track of like Pat's
amazing a voodoo magic and I have some
questions for the Q&A after the session
Pat he has a talent for explicate eclis
the algorithms of the core of
civilization of power and is I love it
and I'm excited for this session and
without further ado I'll pass it over to
Pat all right thank you very much for
the introduction
I mean I'm joying the new MCS it adds a
different vibe every time this is nice
hello everyone welcome back for another
session of dark stoechas season 2 this
one will be talking about demon hunting
as and how to do it as and most of you
are actually demon hunters already you
just hadn't had that explained to you
yet the fact that you've been sitting
through this session means I've been
slowly trying to tease out who is
receptive and who is not so let's just
get into it then oh I'll need a I'll
need sharing permission please nose is
itchy
episode 5 demon hunting so let's just
get into it that dates wrong I can't be
trusted with calendars mm-hmm
so season 2 has been dedicated to
exploring the other half of this meme
which is over here and in this episode
we're just gonna do a real quick recap
of everything that we've been going
through already just so we can get back
on the same page and I can do my
seasonal pivot to go into solutions and
things that you as individuals can
actually embrace about the madness that
is continuously spewing out of my mouth
so we're going to talk about well we're
gonna recap what the blue church does to
all of us
and why it's important to at the very
minimum resist it at the very at the
very minimum comprehend it and then you
can decide what you want to do from
there so get this going so last episode
we were talking about tabula rasa
mythologies where people continuously
insist upon using very bad analogues
about the brain where it went from
anywhere to being a sperm tank to a
quantum computer which is quite the
gamete when you really get down to it
and the 1600's things were no different
people thought the brain was a book
that's what tabula rasa means it means
the clearing of the slate or a blank
slate so in this book you could write
whatever you want which is a way of
saying the brain could be anything you
train it to you could write it down
anything you want into the human brain
book and humans can use that freedom to
then free themselves from material and
historical chains that was a very
important thing in the 1600s as the
beginnings of the Roman Empire were
starting to reassert themselves not just
from the papal Church position but from
the trade and the maritime trade and
maritime insurance as that was
accumulating over time you had newly
minted Nobles you had a merchant class
that was on the rise you had this this
the electric shock of freedom in the air
all throughout sixteen fifteen to
sixteen hundred Europe people wanted to
get away from the madness so this book
was this this meme of or this neuro
mythology of tabula rasa really
compresses the spirit of that time and
of course we get to peek
tabula rasa with the advent of of this
wonderful character Martin Luther King
jr. who I've had the pleasure of working
for his family in the past their
children unfortunately do not like each
other very much
and they are still arguing about his
estate right there and in his one of his
most famous quotes you'll see I kind of
abridged it but you know the children
will not be judged by the color of this
game but by the content of the character
that's exactly tabula rasa it's you are
you are not your history you are not
your form whatever is constraining you
you are not that you are a blank tab you
can write whatever you want you have the
freedom to do so so you have like peak
tabula rasa mythology neuro mythology
right here and so so far so good
blue church might be onto something this
is a good thing too to kind of embrace
it's it's all looking good right well
you got to follow things all the way to
the end to see the problems see here's
what happens when we when we take that
tabula rasa mythology and apply it to
the individual and see if there's any
disconnects so let's look at where
things aren't as free as you suspect
they would be g odessa flat earth geo
destiny so not all parts of the earth
are actually the same the opportunities
in the sahara desert is nowhere near the
opportunities in Manhattan is nowhere
near the opportunities in Antarctica is
nowhere near the opportunities in a
mountaintop in Japan every part of the
world has its own dependency of
economics ecology energy dynamics
political dynamics every part of this
globe is a mess and everyone is this and
this constant flux so right off the bat
you don't have the freedom to write your
destiny on the globe because there are
competing forces that will just squish
it so that's so we have some disparities
there we get the economics I mean you
know upper class middle class lower
class it's a pretty obvious one not you
don't have the freedom to just jump to
the ultra elite in a sustaining way
maybe you might get lucky and get
invited to one of their parties if you
have some talent or aesthetics but you
know your rent you just rented at that
point you're not actually
living amongst them as them so there's
again you don't have the freedom that's
being promoted here but at the same time
that lack of freedom is what makes that
tabula rasa neuroethology so attractive
social networks some people are more
connected than you mm-hmm that's just it
says how life goes I'm nowhere near as
connected as I should be I probably
could put more investment than that and
there's some people in this very chat
who are crazy connected so you have
disparities there and then technology I
mean the difference between this year
versus the robot hand that's holding it
is 200 years of technological investment
it's pretty significant when genomics
you know this is kind of racy no pun
intended
oops but you know it's a there's
differences here too between people and
however whatever cluster and whatever
group you want to come up with you can
always find differences here I mean just
as machine learning and then culture
there's plenty of differences in culture
I mean just ask just look at the
internet I mean not everyone is an
educated upper class white cosmopolitan
that's just there's there's way less of
those than there are humans on the
internet so right off the bat we're
seeing the idea that the blank slate the
freedom to write wherever you want
and somehow bypass all these domains hmm
you have to account for each one of
these domains you have to navigate every
sentence you write in that blank slate
you have to comport it to all of these
domains in order for that sentence you
wrote to have the message you intend to
have you can't just like blow through it
like a rebellious child and scream and
whine and burn stuff down all day long
it's you're gonna attract these domains
to start stomping you out because you're
you're up their flow man and so
these differences there's a lot of
differences here and there's a lot of
conflict and tension that arises from
those differences so what happens how do
you negotiate those differences well
there's different mechanisms there's you
know trade or price discovery but the
one that people seem to form intuitively
on organically across
globe and across time spans is law law
is that one binding force that brings
all these domains into balance
eventually in some capacity I'm not
saying it's putting it into balance
perfectly it's not what I'm saying
law is the attempt to put these disputes
in balance in the hopes that you can
steer them towards the tabula rasa myth
owner Oh mythology so you got the
balancing of interests and we're trying
to balance someone who has a real big
interest in making sure that people have
access to water versus someone who wants
to be a real asshole and say well no you
got to pay me more and more for my water
so then there's some balancing of
interests here right and if you fall on
the wrong side of the balance you get
the shooty voice now the law says that's
fair because well I got to bring it into
balance if the GOP if the Geo destiny is
not playing along call it the sugar boys
if the cultures aren't I'm playing nice
bringing the shooty boys shooty boys are
like the backstop of the law no matter
where you go rights it's this it's not
the gold economy it's the LED economy
and that's that's the backstop of
everything so the law does rely on this
stuff no matter where you go no matter
what formulation of law you come up with
force does happen and our wonderful
libertarian friends like to say that
that that the state has a monopoly on
force that's a that's a clever way of
stating that you know in the end it's
still a led-based economy
and when you and you when you put that
lead based economy to the individual
well they also have to regulate
themselves they also have to balance
themselves in respect to those different
domains and a lot of those conflicts
tend to show up as symbols now here's
what I mean by that the law is just
written words for the most part the law
is trying to solve these situations in
these local tensions in these macro
tensions and it's writing them down
symbolically and saying here's the
compression like here's the compressed
conclusion of the conflict that we just
went through so if you come across a
very similar conflict just look at that
compression we wrote before it'll save
you a lot of time it's a really handy
technique and then you get the culture
the cultures throw their symbols into it
and then religion throws their symbols
and do it and everybody throws symbols
into it it's just um
so now you have like certain symbols
represent good laws certain symbols
represent bad laws people complain about
the symbols and now the law has to come
in and manage the symbols that it all
created and so it starts saying that
these symbols are illegal like these are
the bad symbols these represent bad
neural myths and these represent bad
cultures and things that we don't like
and bla bla bla and then you have
symbols that represent good things so
what does this mean what is this
symbolic management that the law
accidentally created by trying to manage
the individual well what does that
actually look like in the real world
when it finally emerges well you get the
when you have people using the bad
symbols you get the helicopter ride boys
and when people are using the good
symbols you get the helicopter cache
boys so this is the this is the Healey
RC is they had the helicopter rulers of
the world I mean while the rest of us we
have no idea this looks downright
schizophrenic to most of us wait this
symbol is bad but but this one's good
and it you have no idea what symbols you
want to use as of right now I think 400
federal laws in America in America 400
federal laws are created every single
year there is a new federal law every
single day do you subscribe to that RSS
feed no you don't so you have no idea
what laws you're actually under at any
given moment so it's it's it's anyone's
guess because this game just gets so
complicated because all the law has is a
simple that's the only thing it has it
has shootie boys and symbols it has to
manage both of those so you you don't
even know if it's safe to like is it
okay to use this symbol is is this
symbol is this bad the best bet is just
hot behind the Chariton you know hope
you don't get smacked which kind of
sucks but a lot of us are here like a
lot of us are here whether we know it or
not when we're this poor guy is so what
happens when you get impatient with this
what happens when the law is not making
sense and you're like you want to say
something right so here we go you got
the law got this poor confused chump
which is like 90% of us then this
person's also confused but they're on a
schedule they gotta get stuff done like
come on like seriously like that doesn't
even make sense like that law doesn't
even
make sense what are you doing and he
said oh that's a heretic
that's a heretic you gotta arrest him
you got to kill him he gotta get rid of
him we got to bring the shootie boys in
get rid of him now this person who's
just been sitting there waiting to
understand what symbols good and what
symbols bad they just been sitting there
now they just got a green light he said
ah I got the green light now I can
actually do something with these symbols
and so they go after the heretic and so
there's a self-regulating cycle the
simple management it's like a like a
life cycle of simple management oh yeah
and if this person retaliates well you
know then they'll just justify the law
after all the law called him a heretic
and when this person retaliates well I
guess they were a heretic so this is how
this is what tabula rasa eventually ends
up becoming when you start writing in
the book you are responsible for
everything you just wrote and when you
get a hundred pages in the book ask any
creator of any type of story or any type
of movie when they write their Bible of
characters it's very hard to get
continuity it's very hard to say oh this
character was here at this time line so
then that means in this page I gotta go
back to page 54 and change my time line
well the same thing is true about law
you're trying to write a story about
civilization using the language of law
and you are on the hook for all the
previous laws you wrote so getting
consistency is really hard and if you
call out that things are inconsistent
good luck so then this leads naturally
into identity politics now how is that
possible well we have two hylia cracy we
have the helicopter ride boys and a
helicopter cache boys and what do they
do well you got punishment and reward
and this is what's the law is now these
are the arms of the law this is how they
modulate the human behavior state
machine right so in this case we have
different identities which I'm going to
represent as hex colors in CSS HTML and
the 0 0 0 squad does not like the idea
that they are the target of helicopter
rides and meanwhile the FFF team is uh
pretty happy about all that cash there
they're somehow getting but all is not
well in tone land or in Hue land it
turns out that EEE doesn't get
much as FFF and maybe four four four
doesn't get beaten as much as zero zero
zero so what we have is this fractional
izing of identities it's not just here
in here
whose variations mutating now these
these variations didn't mutate on their
own they didn't just set up where the
four or four or four Club it's not how
it happened they just didn't get beat as
much so now people who are watching
people get beat say oh I guess I'm part
of this four four four group weirdest
thing I'm only getting beaten twice a
week as opposed to seven times a week
right so that's so that's a natural
distinction people will pick up upon
seams here he looks up at four four four
and they're like I'm not making the
money you're making what gives
so people notice things they notice when
they're treated differently we're really
good at that sort of thing and more
different you know more delineation
happens eight eight eight zero zero
zeros complaining about it's not that
big of a deal me break and then CCC is
sitting there like I'm kind of poor man
this kind of but where's the helicopter
for me right so it all starts here this
very simple delineation that the law
tries to codify but then things fragment
and he get identities but they're not
actual identities they're synthetic
eight identities they're synthetic in
relation to the law they're not actual
culture they're not actually there
they're just manifestations of the law
and manifestations of trying to game
this hylia see trying to get the
helicopter or helicopter ride guys go
after these guys and get the helicopter
cash people to dump on these people it's
just a company it's just a game
so identity is now just yet another
battle space to play in it doesn't
actually represent the reality of the
human condition at all and why stick
with our gradient things can you know
things can go in a totally different
space this space is pretty simple to
understand but let's go to a place
that's harder to understand a natural
variation from the darker hue natural
variation from the lighter hue now we
have totally different identities and
they're okay they're being treated okay
maybe they come from a place where
they're really highly educated in all of
the type of technologies that are needed
even though they look like these people
they are treated pretty these
despite being accidentally confused for
this group right meanwhile this group of
people who are kind of like these groups
cuz they're not you know they're in the
bright range or in the bright queue
right
maybe these this but maybe this
particular identity barely survived the
Civil War and they don't have all the
skills that the society that they're
that they move to have and despite them
being of this family they're not treated
the same so the identity stops following
this very simple heuristic of one versus
the other and then it starts getting
multi-dimensional and things get weird
after that because we're pattern-seeking
creatures and we're trying to find
patterns and all this stuff and at once
you introduce this level an identity
patterns go out the window you can't
actually come up with really simple
heuristics anymore and then you know
this group doesn't like that group
because they're cousins and they're fine
because this group's doing all the work
for that group and it turns out that
these two people did fight that Civil
War and their stance on the Civil War is
well you lost the Civil War so all
forever we in America do that all the
time when it comes to the south so it's
really not that alien of a concept but
the point is when you when you play
these identity games they no longer
follow anything that a human being can
actually make sense of in fact what you
end up doing is retro actively
justifying all the exceptions and you're
no longer describing a system you're
just describing the way things are under
the guise of creating a system because
scientific culture says you should
systematize everything even if it
doesn't make sense
meanwhile you have this you know I said
again just to reiterate all of these
identities do not naturally exist they
do not organically form they are all
driven entirely by trying to gain the
helio accuracy trying to get the
helicopter ride boys go after their
enemies and trying to get the helicopter
cash boys to go for their allies that's
it it's just a posturing game meanwhile
someone calls out this posturing game
they think the hex system is lame
it's a stupid it's all games freaking
retarded why am I even playing this post
hex ISM is terrorism now look at that
you have to play the hex game we have to
stick with our identity hexes
sad so what happens to this poor sap
well this is an unauthorized identity
and it's really important to make him an
authorized one because if we can't make
him an authorized one lam you just got
to get rid of him we have shootie boys
we can make that happen so now we get
all the identities that are under the
hex system and we start steering the
identity we say all right we'll take
this one will accuse this identity of
being a CCC Asst
I mean while the CCC group will say yeah
we got some funny memes so what happens
well there's a mutation process mutates
so now you know you're not exactly eight
you're kind of e but you're more seven
than eight subtle mutation kind of
change right we're making our changes
here we're influencing we're trying to
get this person back in the back into
space then the three zeros come in they
got crazy drugs and FFF is after saying
three zeros are stupid and we don't like
that well you know mutates our friend
the radical once again we're trying to
bring them in line we're trying to
expose you know the identities who are
are already in line so that we can teach
this identity what is expected of it and
then you know we get to these guys and
they're just cool dudes and this is
incoherent yelling so the obvious
solution who influences who here before
you know it you've completed the
transmutation chain to get this
unauthorized identity to being an
authorized one so that's what happens to
the individual the entire group now
hammers that person until they fit
within the hex system that is easily
understood so tabula rasa where I write
down the book of every individual not
only are you on the hook for everything
that you wrote on that book about your
life you are now expected to look like
every other book in the library as well
and so now the law comes in because
maybe this person didn't follow the
pipeline correctly and it's like huh now
this person is an upstart and screwing
up my color codes and I don't know what
to do here
so I'm gonna go to the law because I'm
trying to get my helicopter ride boys to
do stuff and now I gotta get my
helicopter
alright so here's I'm gonna do I'm the
law the only thing I know how to do
make stuff illegal that's that's my job
that's like that's all I do I use my
symbols to make stuff illegal so now
these are illegal because there's too
much conflict associated with it and
these are good these are approved by the
law right then all we're doing is
changing where the ride boys and cash
boys go we just we just change the
dimension meanwhile our force is its
safety identity yet still hiding behind
that chair so this so that the same game
is now moved to a totally different
space and then someone says this is
stupid still now they're calling now
they're saying instead of that little
hex saying the hex system is stupid now
someone else comes in and says this
reactions stupid so what happened so
we're back here again well look at that
here's our scared person who looks like
all of us and here's this person who's
also confused but no they got bills to
pay and stuff to do that law doesn't
make sense
you gotta banish the triple zeros
finally a zero zero eight zero zero like
HTML program you'll find that funny so
again we find this triangle once again
reasserting itself as a reaction to the
law to make sure that this symbols about
the law hold for continuity sake and
don't you dare retaliate because you'll
justify this person had to be banished
because they called out the resolution
to the problem and if they retaliate
you're gonna justify the people who
banished the person to begin with around
around we go once again so where does
this take us this takes us the
scientific methodology because now what
we're doing is we have our symbols we've
built them all up over time we figured
out how to be continuous between our
symbols and we know how to measure
identities so it sounds like we're gonna
have to bring in science to find some
additional efficiencies here but first
foremost we gotta figure figure out what
is science and what isn't science so
this voodoo and this Native
and this sci-fi that ain't science
this guy science he's all the science
you need you don't need any more science
a be easy accountable and repeatable and
explainable scientific methodology
methodology practitioner that is
science all you need science TM big
science everybody loves science and it
comes to law and by the way you got out
Lou got out all these other dudes cuz
they're interfering with progress that's
his way of saying only my science no
gods before me
the law meanwhile it's the only thing
they know how to do more than happy to
get these guys out the table and they do
they push them out and so these guys
instead of having a seat at the legal
table they now have a seat at the
cultural table where they're spreading
natural news articles and Alex Jones
memes so now because science was the
good boy now the science and the law are
married at the hip they're very married
they can no longer be separated without
without extremely violent reactions
because the science is the only thing
that can actually manage what the law
did the law has gotten too complicated
and only the science can actually parse
it and furthermore the law looks to the
science and say well could you take this
complicated cultural mess and make it
more predictable and the science says
sure we'll come up with financial
instruments that mitigate risk or will
explain sociology or we'll come up with
psychology and we'll science everything
until we're blue in the face so we can
minimize the risk so you the law can do
more things then because they're married
you know they do what married couples do
they have pillow talk and the science
says pillow talk and says there's
nothing beyond the atom whispers it ever
so delicately into the laws here and the
law says oh oh right away dear of course
there's nothing beyond the atom makes
perfect sense so now we started with the
promise of tabula rasa where you could
be anything you want and by plying
scientifically guided sociological
optimizations mired in endless identity
compromises you end up with the best
tinder has the offer which is God help
all of us that's better not be our
future she was more than happy to
announce it's just a bag of atoms just
from from God's ear or from God's mouth
to to your ear right and that's what
happens we go from all the potential
that could exist to uh you're a robot
pal and don't you dare disagree with it
because this is a robot path and this is
the tabula rasa path and guess what
I'm the law so these are good and those
are illegal
now back at this again look at that
looks like the helicopter ride boys and
the cash boys are at it again look at
him go and meanwhile this person wants
to do is is it safe the science yet
maybe maybe it is maybe it isn't who
knows this turned into a mess so what we
thought was sciences and science now
it's a legal thing and now you can't
make progress in science anymore imagine
that look this scene again just round
around we go every time we try to find
this band-aid we end up back in this
this pattern this pipeline so we ever we
have our scientific legal complex and
this person just can't make sense of why
certain things have didn't been rendered
illegal I uh well actually let me step
back a bit here the thing about science
is that it defines what is possible it
has this weird effect where once your
excel in soar exposed to all the
possibilities of science you say oh I
can now extrapolate the future I can
extrapolate some assumptions about the
future so for example if I gave you a
robot that can walk that I could talk to
in some capacity and was able to spit
back good enough linguistics at me I
would naturally conclude that maybe in
you know 20 years that thing's gonna be
reciting Shakespeare and I'll be having
Shakespearean conversations with it
that's the type of extrapolation that
one would naturally make and so what
science does is it has a monopoly on the
horizon the horizon of what is possible
and so when you start playing these
games or you say one thing is good one
thing is bad you're eliminating certain
Sciences like genomics because that that
violates tabula rasa and you're
accelerating other Sciences like
computer science because that
accelerates surveillance state so what
you're doing is you're you know you're
picking and choosing your horizon what
type of destiny you want and so when we
get back here and this person's like
wait why are we in a surveillance state
well whoa whoa conspiracy theorist pump
the brakes you need to slow your roll
there for a second on this person who
just doesn't even understand the
conflict am more than happy to attack
this person and we round around we go
this person is just like what the hell
and again the key here is the
law has to look consistent it has to
look justified in every decree it does
so if I call this person a conspiracy
theorist and they get pissed and they
attack like I guess they were a
conspiracy theorists every accusation
they make is designed to make sure that
the target retaliates to justify the
accusation circular justification right
and we've already gone down
utilitarianism so I'll just do a brief
summary on this one and I think we have
some new people here so utilitarianism
is the idea of maximizing joy and then
minimizing suffering and that's
orthogonal that's not like you know
pains over here and pleasures over here
you're gonna have pain and pleasure at
the same time and you get a very little
pain and very little pleasure at the
same time so much joy very pleased small
pain tiny ouch small joy join I didn't
fix that geez small join tiny please and
very much pain very outright so
utilitarianism tries to do this is
selecting for a lot of joy and not a lot
of pain and it turns out that that's
what the right side of history is to the
blue church and everything else is just
a satanic north sea so you know that's
that's a that's a quick recap I do have
an entire series if you're confused I
have an entire show about this if you're
confused by this concept please double
back and take a look at it I'm just
gonna push on there basically before I
move on it's it's this is a core drive
once you have the blue churches ability
to write all of its laws down
symbolically its ability to go after
people who don't handle the identity
categories they are predefined to go
into to maximize legal optimization and
then they don't comport to the
scientific methods ability to then
understand and navigate those categories
then at the very minimum of all that
control mechanism fails then we'll just
stop happiness on you but we're not
gonna dump actual happiness on you dump
synthetic happiness on you gonna fill
you up with drugs that's it because
what's the difference
so now you end up being this person now
once you start going down the the
synthetic happiness route here's what
happens you start you start justifying
infinite violence so if you're trying to
this whole this whole be happy and
maximize happiness if if you're not able
to achieve it one you're gonna fake it
because everyone else is faking it and
to even if this doesn't work they'll
just fill you up with chemicals so you
know pick a drug of choice it could be
any type of narcotic could be alcohol
could be any type of bias have fun at it
and while you're in this state of
seeking happiness here's all kinds of
things that absolutely are not happy and
you're going to avoid because it is your
job mr. Skinner box to find the
happiness at the end of the maze
therefore you're going to avoid these
things so what you're doing is in the
pursuit of putting this mask on you're
going to avoid all of the actual
disaster that's going on around you
and so this person is just stuck in this
trap where they have to seek happiness
because everything else is too
complicated to fix
but that's not enough the whole point of
utilitarianism is to make sure you're
happy that you are at maximum infinite
happiness and this is not infinite
happiness you're coping your coping
mechanism is not enough your coping
mechanism is never enough because
there's always someone else that's
happier than you and they're very pissed
that you're not as happy as they are and
so the pressure to drive you and drive
you into this ridiculous state over and
over again keeps piling up and the more
they drive you into this happiness the
worse this gets to all of us so now
we have science in the law and now
because they're trying to maximize
happiness science can actually create
chemical happiness the law can force the
consumption of that chemical happiness
and they can pick and choose they can
pick which one's bad and which one's
good yeah Ritalin was good once now it's
the bad one lexapro is the good one I
should be getting paid for ads for this
in fact I'd be part of the helicopter
cash boys if I was but everyone else to
get the helicopter ride boys those are
all tests those are weird people we
don't talk to them anymore even though
we pump them full of drugs
we put them in the asain Asylum where we
dismiss them whatever just keep the
churn going meanwhile again it's us
is it safe to happy yet so now even
happiness is clouded the very concept of
happiness is clouded so these this is
the this is what happens when you when
you play the the tabula rasa
neuroethology you end up where you're
trying to write this book about yourself
and you are on the hook for all the
consequences of that action and you end
up in this road of trying to seek
happiness and you can't back out there's
no backward motion in a book that's the
problem about a book I can't I can't
erase the pen I can erase the pencil but
life is a pen it's a it's a for it's a
forward process I can't go back in time
so what I write on the page is the page
and burning the page sucks because if I
burn a page I got to burn all the pages
before it and fix all that too because
it's a pen what can I do
ah this is all sad stuff sorry folks so
let's change this into some action
instead of sitting here listen to me
talk about you know the end of
psychology and before we do that just
you know check in with this cycle real
quick again someone looks at why did why
is lexapro all of a sudden the thing you
want to go for that doesn't even make
sense
um just dump you what more synthetic
happiness will come up with a new one
will come up with an opioid will come up
with a synthetic opioid will come up
with new drugs all over the place all
day just shut up that's it finally a
green light and you know the retaliation
threat the posture you know because if
if you're complaining about this then
all they're gonna do is hit you with
more synthetic happiness you don't want
that because you're already confused
about the last round so you don't want
to be tied down and dumped with drugs or
have ads for for alcohol dumped on you
all the time you know that's coming so
you're not gonna do it so this holds
this whole evolution from that neuro
mythology what's happening is trying to
resist the evolution of a neuroma tala G
is a guaranteed way to get the shit's
left out of you because the neuro
mythology is a powerful powerful tool it
unifies a lot of people because it
rationalizes a lot of things and it
gives people a very heuristic
understanding of all of the law that
they can't even possibly keep up with so
here's a quick example of what happens
to you when you resist the power of a
neuro myth for starters you'll be
looking at reality curiously because we
have brains and we're humans and we're
very curious and then you have to hold a
false consensus about reality
defensively so if you if you're out
there being like hmm genes are pretty
interesting and then someone says what
do you mean they're interesting that
sounds like you don't believe in
equality well then you have to hold of
false consensus be like no no no no I
believe in equality that's fun
that's fun even though you secretly have
you know complaints about it but you
just can't file them that's all
and then good that's not enough
that are gonna actually come after you
directly you know because you know
you're racist how dare you believe in
jeans well then you'll rationalize their
assessment as a bargaining strategy
yeah I'm not racist but it's a
bargaining strategy you've heard that a
million times on the Internet
it's just bargaining that doesn't work
cuz bargaining never works
because there's more of them than there
are of you so you will experience
reduced social potential you will be
isolated you will have your teams taken
from you you have your family taken from
you you will be remove from social media
your ability to engage in PayPal will be
removed you will be locked down China
style you will not be able to actually
go towards any type of social event in
the digital space for sure which is in
turn going to feed into the actual meat
space so you're gonna be isolated all
because you're challenging a neural myth
ask me how I know now because you're
isolated and you don't have a support
network now you got neuroses to deal
with cuz you don't even understand why
you got isolated to begin with I just
happen to understand why I had to deal
with 12 years of being shadow band years
with the why most people don't even
understand that technology's too
complicated social medias too new they
don't get it so now they have this like
this neurotic fear of every action they
do and they can't understand the penalty
that was actually put upon them so they
developed these bad cognitive coping
mechanisms as a result and then that in
turn results in self isolation because
now they're afraid of everything they
challenge the neuro myth they are now
isolated intentionally from here they
don't know why they were isolated
they're lashing out there trying to find
empathy they're trying to find
explanations but no one wants to deal
with that heretic no one wants to deal
with that Scarlet Letter so now the
person is actively self isolating where
the priest caste could not actually
reach
then of course this leaves naturally to
synthetic happiness and you will
acclimate because you can't even
understand what the happened you
and this is what this is what waits for
every single person who fights against
the neuro man's every neuron if this
will happen to you
but here's finally the good news in this
entire mess the good news is that as you
go through this you will develop skills
that no one else will have you will
develop perspectives and ways of looking
at the world and you will find actual
people you can rely on when you go
through this pipeline now let me flip
this around for you before I do that I
always forget this part forgive me so we
keep this week every time every time we
hit this part we hit this you know
whatever the law and the science come up
with as a resolution someone says that
doesn't make sense that person is
clearly a monster from the perspective
of science and law now we have to defeat
the monster because these guys are just
huddled in a cave waiting for the green
light actually do something instead of
living in fear all the time so they go
to attack the monster but then the
monster activates you see before and all
the other examples they didn't but in
this time let's say the monster does
activate let's say they lash out they go
after the source of the isolation they
don't want to go down that pipeline that
I just described in the previous slide
they actually say that I'd rather
die all that does is justify the law
that's all it does because someone calls
you a monster and you act like a monster
the rest of the world doesn't understand
the nuance they don't know what actually
went down and they don't care to know
what actually went down if someone calls
you a monster and you act like a monster
you will be a monster and that's it no
nuance is allowed they're not gonna
there isn't a journalist is gonna come
along and give you a nice little puff
piece in advance they're not gonna do
that
you're basically the moment you
go active that's it
so now I can talk about how I can flip
this around and turn this into something
useful so the good thing about cognitive
dissonance is that while it makes you
look like a hypocrite it actually is
training you to manage multiple symbol
systems so you can have different
symbols if we take our scenario where we
have all these symbols that have all
these different meanings from all these
different cultures and all these
different laws and all these different
psycho histories if you try to keep
track of all this if it will make you
seem like inconsistent you'll be like oh
well Christianity is here and then
communism in me means this and spatially
if I go to spaces this way and down this
way at least you know come up with all
that's a weird numerology systems to try
and make sense of it but as you explore
that most of you most of your initial
attempts are going to fail you're gonna
want to follow up in research and
understand what all these symbols
actually mean and go through
so you man up sorry that's archaic
terminology forgive my forgive my time
capsule definition you uh you become a
grizzled veteran when you play this game
long enough because you don't agree with
what the blue church has done and
because you have been forced down this
road because you said bro this doesn't
even make sense
you've been hit by the law you've been
hit by science you eventually say okay
well if I can't be allowed to made sense
of make sense of symbols I'm going to
make sense of symbols myself I'm not
gonna wait for the collective to come
down and give it to me I'm gonna
actually go ahead and actually do it
myself so now that symbols that was this
chaotic mess now you're steering these
symbols now you're understanding the
relations between them all now you can
read illegal passes and say oh this
legal passage means this and this
financial contract means this and this
this outcome actually means this thing
so when the law points to these things
and says you're guilty of these now you
can come back and say no I'm not there's
entire communities of people who are
frequently incarcerated in America they
become extremely good at law afterwards
so much so that if you ever go to an
American prison you go to the law
library you will find nine times out of
ten that the legal books although all
the pages are torn out and the law
libraries why is that well one the
funding for a private prison is pretty
high you'd think they'd be able to
replace the books but obviously they
don't want to replace the books if
someone's in prison for thirteen years
or you definitely don't want to provide
an endless supply of legal books to help
them get out of that situation and what
happens is the prisoners will rip the
page out and keep it for themselves
that's what happens but the point is as
you get pushed down this system you will
learn to manage these complicated
symbols you'll start to understand the
history of things you'll start to
understand the relationship between all
of these technic techniques and
technologies that the law and science
uses because you don't have a choice
you've been isolated the isolation
process has begun and so now you're
adapting you're actually being empowered
it's just not being explained to you
that way you see it as isolation I see
it as empowerment
now we go to our rationalization where
they call you erases me I'm not a racist
but that type of bargaining strategy
that never works ever under any
circumstance
you know here they come you know they
they tell you that right do that right
now poor the poor damn here sweating
it's a damn it has water how high is it
sweating I don't know why I did that
right it's sweating it's like oh what do
i do what do I do
this is this is this is a bad scenario
because if I if I screw up in this
scenario my bargaining strategy fails
I'm gonna be put in the isolation
pipeline all right well become an
influence operator learn how to
influence the situation learn how to
read these people and understand okay
what game are they playing let's flip it
around
that's a fun little flip we can all
agree that the guy who killed Hitler was
a great man wait a second Hitler kill
now this is an odd thing this is a
strange sentence because on one hand
Hitler is degreed evil and he is the
grand racist and killing him is the best
thing you could possibly do right wait a
minute who killed him oh he killed
himself oh now what we've done here is
we've added this state of suspense
you've put them in an uncomfortable
position where no matter how they answer
they are now the thing that they are
accusing you of no matter how they
answer that there's no way for them to
answer that where they don't look racist
themselves so you become an influence
operative so when you get to isolation
isolation is a pretty bad thing those
people don't know how to handle it and
there's plenty of pathways for you in
which you can be forced to handle that's
where the drugs and all the other stuff
comes in
but these heretics are actually assets
because the law didn't just isolate you
it isolated tens of millions of people
and their assets if you know how to find
them it's a standing army if you
know how to find them so you realize I'm
alone they isolated me the law on the
science isolated me but because you're
isolated now you can see the other
isolated people before you couldn't
you're too busy playing the game too
busy trying to protect your social
status and and all the things that
mattered you're trying to prevent the
isolation from happening so you couldn't
even see the ten million people that
were isolated but now you can because
you're finally in their shoes now if you
want to fight against that stuff that
sent you down this pathway well that's a
free army because if you're alone so are
they so now you have an icebreaker now
you have something that you can bind on
now you have a team that you can build
from hey you didn't build this team you
didn't create this out a whole cloth
you're not a grand orator you're not a
grand speaker and your charisma was the
thing the science and the law created
this thing all you did was find it see
you don't you have to create everything
the law did it for you now you know
where to look so isolation becomes an
asset so this is a good thing feels like
a bad thing but it's a great thing
just takes time that's all today I got
shoes neuroses right you're down the
pipeline
I've been isolated I'm under attack I'm
hyperventilating
I don't even understand what happened to
me why am i shadow band i am i shadow
band i don't know what's going on you
know you're developing all this like you
know mess about your mind okay well
let's look at what's going on in your
thresholds your sensitivities okay so
we're X&Y our X is gonna be the number
of conflicts you resolve increasing to
the right and symbolic sensitivity
increasing on the up so symbolic
sensitivity means you see a symbol and
you think it's reality so the concept
that tumblr made so profound was I am
triggered what that really means is you
see a symbol and you think it's reality
you can't tell the difference between a
symbol in reality so if you are here
then all symbols are real and if you are
here no symbols are real and as you
resolve your conflicts over time real
conflicts your simple sensitivity will
go down because you will realize the
amount of cognitive effort that you have
to do to track things that are going on
here is so high but if you're too busy
resolving conflicts now you'll say
 not all these symbols matter
none of these are real none of these are
actual real threats they don't matter
because you're too busy resolving
conflicts inversely so your symbol
management skills go up because now
you're like oh I can't tell the
difference between a symbol in reality
oh I'm getting good at this so now you
can deal with more meaningful conflicts
instead of like the sporadic conflicts
that we do online or the sporadic
conflicts we do on their personal lives
you get better at it as you do more of
it because congratulations you have a
brain that is as tabula rasa's you're
going to get
that's the writing in your brain that it
actually is sticking so when you combine
these two things together well you end
up like this guy ready to go so then
they start cutting you out and first
they isolate you from the people they
know you're you're connected to and then
you'll start isolating yourself when you
try to reach out and and get some
understanding of the scenario but they
don't have any understanding of it just
like you don't have any
standing of it you just got hit with the
full force of the state and the science
buddy you're
you got hit with like it's the
equivalent of getting hit with Cthulhu
you have no idea what the hell happen to
you these guys don't know either
so you isolate yourself so what that
means is while that's again a terrible
scenario it's a filter it's a glorious
moment in time to filter who matters and
who doesn't what are the strong
connections and what are the weak
connections because the weak connections
are going to say bye-bye but strong
connections down door and from that zest
that that's an entropic reducing down to
immutables you got hit with all the
isolation of that Cthulhu state science
law crap and now the only things that
stick are the only things that are meant
to stick and you can rebuild from here
so you are filtering for the resilient
and you are discarding the frivolous
again this is supposed to be an attack
but it's actually an opportunity and
then we deal with the synthetic
happiness this is a tough one I even I
struggle with I'm a walking Irish
stereotype when it comes to this one
and there are there are plenty of people
who are who are up on the drugs to all
the drugs that the kids do the some of
us are pretty dense at this lesson but
you'll find the hard limits of synthetic
happiness as you keep going you'll find
it yeah it's just a drink bro three
bottles in this DUI bro it's no big deal
it's just a job I don't need that it's
just a relationship I'll find another
one before you know it has just a body
who cares so you're you're rationalizing
the synthetic happiness and at some
point wherever your threshold is you
will find it or you die that's about the
options got here you will you will end
up like this person eventually when you
when you played this when you played
this game now whether it sticks or not
how many times you have to visit here I
don't know that's that's our own
individual journey or an individual
stubbornness we'll find it I might find
it one day we'll see but the benefit
here is once you find the hearts which
find the hard limits of synthetic
happiness it will never tempt you again
because you'll have too many memories
and you have too many experiences you
will never be able to be put on that
track again
there was just too much sadness and too
much pain behind that your neural system
will literally not even allow you to do
it again you would rather die okay so
now take all these opportunities and
what can we do with them what we're
doing is we're training ourselves to
actually engage in resisting a neuro
myth so that we can say wait a second
this neuro myth is us up I want
to change this because I am a human and
I don't want to live under the confines
of a neuro myth so they want to call you
a monster they're gonna call you a
monster no matter what you do there's no
diplomatic way around that there's no
personality or celebrity or combination
of words that'll magically make this the
state that'll make the law in this
science ignore you it's just never gonna
happen they are they only know how to
call you monsters so they only know how
to create monsters okay so now that
you've mastered all of these
opportunities
all of these lashings that they gave you
these opportunities you've done what
you've actually done is you've changed
the calculus of your own value in doing
so meaning when the science and the law
team up because they're married at the
hip and they say it's time to find more
monsters who's the blame well you're
suddenly too expensive to target because
the doesn't work on you anymore
number one thing that they can take away
from you as other people but if you
learn to survive without them they can't
hit you anymore there's nothing they can
hit you with anymore now all of a sudden
these people who are waiting for the
green light these people who drove you
in that isolation they become the
cheaper target they become much easier
to hit and so what is the science and
the law do well they get the helicopter
ride boys and you all of a sudden you
become a cache think because you're so
expensive to target they throw money at
you and they lose money it's a losing
bet for them
and that's why you'd go down this path
because if you don't you're gonna
actually feel the isolation and you're
going to fall into this state and you're
gonna fall into whatever this marriage
is trying to make you fall into and
maybe you like that there's a whole army
of people who have no problem with this
arrangement and maybe that's a good
thing maybe I'm just an asshole for too
long I'll accept that right but
sometimes these guys get it wrong and
when the neuro myth is wrong we've seen
what happens when the neuro myth is
wrong
we've seen what the dolphin did the
dolphin was pretty angry right a dolphin
horlor right
it was pretty angry fish I know it's not
a fish the point is we've seen what
neural myths can do when they're bad so
we have a we have those of us who
understand that hey this neuro myth is
is gonna end up in a bad spot
someone I suspect a lot of us here may
see you that so if you're going to if
you're gonna walk down that road which I
never met recommend walking down but you
find yourself on that road you can take
all the punishment that's gonna come
your way as you walk down that road and
each and every single one of them has an
opportunity and when you're done when
you finally turn all that into an
opportunity you will be a demon hunter
you will learn to hunt demons because
these guys the laws the law and it's
gonna be what it is that it is eternal
there is no way to actually fight the
law but these guys in the old days we
used to call them priests now we call
them scientists but these guys are the
actual demons not you you're not the
demon you're a person these are the
actual demons because they are using
their ridiculously bad assumptions to
help this thing survive and maybe this
thing tries to survive and it should
survive but the techniques these guys
are using are insane
or absolutely utterly insane they don't
even work so you turn all these pipe you
turn this pipeline of isolation into a
pipeline of opportunity and you will
become a demon hunter now you might be
saying well if I think and act and
behave like a demon then what's the
difference between demons and myself
it's a fair question the demons will
stop at nothing to destroy you in your
world
but you will know how to sacrifice
everything to save it and that's how you
become a demon hunter Wow those great
can you guys see me this medium is
trying to erase me I'm wrong here for
this media I'm I want to encourage you
guys to put your I seen some good
questions
I'll calling you guys soon I wanted
money to put your questions in the chat
and hopefully you have something good I
have two questions I just want to I want
to ask so he spoke about you you you
reference this thing called the neuro
mythology right didn't I know if that's
the right term it's it seems like you're
mentioning this thing but it's almost
like it's a it's so amorphous it's
almost like it's trying to engineer
precarity lien people to make them on
the to keep them on their feet so is
like I want it I want you to talk about
that more is there is it just some type
of arbitrary kind of symbol hacking into
the future or is it there's something
more the core of that does that make
sense
are you asking what a neuroma Thal G is
yes yeah so the previous episode went
into that the neuro mythology is just a
series of bad analogs we use to explain
how our brain works and we use that to
justify morality legal systems culture
even science at times so so however we
see the nature of our souls which is
ultimately what their Rheumatology is
trying to figure out anyway that however
we define the nature of our souls
actually defines the boundaries of what
is possible and eventually when an
entire engine and civilization system is
built on a single neuroethology
they achieve maximum saturation and then
it goes into diminishing returns and
then it's just all shitshow after that
so if you need to if you want to eject
from the Shih Tzu or you want to turn
that shown to something that was
just as orderly as it used to be this
whole episode is designed to tell you
how to get away from the isolation that
will happen to you when you walk down
that road and instead turn those and
opportunities
ah yeah I have a question about that
isolation it seems like to be it seems
to be a point at which when you're
isolated you're you're at risk of
falling into a super cult as you call it
in one of your past episodes where for
example the alt-right I guess a lot of
them were isolated individuals and it
kind of maybe fell into a different cult
I want to know if you have thought about
this or on how to kind of stop that from
happening to you sure so when a person
is isolated they become desperate for
anything that resembles the previous
social opportunities they had before so
that puts them in a position that
there's they are precarious and they can
then be exploited by people who can give
the simulation of that social order that
they had previously of course the
science and the law knows that and they
intentionally put people in that
position somehow that's not the
discussion that's being made somehow
it's the discussion that is the cult
that they fell into was the problem well
maybe if they weren't put in that
isolation to begin with the cult
wouldn't have power but we're not there
at that conversation yet we're still
trying to address the symptoms instead
of the actual disease itself so
it's hard for me to entertain the idea
that a symptom is is worth even pursuing
so I might as well just come out and say
it if you isolate people if you
knowingly isolate people if you shadow
band them for 12 years if you cut them
off from conversation if you cut them
off from PayPal you are going to get a
backlash that you can't even comprehend
and it's in your best interest to bring
them back into the fold sooner rather
than later because this is me being nice
this is me being nice right this is I'm
telling you what these people can do and
how this whole thing works and how this
whole thing plans out I don't have to be
nice this is just me being nice because
I'm explaining the last twelve years of
the craziness that I was a part of when
these people hit the switch and they go
when they go on you're not gonna turn
them off
there is no combination of science or
law that's gonna turn them off so I
trying to use a eyes to stop hate speech
is going to fail miserably because
you're not stopping hate speech you're
just stopping the semantic transmission
of it that's not the same damn thing
that's like saying I burned the I burned
the piece of paper that this law was on
so the laws not in play anymore it's
it's not how it works
just because you wipe out the medium of
the semantics doesn't mean that the
thoughts aren't still there so but this
is what happens when you isolate people
you got to pay the consequences for it
that's just how it's always been
excellent you brought up some personal
stuff I hope we can go over in some
future episodes I think Peter do you
have a question yeah so Pat given
everything you outlined today what would
be your advice to the stoah I would not
fear isolation you will be it when
they're done targeting people like me
they will target you because you will be
cheap and I will be too expensive and
when they come for you just another blip
another another piece of data science to
churn through so when that time comes
and welcome
remember the isolation is the only
weapon they have you now know how to
flip it and turn into an army so good
luck to you yes well thank you so
there's some good questions in the chat
we I'm gonna ask Dane if you want to ask
you a question I think you were one of
the first ones someone post one you see
how are you man this guy Jesus history
you and I shall I go right into my
question or dude did you want to
highlight anything from the Batman so
this guy is the last remnant like you
were there when I first started this
whole journey this crazy exploration of
how to engage in cyber warfare and how
to do me more fair and you were there
front line watching the experimental
phase oh man I got hit with a couple
stray bullets actually if you remember
your encyclopedia dramatica page where
you called me a castrati
that was nice so anyway I hate to do
this to the audience and just go down a
pro I've been a witness to pet before he
revealed himself as a pack I mean we're
talking going back as far as 18 years
but congrats this series it's it's been
fantastic and I'm glad you get to share
it with these people who seem very
bright I do have a question for you that
is on topic I want to know I
got some notes here because uh some big
ideas but some rebels if we talk about
them in archetype there's the wise old
rebel whose beloved there's the famous
rebel who's still alive these are people
who were never necessarily isolated I
can give some real-world examples Hunter
s Thompson George Carlin Terence Mckenna
Timothy Leary they were always sort of
rewarded for their counter neural myth
attitudes how do you think they fit into
your paradigm and is it similar to going
viral where well sometimes you just hit
luck and you get one of those or is
there a sort of path and a history that
sort of builds such a person fantastic
question you'll see in Hollywood that
certain celebrities get promoted over
others now did they have an it factor or
were they just part of a really famous
family and change their name like who's
that one singer Billy Elish what's her
name is that her name yeah she's related
to all kinds of crazy powerful Hollywood
people she didn't come up through the
internet and stuff like that just change
her name and look at that so the so the
idea of the rebel being celebrated you
have to ask yourself why is that even
being loud is it that the neuro myth of
the past is finally allowed to be
destroyed and so that something else
could come and take its place the people
you cited during the 60s and 70s and 80s
they're a tremendous new Rheumatology
dismantling going on you had
decolonization being promoted you had
the grand return of tabula rasa the
restoration of the neoliberal economic
World Order from the British these were
monumental geopolitical events and so
the models that they were promoting they
didn't invent they were tapping into
what the world was going to become which
was going to be the the psychometric
liberal capitalism that we have today so
that was arguably Slade
it's just a question of did you know
finding the PERT the right personality
for the right slot for the right message
there is an entire team of management
for that just check out CAA or any type
of agency in Hollywood and you'll see
exactly what I'm talking about they
always try to find these archetypes so
always be mindful about neuro myth
destruction as well and that's a
fantastic question because if it's being
allowed you also won't be able to stop
that just like you can't stop neuro myth
so in the transition from one neuron to
another it's just as powerful as the
previous newer myth itself and you got
there
that's a time to critically analyze that
transition why is it going into here
what is the actual configuration of
humanity that is supposed to happen as a
result of this because if you change
neuroma to change a configuration so
those are that's where I would start I
would do some analysis on why the timing
and why the personalities thanks for
your answer thanks to the stove for your
time appreciate it great question
I just want to plug pots of VPN if you
guys need to check it out so Todd how
the question Todd would you like to ask
a question sure which one the last one
it's the game plan we can start to miss
the constructionist and we go after
their their own system by using the way
you want to do that is make yourself
expensive that's the first step you want
to make yourself as expensive as
possible to target because cheap targets
are the targets that the ai's go for and
that the corporation's go for the
targets that are cheap are the are the
targets that you cannot be held
accountable for so you can dismiss them
that's why it's very dangerous to be
deep platforms because then you become
an incredibly cheap target so it's your
responsibility to actually make yourself
an expensive hardened target so that
when you're hit there is a reactive
chain of events that causes them
tremendous amounts of money
start there if you want to start
somewhere follow oh cool thanks for the
question
next we have handsome Carl that's a
great image so I like your strategy I'm
talking about tactics now is it possible
to disguise an anti tabula rasa attack
under a blue church cause in the
interest of asymmetric warfare yes that
is that is feasible we actually see that
every so often come up it doesn't have a
lifecycle to where you set it and forget
it it's something you have to curate and
it does mutate as well there are like
the they take the Karen meme for example
right the Karen meme was one of the most
beautiful opera well the most beautiful
modern meme warfare tactics I've seen
and I was out there and on anybody who
has the unfortunate disposition of being
under the the withering posts of my
Facebook account will know that I was
running the Karen meme way before it
became what it was I was out there
saying you know middle-class white women
this and that and that wasn't that was
me going after the target not individual
I just saw where the trends going I said
oh man they're gonna stop even Dave
Chappelle mentioned that and as in one
of his previous comedies where he was
basically saying you know the meaty the
me to movement you better enjoy it now
because when they turned their hooks on
you they're gonna tear you women apart
and Karen's just the beginning they're
gonna absolutely slaughter your
reputation absolutely trash it the me
too they will do the people you have
pissed off have unlimited account the
bill have unlimited on accountability
and unlimited dollars and they will
trash you you will see what it's like to
be platformed which is why I'm telling
you this now you might not feel it you
might not know it but it's coming for
you
so that type of meme where beforehand
you had believe all women and now it's
like well these women don't even listen
to him effectively deep platform of them
and that's a switch the tide so quickly
so
fast that they don't even have an
understanding of what's going to happen
to them and they're gonna feel the
isolation and I'm not gonna be able to
explain it well but this video they'll
be able to explain it and don't know
what to do next
Cooper Cooper you have a question yeah
here a great pad an interesting
listening to a couple of your video like
oh well a couple all of the videos and
all the the posts online so I I respect
your viewpoint on many things one would
be your your end goal is get to the
stars and in previous videos it was why
don't we have these specific like
scientific questions answered do you
think that getting to the stars as that
next step
Souls that what eventually gets us to
solve the problem of dark matter etc ah
second question do you think that like a
equivalent of a tattooing like Cantina
exists on some faraway galaxy where
there are you know other people who have
made it to the Stars conversing third
eye I respect you because you come from
the fortune HN like like behind it seems
clusterfuck of people who know what
they're doing online and I would just
like to hear you rant about applicable
anonymous security while posting certain
things you know whatever whatever that
means to you and then I don't know forth
oh good good man thank you
okay questions first one stars getting
to the stars is not a science problem
the reason I am attacking science and
abandon it so heavily is cuz I realize
it is not a science problem solving dark
matter and solving quantum gravity will
not get us into the stars I know that's
the great promise everybody has nice to
subscribe so
scribe to it to getting to the stars is
not a science problem you cannot hire
enough nerds like you could put a gun to
every human being alive and say you are
now a scientist or I will shoot you and
you will still not get to the stars the
problem is that there is no reason to go
to the stars because space is a desert
and capitalism sucks at deserts unless
it has a bunch of oil under it otherwise
you don't go into a desert so there's no
profit motive to go conquer a desert
it's too damn expensive and biosphere 2
is hilarious check out Steve bannon's
involvement in that it's amazing now the
other part about the Stars is that
because it is not a science problem then
what type of problem is it it is an
economics problem it is it is a question
of incentives is a question of alchemy
more than anything else you have to find
the right alchemical transmutation cane
chains to trick all of humanity into
going into a desert because there's only
two ways to actually make man attain a
desert to conquer a desert you either
trick people into doing it which
Alexander did or you use religion
religion can also pocket deserts but
those are the only two things that have
done it in mankind so capitalism won't
do it communism won't do it you either
need religion or you need to like pull
like an epistemic Emperor Alexander to
pull it off
so that's why I'm this that's a running
theme and everything I'm doing in this
season and now regarding previous
cognition a Tatooine type of thing
who's the say were the only sentience
who have ever evolved on this planet
biology's had a long run here
who knows what dinosaurs became maybe
there's a sorrow sapien that appeared at
some point and just kind of left and
said peace out there's a lot of
opportunities when you're when you're
playing with neurology over a two
billion years how many times did we
leave the planet it would it would suck
if the answer was greater than one oh we
didn't do it that would be very
embarrassing well the kids think of us
and then finally the the a chain rant
about security I used to do security
forever and it just it bought me time
but eventually you run out of time so
security
you practice your OPSEC correctly you
practice being anonymous if you are
engaging in a high risk high penalty
content that's not to say illegal if
it's illegal you shouldn't be
doing it but if you're if you're talking
high social damage content that is legal
then obviously OPSEC is important and
you should be doing the basics you
should have a false identity meaning not
a fake identity but a false one meaning
when people Docs you they actually Doc's
a social justice warrior instead ah now
that's interesting people don't tell you
that because it's not like those people
actually do their due diligence and say
uh well that's one of us so we shouldn't
attack them they don't know that they'll
tear that person's life apart and two
weeks later they're really and then
they'll be off to the next one anyways
these people don't understand the
concept of adaptation or you know
apologies or anything like that they
just want meat for the grinder so make
sure that all of your identity points to
a social justice warrior so that they
tear them apart and regarding security
the thing about security is that it's
something it is a currency to spend it
is not a currency to hoard most people
approach security like it's a hoarding
thing like I need more and more security
any more and more of it no you spend
your security to get objectives complete
just keep that difference in mind and
you'll understand when to reveal
yourself and when to reveal a fake
identity and just weigh the cost and the
cost and the benefits
hey keep it clean of the chats keep it
clean in the chats guys I really yeah I
agree with ang in the desert that that
that analogy is very fascinating but I
want to skip I want skip a few people
because someone got a plus-one I'll come
back mimetic keeper you had a question
yeah you actually just sorted you gave
one answer to it just now but I'm not as
been asked how can one work on making
themselves expensive to target right so
you can preemptively go down the
isolation pathway that I laid out and do
all those things in advance learn how to
identify those who are isolated all
those tricks that I just showed you
preemptively do those practice yourself
with those so that when the time comes
you don't fear isolation so that what
you're doing is you're preemptively
making yourself expensive I guess like I
know if you're already capable of
withstanding isolation I know that's the
kind of expensive but I guess I was
thinking like more of a retaliatory
thing or I don't know yeah reactive like
because because you know you can kind of
go and be isolated and being a monk on a
hill for a long time no that's not what
I mean no that's that's mythology that's
a neuro myth you have to get rid of as
well I don't mean isolation in terms of
seeking enlightenment
I mean isolation purely as an economic
cost strategy I think the idea is is to
when you are isolated the cost of
attacking you is negligible and so
you're opening you're actually inviting
yourself for more attack when you're
isolated which is why they isolate you
it's the setup it's the first round then
they hit you with with the big boys and
the shooty boys and then they shoot
everyone just like you and all of a
sudden there wasn't a genocide what are
you talking about you conspiracy
theorists that was eight hundred
thousand people didn't die that's crazy
I'm just gonna listen to this new song
now so that's why you don't want to
isolate yourself when I say prepare for
isolation not I mean like get used to
being alone nobody can actually get used
to being alone it's a state that we we
resist being alone usually we are forced
into being alone because things either
get too complicated we need a
cooling-off period or we just walked
into a situation incorrectly to begin
with what I'm saying is preemptively do
the six things that I walk through this
video and say you won't be preparing
yourself for isolation if you do those
six things what you'll be doing is
you'll be pairing yourself for reaction
to when you are isolated these are two
different things all right
Pat I want to be mindful of your time
sure we have a couple more questions how
many more you want to want to take just
keep them coming
I was pretty fiery today at the end so
I'm sure a lot of people have questions
all right we have four more questions
let's leave it at that
no I am true hi can you explain yeah
here autocracy like it was that a pun or
like I was so confused by that like I
just thought it was like a like a reward
or punishment system sure it's a it's a
it's it's me being funny about a
libertarian meme where a helicopter
rides are a libertarian meme where I
forget a Pinochet potentiate would throw
communists and socialists out of
helicopters so that's a that's a running
meme in the libertarian community where
if you're a socialist you get free
helicopter rides and then the helicopter
cache is a another libertarian meme
where when the bailouts happened it was
the equivalent of Ben Bernanke sitting
in a helicopter throwing money outside
of the helicopter just ridiculously
raining cash all over the place so the
idea of these two things being the only
way that the science in the law can
respond they can either pay you more and
more money or they can beat you more and
more that's the best of hylia cracy it's
the helicopter is a central part of that
so it's just a it's a punny play on
libertarian meme ecosystems okay thank
you and another question on top of that
like what like when you talk about like
going to isolation is that kind of like
is that kind of the hero's journey if
you're preparing for isolation and kinda
is that kind of like that way or built
where you're you're are alone so you
figure out what your allies are and then
you like is that is that what Joseph
Campbell is talking about like in the
hairs are you kind of like is that
parallel that's it that's what I think
that's a really good analog that's
really perceptive of you that's that's
pretty good yeah it is it is a a
domain-specific version of the heroes
for sure okay cool thank you so much
great questions I can't believe I missed
mega and one of my favorite people in
the store maybe and I missed your
question you want to ask it for real two
weeks ago and what the what the steps if
that mean and I've never I've never seen
it quite like that I but I suspect
you're right but I also think of what
you're describing is the thing that I
would call negative path ascension and I
think a lot of a lot of effort went into
all of us the option and there's an
alternative I might not be able to
explain it but I feel like that kind of
has to have a go when you are so when
you were describing it you're using
we're using like control and mastery of
all of these steps so you take your
human relations and you control them and
your economy and you control it and your
elements and you control them and that
dynamic is what makes it negative path
but like today at the end of the session
you're saying and you know what makes us
different from the demons is well we we
have power but we're using it to you
know save humanity you're not not the
story and to do that in a way that's not
using that negative path dynamic of
control is I don't have the language for
it but it's it's knowledge
it's like recognizing and integrating
human relations either like the the
internal you know male female aspect of
nature and then the same for every
single set I think that's the best I can
do it explaining that I just there there
is um and and thank you for that there
is a limitless number of people who will
challenge my language there are more
people who will challenge my language
and there are people that that's usually
how it goes and the idea that
one way or the other way is the only way
I don't play that game what I'm doing is
I'm saying if you find yourself in the
road that I am in and if you find
yourself in the perspective that's I am
for that I'm in and you did not see the
results of all the other ways what I'm
proposing will work there will be costs
there will be penalties I'm not
promising an easy ride I'm not promising
a risk-free ride
I'm saying this will work you will pay
for it but this will work all the other
roads are like we can minimize our costs
and we can minimize our gains and you
rationalize it and that's fine there's a
place for that there is a place for that
type of optimization but if if you see
an eminent threat at the existential
level and you don't have a solution I
would put all solutions on the table and
then kind of pick from and so I'm just
trying to be another utensil in the Jura
that sounds like good food for thought
yeah we're kind of running out of time I
think we should do one more question and
then keys question sorry keep so angle
engine you heard a question so it seems
like one way to operationalize these
ideas is to find that find your army as
soon as possible well what do you think
are the best ways to do that what are
some of the mediums and channels
communities and who do you reckon you
target first with your reference sure
then you might you want to refer to the
chemical cognition slide or video again
because again because what I'm doing is
I'm recognizing the limitations that
every brain has three pounds of meat and
they're on stuff and all the other
limitations we have you can't appeal to
everyone the desire is to appeal to
everybody because we live in a society
we live
society and that's an old name I get it
but we are conditioned via mass media to
be in this eternal state of childlike
thinking and that's not to say we're not
smart that's not to say we're not
intelligent children can be very
intelligent but it's the idea of trying
to find the maximum amount of reward for
the least amount of accountability
that's child thinking so by being in
that state the easiest way to maximize
the amount of reward while minimizing
accountability is trying to appeal to as
many people as possible you end up in
this weird social made this social
networking hedge where you're trying to
say oh but I don't I don't want to
isolate anybody because that one node
could be the one you know six degrees of
separation this one person might know
the billionaire I need or this one
person might be the account that I need
and you play these games and so you end
up bending over backwards for every
single person you ever meet until you
gradually lose your mind
so instead of playing that game I would
consider recognizing what it is your
biases are what is your personality what
is it what are your preferences are you
honest about your preferences are you
because you are accountable for your
preferences whether you know it or not
we're always accountable for our
preferences whether we can define it or
not the only thing you have to ask
yourself is are you honest about them
because once you're honest about your
preferences then the accounting isn't so
hard and so once you know what your
preferences are you know what you're
attracting because what you put out as
what you get back what you put out is a
is a is a criteria for a filter if I was
to wear a very bright colored shirt
instead of my normal dark garb and if I
had a funny little hat on and I was
making clown noises every so often I'd
probably attract crowds of people and
trained animals and peanuts right so how
what I put out is is what's gonna come
back to me as long as you're honest
about what you're accountable for and
honest about your preferences that's
what you're putting out anyway that's
what people are picking up I'm sure we
have like this veneer and we have these
you know these behavioral tricks and
these fun little games we like to play
all the time but people are pretty good
at actually getting to the core of a
person if they don't see the core of a
person it's because they're suspending
the disbelief so
do you want people to be in that
perpetual system of disbelief as you go
about your life some people okay at that
but in terms of trying to build that
army and find that army take
accountability of your preferences
attract the people who are okay with
that accountability and that's your
inner circle filter for them build the
strong relationships test those
relationships eliminate the
relationships that can't hold and endure
as you trial and error and trial and
error trial and error you're going to
get that core team of people that you
can then build from because as you move
forward with the purpose of an army is
is it's not just military it's not just
Marshall the purpose of an Army is to
affect change that's the point you can't
do it yourself you're not Rambo you're
not not the superhero the world was
waiting for no one is you need people to
change people so chain even then the
word change offends me greatly and I'm
not offended by much a change implies
tabula rasa like oh you're not you're
not thinking right I need to change you
right and for some people that's that's
their mission in the world but but if
you want to have an impact in a
meaningful way or you have something you
want to get done go to your core team by
holding your preferences be honest about
your preferences because that's what
you're going to attract anyway whether
you know it or not and that's all you're
gonna have to work with because you're
not gonna be there in front of every
single part of your team and network and
say I'm gonna micromanage you and blow
and I have the technology to do so you
gotta learn to trust your teammates
because you have to that's why you have
a team to begin with so I would start
there exactly what we need you know I
feel bad for a key because we keep
pressuring her it's the owner of that
bring us all key abuse I need to have a
chat with key key the EverQuest key
what's your question
Wow hi thank you as I always say I guess
oh my gosh I don't even know what to say
at this point thanks for saying that you
want to hear the talker and also
appreciating the
way in which this presentation is
formatted yeah I said in the chat that
you're not a utensil and yet I tend to
speak in ways that I try to get to the
most efficient way like describing what
I'm thinking um so I'm just gonna scroll
up so I remember what happened in the
moment as I asked the question because I
was responding to what Megan had said
and it was helpful for me to see that
way of thinking so the question was
about the but you kind of answered the
question already uh in the last bit I
just said tactics of being a demon
hunter in your view and then um if you
could maybe go on I also am asking for a
rant Wow okay
about the short-form story of the twenty
years um I understand I'm really glad
that you said this whole like child
perspective piece thing um I'm you know
like the maximum award and minimal
accountability I'm not that's not you
know I understand that that's a worry I
do want to be accountable for the things
that I do and say and think so with that
said yeah I'd love to hear your story
you should I can track key I do my best
to track I couldn't find the question I
found one question was there another one
okay that's the question and then it was
like can you talk about your story if
not no oh oh I see I see I'm sorry it's
okay no I'm sorry too for not being
clear enough tactics of being a demon
hunter you have to think like a demon
without becoming one that's where people
 it up they it up so hard there
because the moment you think like a
demon you can rationalize it's like one
once you start rationalizing stuff it
just never ends I mean if
rationalization is the worst thing you
could possibly do you see those types of
arguments all the time online where
someone's like I make this proposition
and then someone comes in and says oh
this propositions wrong for XYZ reasons
and the person who initially come in and
said I was intentionally being wrong
that's a rationalization give me a break
some people can rationalize anything
archaic we could just like turn
rationalization into like energy we
wouldn't even need nuclear power we'd be
set so we're very good at lying to
ourselves in the in the sense that we
lied ourselves to save face and that's
that's what anti accountability is and
we've been on that track since the
boomers yeah I said it fight me but yeah
we've been on track since the boomers to
have that anti accountability culture
and theme so the key with being a demon
hunter is you have to think breathe
react act and be a demon and it's hard
because those actions will lead you into
isolation and it's not for everybody
this is not something that can be
industrial-scale doubt this is for
people who have already been hit by the
the science and the law and the Cthulhu
like impossibility of describing it
people who've already been isolated
people have already lost stuff people
who've already had things seized from
them people who have lost loved ones the
pain in their world that's very real and
there is no network out there for him
I'm not out here in a Jesus mission
maybe the ai's are but I'm a human I'm
not I'm not a goddamn Saint I just know
what works and what doesn't in these
types of flights and when you have that
type of loss we are very good at
ignoring the other person who went
through it so remember the self
isolation is part of that pipeline why
resisting sucks the self isolation is
where you you don't understand what
happened to you and so you lash out
trying to find someone to explain it to
you but they don't understand it either
they think you're crazy I say they push
them push you away that is
that is where things go off the rails
and you start coming up with very
strange rationalizations about what
happened to you and what's going on and
that's what can make you look like a
demon but what I'm saying and here is
its to not just reactively get yourself
into that demonic state I'm saying
consciously do it so that when you are
put into it you know how to pull
yourself out that's the key because if
you do not do that when you are put in
that state you will become the monster
that will then justify the law in the
science because that's what they need
they need that justification to prop up
their system and prop up everything they
do it's why they punished you to begin
with so that you could be the scapegoat
so consciously put yourself in that
demonic space so that when you were put
in that position you are already
prepared to pull yourself out because if
you don't do that you're gonna be on for
a hell of a ride in that isolation and
those synthetic happiness pills are
gonna you up for a long time now
that said my life story is you can
imagine I've if I'm able to talk about
this stuff with a somewhat straight face
and a smile I'm quite acquainted with
actual living demons I know people who
have killed people so I like I've known
people who have killed people since I
was a teenager right so it's it's like I
understand the full spectrum of human
potential and I've known it for my
entire life and it never goes away once
you really see the full human spectrum
and you see it everywhere and that's not
that's not a cognitive bias the tabula
rasa that says human potential is the
most important thing we write our
stories human potential goes all over
the place it's not always the good stuff
it's the bad stuff too the potential to
be absolutely heinous is just as
infinite as being absolutely progressive
it's just as infinite so I I got to see
all of it so I would when I was younger
I used to be much more open about it
because that was my strategy to try and
win pity points I don't do that anymore
so I'm happy to take that particular
question one on one if you'd like
oh I think you know I kind of liked that
it was getting personal and maybe we can
do that at some other time but yeah I
really like this idea of you know
keeping track of your stories are you
telling yourself unconsciously putting
them down and entering that liminal
isolated state consciously I'm sorry
that we didn't get to let other people
ask set questions and all those two more
but Peter just wants to we have to close
this down Peter wants to plug in some
other story events so Peter you know
thank you
Khalil Thank You Pat for another dark
stoah so upcoming events at the store we
have a few events to Sunday mimetic
mediation 3:30 p.m. Eastern Time on
Sunday and the sexy Armenian Daniel cos
engine is back with his metagame
mastermind that's at 6 p.m. Eastern Time
on Sunday and then our meta modern sex
columnist maybe grey is doing a sacred
sex session or her raw sexuality series
on sacred sex and toronto-based graphic
novelist Chester Browns gonna discuss
sacred role of sexual transgression and
prostitution in Christianity and explore
God's rule for rule breakers so check
that out he was still at CA and this
still is based on have a gift economy if
you want a gift to Pat directly go to
the store dot see a slash gift and then
you can see the sexy or handsome and
sexy the illustration of Pat Ryan and go
to that and then you can get to him
there directly so like thank you again
Pat I think I speak for everyone by
saying that you know it's absolute gift
and yeah thanks so hope to see you again
next week see folks thanks everyone