I was listening to your chat with Tyler
Hollett
the other day oh yeah its discord and I
thought he was a very bright fellow and
had a lot of interesting things to say
and it made me think I and and something
that I've been thinking about for a
while that I thought might be a topic
that you guys could speak on quite well
since you know Plato and Aristotle and
the Greeks so well and that is the idea
of a soul what is the soul and how do
how do we how do we have a soul in this
machine and I've heard you talk and kind
of redefine the notion of soul John and
does that seem like a topic that might
be of interest yeah I am very interested
in discussing that I'm interested in
discussing that in connection with with
nauseous and dialectic very much very
much so maybe I could start try I've
been talking with Chris about this and
trying to I guess what it's not right
cover maybe it's a combination there's
the word I want to use and it doesn't
exist in English Carrie makes use of it
in his book Augustine's invention of the
inner self which of course is deeply
relevant to what we're going to talk
about now the thing about that is Carrie
takes great pains to say that yet this
is English he wanted to use the Latin
term inventio in that time yeah and the
rien de the publishers wouldn't let him
because well they're publishers and the
reason you want I won't use we're going
to use the word inventio is that it
hangs between our two words invention
and discovery so this is where for
example you could get around a lot of
thorny problems in math by saying math
is neither in
vented nor discovered but it is in been
tio
so I'm very interested then if you'll
allow me to reinvent EO I want to
reinvent you the soul if that makes any
that's sure and I want to try and do you
something sort of the opposite of
Descartes so for really important
historical reasons especially to try and
form a an alliance between the Catholic
Church and Neoplatonic magicians from
the Renaissance baked art pretty much
completely it identified the soul with
the self and then he completely
identified the self with the the the the
center of subjectivity the the place
where the mind touches itself in
consciousness you know you're conscious
by being conscious it's pure
participation and as always with
Descartes included deconstructing
Descartes you have to be really really
respectful there's really important
insights there that should not be
abandoned but that confusion of soul to
self to subjective Center is something I
would like to try and full of heart well
nevertheless keeping the connections and
so so also the soul is connected in some
way with this notion of the divine
double yes or the sacred second self I
think as you you've renamed that yeah
yeah that's very much the case I think
there's something in here that there
term our soul is in is aspirational but
I would also like like more does
Christopher Moore does with Socratic
self-knowledge and reconfigures reinvent
here perhaps
thus the
itself as something not possessed but to
which we have a perpetual aspirational
relation that your true self is is the
the virtuous self that you're always
aspiring to right so the soul is not
something we have something we do it's
something we it's an activity and it's
something inspired to become at the same
time so what I think it's what the soul
this is an idea I'm playing with serious
play and I've been playing with
Christopher ease when my best purse one
of the best people to play with as you
can imagine this idea of I just have
this image of you guys in the playground
with marbles yeah yeah great great play
Nathan a play date yeah although I may
have lost a few of my marbles um so yeah
and I'm trying to pick up on this notion
that could resonate with Neoplatonic
ideas of the one within us which I can
perhaps get to and then Buddhist ideas
about the no self and the true self
especially in the work of nishitani
and and so what I'm gonna what I'm sort
of playing with is this idea that
there's two ways in which we participate
in a kind of transcendence one is to be
coupled to well put it this way the
emergence of mind is wedded to the
emergence of world and I don't mean the
emergence of thought I mean the emerge
the way what the way your mind has
emerged developmentally the emergence of
mine and the emergence of the world as
an increasingly complex of complex and
dynamic set of intelligible affordances
for affinity and aspiration so I'm going
to use the way and what that does is
that couples us to be inexhaustible the
morning not just quantitatively but
qualitatively but there's also that
about us which I want to use a Buddhist
term which is our suchness it is
if this direction is the direction of
participation the more nests the
movement into more nests this is the
suchness is the breeze the direction
towards individuation and the suchness
is that about you that is resolutely non
categorical that would that it's that
what you love in a person which you love
the their uniqueness and i want i don't
like that term because it's so bound up
with narcissism but when you pick up on
the irreplaceable way in which that
person can is and continues to be a new
venue and you get a sense of oh my gosh
right that that's the suchness now the
buddhist claim that enlightenment is you
get such nice for everything it's so
it's a way of tailoring your cognition
to the being mode in everything and then
what i'm playing with is this idea that
though the individual the individual and
this is right out of Tillich and Chris
Wells tell you that this individual
participation dialectic between the
mourners and the suchness that activity
is soul hmm between the morning and the
suchness yeah so you mean between some
kind of let's say Eck excessive life and
and and and just the simple existence
the way in which the inexhaustible
overflows the world and the way in which
the the inexhaustible and you overflows
any categories in which I try to
particular eyes you but nevertheless I'm
pointing something individuated and
instantiated in you that is not
individuated and instantiated in
anything else so this is like trying to
pick up on internet and other ideas that
you presents the more nests in your
suchness and your such nostalgia
is can not just much I want to use a
distinction pro kleh it's not just a
passive possibility but the pure
potentiality the potential to power
potency an act of being able to write
assume you know a variety of identities
a variety of agent arena relationships
and also assume this in your own
idiosyncratic historical development
yeah and I think we talked about that
was Zach that the soul is is is not is
not a singular thing no no no it's a
multiplicity it's of potentials yeah
yeah yeah and so yeah so yeah the soul
is that which you knew well sorry one
pole of the soul something dr. Seuss
sorry one a pole of the soul is that
which in you has this inexhaustible
capacity to the relevance realization
and refit itself in evolving fashion to
the world and then the participatory
side the resonant side is the fact and
we experience the most in wonder and awe
that the the world right the world
discloses an inexhaustible nests that is
always presencing through it and the
soul is when those so what I'm trying to
do and you Chris probably sees this why
you making use of Tillich's
individuation participation and talking
about this a finding relationship
there's this mutual it's not reflection
because the more earnest comes into the
suchness and then the suchness right
adds to the more ness of the world right
oh it's great when you can get this the
handle of this vocabulary it's very
beautiful yeah and so what and of course
this is deeply influenced with Whitehead
but I'll say one more thing and I'll let
it let Chris talk with what I'm trying
to do and again I mean this respectfully
is I'm trying to give I guess a
non-theistic or secularized equivalent
to what the soul's main function was
which was to worship the soul's main
function was to worship and Descartes of
course left that transform
finding to transcendence right he left
that out and when he collapsed the soul
into the self and then the self into the
unchanging center of subjectivity so I'm
trying I'm trying to reformulate
reinvent eyo soul in a way that zaps
Andry appropriates in a respectful
manner the soul's main function which is
worshipped beautiful yeah before Chris
speaks I wonder if the soul ever had a
kind of fixed meaning if all of these
terms kind of they have to be reinvented
all the time otherwise they become
reified and they have been no longer
have any meaning well the problem is
things can become rarified in this way
and ER they can be embedded in a myth us
that stagnates and dies and has not been
replaced by any new emergent mythos that
discloses new logos right and in that
sense they're trapped within and this is
like Chris's metaphor of the dying star
is so appropriate they're trapped there
they're sort of stuck on the event
horizon if I if I turn his dying star
into a black hole other right yeah and
so think I think our notion of soul has
been lost interestingly in the
performing arts you know there's a
category of music and you know this much
better than mine I do soul in which
there was an attempt to reinvent eyo
soul as a particular way of you know
connecting through into music yeah well
exactly I mean you have to you can
distinguish between music that has a
soul
yeah and music that doesn't have a soul
I mean if you have a very fine fine here
and the music that has it so I think is
connected with that inexhaustibility and
the music that doesn't have a soul is
just a formulaic repetition of of
something you know it might be very
performative it might be very salient to
use your term or and that and that that
relationship that I'm talking about a
worship that individuation participation
tono's a dynamic tension creative
tension
that's very aspirational you are
participating in the sacred second self
well your individuating the current self
and re individuating it andrey
individuating it tapping into it's such
nice until you actually come to
appreciate and become or asymptote
towards the sacred second self mm-hmm
beautiful
Christopher I want to hear from you I
want to hear you sometimes I add to that
riff riff one on somebody's there
possibly to be added to that well I I
guess yeah unsurprisingly what I say is
just going to be a recapitulation of
what John just said Chris I wasn't
courting contradiction by saying that no
I'm just trying to say that that was
pretty comprehensive I mean okay maybe
I'll put it I'll try and put it what you
did John I'll try and maybe put piffle
II I to me that if I had to distill it
down as a working definition I would say
that the soul when I what I understand
soul to be is like the transitive
property of the self that relates it to
its own morna's I always come back to
thinking of soul as a I as a relational
aspect which helps to dislodge the
notion that it's something fixed an
entity fixed within time and space right
if it has if it's fundamental nature is
as a relational nature both expressive
and impressive then its function in a
very sort of Guardian way its function
is as a relation to be cultivated it's
as a relation as the I've sort of a it's
sort of like it is the intermediary
aspect in the orchestra of self that
bridges between the the suchness of its
current composition to the morning of
the yet unheard melody yeah it's it's
it's the true the transitivity to me is
the property of the soul that most
alludes its definition because an ended
that also explains it sort of multi
vocality and it's equivocal death
clinicians right because it's if it's
nature is as a dynamical form of
relation then it's no wonder that we
keep trying to voice definitions on it
that it continually bucks and eludes so
so I think that the the as yeah when I
think of the soul the best place to
start for me is to understand the soul
as the expression of the existential and
ontological relation that we have with
the aspect of self that is to be
disclosed with the morning of the world
and that's perhaps why well I was
thinking when when when John was was
mentioning the soul music and how soul
music if music has soul I mean we're not
talking about the particular genre of
soul music but just soulful music in
general it creates a kind of silence it
stops you in your track but there is
kind of a forward movement at the same
time you feel like you're moving and
you're still because it's always a
double disclosure or it's a it's a
double it's what I should say is like
the soul is your power of faith it's the
power to it's it's the enacted power of
wedding like the emergence of mind to
the emergence of world like I'm saying
other such Nastase and so I guess what I
need to say is that it's always it's
always enacted in in faith but faith
that I'm trying to talk about that that
ability to continually realize religio
[Music]
find what you mean by faith John what
what your working definition of faith is
well that's that's what so I'm I'm
really picking up on the auth right so
that what faith is is faith is right
that continuity of contact that ongoing
affordance of affinity that makes us are
conformed
more and more to what we think of and
what we realize better we realize as
real or more real so that like I said
what happens is there we and we these
are truths that are only tracked we can
only trace the inexhaustible through our
own trajectory of transformation so
that's the emergence the developmental
emergence of mind as the capacity for
intelligibility and when that is wedded
to the way in which the world is
constantly disclosing itself to us and
and then that the two poles of that is
there's there's a disclosure of what the
more nests and the world can be and then
there is and it's like two sides at the
same time but there's also a demand put
on me to aspire to tap into the
resources of my suchness what is often
called in Buddhism your original mind
your pure mind so that I find that
potential to trace the trajectory of
trance framing in a tree in a
transgender man er so I can like it more
and more maintain continuity of contact
I think it's entirely appropriate that
deaf the definitions of faith and soul
be understood coterminous ly because
because it's it's almost as though faith
faith isn't just is the described
activity of the soul and so it's really
I think it's impossible to think of them
in as independent dynamics I think once
one is somehow a property of the other
so that the cultivation of soul
manifests in faith and the cultivation
of faith manifests in soul I think it's
appropriate to understand consistent in
that manner I I would say that soul is
the term for a power and faith is a term
for the virtue that you know cultivates
that power towards excellence the
enacted works you know faith is related
to virtue something I wanted to ask you
about today also was the sanest word
hurt you because in Peter Lindbergh's
blog there was a big discussion about
about virtue and and he was saying
something like he made some kind of
comment like he says he loves virtue
more than he could love even a woman or
his wife for all yep that kind of virtue
that kind of that's what virtue means so
that seems to be related to faith as
well yeah I mean so I let me try
something that's close and related and
now may help visit um so I think of
reverence and here I'm found following
Woodruff because he explicitly argues
that reverence isn't a feeling or an
experience it's a virtue he's a little
bit less clear about what the virtue is
but his exert his examples and the
allusions to the Platonic tradition make
clear what the virtue is virtue is and
this is the other aspect of faith that
I'm trying to get it sorry reverence is
the virtue that puts you into right
relationship to all right so that you
are both excellently receptive and
excellently that's the disclosure and
excellently responsive that's the demand
to the experience of awe so that you can
tap into the fundamental depths of its
transformative offering and so reverence
is a virtue faith is by the more
encompassing virtue the better you know
right like I say that it alludes back to
the notion of worship where we are
trying to get into a comprehensive right
relationship to the unfolding of of
trans jetty the mutual unfolding of the
individuation of such nests and mourn us
and there's something about faith that
means that we're not there yet we
haven't arrived yet it's a near knock up
we're incomplete that were I'm trying to
and I mean Thomas the point is did this
right and try to make this notion of
faith and Chris
says there it's coterminous inter
defining with soul trying to make the
notion of faith back into a virtue
rather than an act of willful assertion
willful identification what you're doing
is you're trying to I think the best way
of understanding virtue is a virtual
engine you're trying to create sense of
constraints within between and without
that will help you best disposed
reliably to right relationship with the
presencing of what's most real yeah yeah
and you're becoming
I mean faith in some ways it's it's you
becoming proleptic Li conversant with
the with the organization of your
relationship with the world your
relationship with yet the relations that
govern and concentr your disposition
before let's say reality as such I say
faith has a kind of a kind of continuity
between the state of those relations in
situ and the possibility of transposing
or transfiguring those relations in
order to accommodate greater levels of
intelligibility there's something kin
like there's a vertical continuity that
you step into when you're when your
relation becomes disposed with faith
right it's like you're stepping it
you're you're stepping into the hair
collide and current as it were right
you're stepping into train with
something that's going to that's going
to disclose that the possibility of
reorganizing your relations such that
you become more optimally disposed to
accommodating the world so so that's
what here's a way of thinking other what
Chris said that I think wouldn't help to
make a concrete think about how you're
faithful to your partner your wife
alright that's that's a virtue right
it's and it's not captured and in this
we can talk about this goes back to what
why you're you know yourself more
with the city a good thought too much
for me oh I just had a good thought when
you said I didn't mean to interrupt
um when you say being faithful to your
wife that's an activity right yes but
sinners if you look inside your mind
maybe you're not always faithful you're
not we're not always faithful right in
our in our hearts and minds but it's
what we do so that just gave me that it
is it is and notice how it's into
defining inter defined with love - yeah
and that make a sacrifice on some level
we might have an attraction to other
people or or something yeah yep yeah but
we make a sacrifice and we decide to to
limit ourselves to that that that
relationship which actually you know
makes our horizon larger yes exactly and
that was the point I want to make your
faithfulness to your partner isn't about
any sense of closure or the fact that
she can be captured by a set of beliefs
so when you the virtue of faithfulness
is to have of course you have sentences
you utter but it's also a virtue also
requires skills it requires a
sensibility for perspective paddle
knowing right and and it requires a kind
of self thing for the participatory
knowing virtues that they do they link
all the knowings together such that
what's happening is as you said you're
constantly affording your wives more
Ness right and how but always always in
recognition of her suchness she's not an
abstract principle to you so you are a
forties not your property or possession
or other things that's right
otherwise if you have that kind of
relationship it's a relationship without
faith isn't it it is there's definitely
that she's not she's so she's not
categorical she has such Ness but she's
also a doorway to the mourners of the
world right she's also not just an
abstract principle she's neither just an
abstract principle or just a simple
concrete thing she is a person which is
not either an abstract principle nor a
concrete thing but something beyond them
something like Orban would talk about as
ultimately
it imagine imaginal so what I'm trying
to say is your relationship of
faithfulness in love to your wife is a
it's sort of it's it's soulful and agog
a you are affording her souling and she
is affording your soling and that's what
the faithfulness is and I mean and so in
Vedanta you get this I've taken up into
you know the central claim othman is
Brotman thou are that right so that the
lead the mystery of transcendence and
the mystery of imminence the soul of the
of the reality and the soul of the
person are ultimately a find inter
afford n't interpenetrating co-creating
I was thinking you know I'm go ahead
Christopher I'm just gonna say it also
means that that implicit within that
within the faithful relationship is the
capacity for the capacity for
inexhaustible reinvent II oh yeah of
course you just find it John right
because there's something there's
something about a faithful relationship
that is necessarily unpredictable die
think about the womb the womb with a
view express that it always has a the
gnosis of the relationship always has a
view to beyond the relationship and so
it's just I mean it's it's it's reliable
enough to be to be to us to us to avoid
absurdity right because when a
relationship becomes so unpredictable
then it verges into absurdity but it is
not so predictable as to become that's
another kind of absurd Nurse Joy that's
right yeah but it's predictable total
predictable miss is absurd and it's just
a sort of chaos engineering yeah that's
right that's the virtual engineering
right you join us too between those yeah
so there's some think so the property so
that the the property of faith in a
relationship is that which keeps its
poesis ongoing and real clinician right
so that when you when you turn to the
relationship that's why that's that's
why faithful relationships are a font
for existential renewal in some respect
right because you find yourself
and recollected anew and a faithful
relationship precisely because in
intermediates the morning of the world
as well as the morning of yourself and
so the the capacity for self coisa for
the autopoietic evolutionary quality to
a faithful relationship is precisely
that what makes it a font of an exhaust
ability yes and notice notice how as you
are participating in the other right
hand right like Chris Chris said you are
also internalizing the other
Ubik you individually your such
necessities to internalize other people
yes and this is what dialogo says I mean
this is what des Louis does right this
is a property of dialogo says precisely
that by the revelation of value are so
revealed and in your revelation that was
more revealed and then the cycling that
takes place is a consequence of that
opens the perspective of the diello goes
to the to the to the sort of something
like the ontological vertex that is that
is available with it with now available
by by virtue of in virtue I should say
in virtue I love that expression to get
back at all in virtue of that faith hmm
there's something else that I was
thinking about it is that as the the
erotic aspect I was just going to do
that and that's what and I in these
conversations often we're a bunch of men
talking it seems to be there there are
women involved as well and I hope more
and more women get involved and then
there's this invocation of the feminine
which happens and then that seems to to
bring this conversation in the insole
the conversation if I could if I could
say so and I'm not I know that Hebrew
there I remember that the soul is
feminine or the Holy Spirit is feminine
in other languages it's it's masculine
but I don't know if it's inappropriate I
mean III think that way all the time in
terms of masculine feminine polarities
but people seem to get offended when you
well I I prefer the Taoist polarities of
yin and yang
because they are more comprehensive
they're not limited to biological
creatures and
and then they also disposed us towards
not getting overly politicized about
something important that we need to talk
about I was gonna bring up the I was
gonna bring up that connection because
the more nests into such nurse and and
when it sort of finds our individuation
to participation when we get that
appropriate tone ours that right
relationship I think that's that's
really the experience of beauty where
we're and I want to bring beauty and
Hans book on saving beauty and scara's
book on beauty I think a really really
important works on reason it works on
beauty because because what beauty is is
beauty is exactly like scary says you
know you come upon a beautiful tree and
there's two things you say geez I didn't
realize trees could be like that right
there's the more nests but then you you
realize that this tree is somehow in the
experience of beauty unique and
different from all other trees so right
so the jury has a soul innocence yeah
yeah the tree has a solar sets not in
any animism
I think enemy ISM is a for us an
inaccessible mythos that that symbolize
that correctly but yeah I I think in
that sense it's a kind of animation
where animation also means to set things
into motion right so I think beauty is
exactly that experience it's like most
of the time we're doing relevance
realization because the goal is to
produce relevance but sometimes the
relevance realization machinery is in
the service of realization it's in the
service of disclosing the more nests in
to touch nests of everything it's in
service of beautifying the world and
that's a kind of flip right where the
you know the world though what I'm
trying to do is actually put myself and
this is like the worship and the
reverence I'm trying to put my relevance
realization machinery in service it's
not subjectively oriented I'm putting it
in service transductive ly through the
disclosure in beauty of you know how all
over the universe
to have existed the way it did for this
cop to be the way it is and to be here
now the way it is and have all the
properties that it has that you cannot
possibly grasp right here right now and
so and so this is in this again this is
a notion of a beauty not of consumption
consumption is the most primitive form
of conformity I become one with
something by consuming it Plato talks
about when you experience beauty the
conformity its you he says you want to
give birth in beauty the response right
the part of the right relationship is
Chris said is poesis
I want to create I want to do more to
afford right
more and more beauty in the world mm-hmm
yeah it's like beauty is like the like
the it's like the physiognomy of the
world's mourners it's what it's how the
mourners presents to us right the
countenance of the mortis is precisely
what strikes us as beauty so gentle and
then you have word for this that I think
I think you'd like I'm going to give it
to you and see where I play it I think
in this self it's an interface where
what we're doing hahaha you think we can
face the world and we give it a way of
facing us yes and all that yeah also
picking up on the technological sense of
interface as that which finds and
conforms two things together so they can
welcome you actually function together I
thought you might want to play with yeah
I will play with that well I think it's
entire it's also there's something in
sort of a tongue-in-cheek way it's also
appropriate to this exact circumstance
but exactly now is interfacing and and
cyka headed room oh I'm just gonna say
that the the the the interface being
beauty but there's also a nog leanness
to the idea of interface as well it's
like you need to have this technological
barrier between us or something like
that that's just a feeling I got when I
when I heard the word yeah and exactly
that and so we've got to get out I mean
I want to bring back the face with an
interface listen why I brought up Tyler
in the beginning because he was talking
about this technological platform and
then I had two feelings about that I had
one feeling about yeah a great lowing be
creative and then a other feeling of
like getting to
clearly consumed by by this machine that
is just devouring all our creative yeah
yeah you know acts and potentials I
think that's right but I think I think
the technology is what it is in the
sense I'm sorry that sounds trivializing
what I mean is it is a power that has
not been coupled to virtue hmm there is
nothing in virtue to pick up on Chris in
which yet that we have decided you know
how we're gonna actualize the potential
of this you wouldn't want it to be avert
you wouldn't want a machine to have
virtue either and in a sense that has to
be a uniquely well I don't know about
that I mean yeah I actually would rug
you the other way I think as we try to
give them intelligence we better be
giving them virtues of rationality and
wisdom but that's another argument I
think with what Tyler was trying to
point out is what's happening on the
discord servers right is a particularly
powerful way in which people are
appropriating the interface medium in
order to do interfacing the way I'm
talking about it right now and in order
to try and create the communities and
the distributed cognition for the recall
serration of our world stealing the
culture from the way it is now frozen in
sort of more abundant normativity x' and
moribund structures and rhe culture
aight i mean i that's what he's bait
with a view that's what he's basically
arguing for yeah and so that's what I'm
trying to get at that there's a way in
which we could virtue we could we could
appropriate invert you the potential of
this medium so that we can recolor yeah
in a really powerful way and recognize
and recolor and recognize in an
interdependent fashion and and so the
people that attend these concer this
will actually circle back around the
people that attend these discord
services are there in good faith mm-hmm
they're there in good faith and there's
a faithfulness they don't have an
ulterior motive
they're just doing it for itself because
they want to stay wedded to what's
emerging they have a sense of DAF they
have a sense of finding themselves and
finding the world in the deal logos and
the emerging community around it and so
they want they want they love the beauty
of that and they are seduced in the
proper sense of the word by the erotic
aspect of it right
they are seduced into wanting to
maintain continuity of contact with it
so there's this when you say seduction
there's this incredible darkness and
danger at the same time as that's why I
don't want to forget about that right
yeah I think finally it so I think in
some sense by Lia I think so taking the
model of these these D dialogo I think
is appropriate because I think what what
the presence of Phi Leah does is it
essentially creates a matrix for the
cultivation of arrows right and for the
transmutation of arrows into something
like in a gap but for maurices so you
know eros eros of course can be creative
or consumptive depending on its
particular valence but I think one of
the functions of the dialogic practice
insofar as it trains and tutors Phi Lea
is that it becomes a kind of it becomes
a way of performing the beauty of the
erotic impulse in a way that it changes
its it transforms it and and I think
that the role of Phi Lea as a kind of
intermediary between the a powerful
emergence of the erotic impulse and the
possibility of its becoming in other
forms I think is central it's I think
that's why idea logos is focal and I
think that's why they cultivate the
interpersonal what we might call what we
have called the the horizontal dimension
of the logos which is to say the
interpersonal dimension abdiel Ogas the
kind of thing that guy cultivates and
circling is so it's such a fundamental
starting point because what it seems to
do is it seems to bound the arena of
play in such a way that the air us
becomes a parity like Xers
that can then be molded and shaped and
creatively directed to become the birth
and beauty to become to become an agog
eclis reproductive now I got an agnostic
when it wants to give birth and I got
and it makes me think of the campfire
again you said you said of course
there's a circle and mm-hmm of course so
so there's something really really
central then about and and I think this
will come out you know as this as this
we work to refine this more and more I
think it's going to become really
essential to understand how this is
sequenced and to understand how it how
you know what what the proper conditions
are in order for this to happen reliably
but I think that's why there's something
about there's something about cordoning
off the interpersonal arena in such a
way then that it becomes a proper
symbolic body for the transmutation of
arrows because you're right and you it
it can be profoundly destructive and and
it can feed it can feed and dilate every
narcissistic impulse we wouldn't
possibly have then so it's a very very
careful game that we have to me to play
to make sure that doesn't happen well
when you were talking I was reminded of
you know my own tradition you know of
practices of psycho technologies which
is Tantra and Tantra Buddhism and and of
course todrick beaut ism is not about
removing those kind of darkness Azure
are those kind of passions or those kind
of it's not about doing away with them
it's about it's always about
transmutation exactly exactly so I mean
the let's remember we are talking and
it's appropriate that we are we're
talking about soul and faith but we're
also talk and love and beauty we're also
talking about virtue and and that's why
the virtues that are cultivated to
ameliorate and help us perhaps grow out
of self deceptive behavior is bound up
in this reason rationality and Andrew
you know that I have a much broader view
of this yes yes so I think reason
rationality and ultimately you know the
interpenetration of the intellectual
virtue is like reason and the ethical
virtues like courage right they come
together in that superlative
virtue which is wisdom so you know
people have to be cultivating wisdom so
dial look dial logos and this is the
point that you know that well I I don't
mean to make it's on a guy is not
responsive he has been immensely
responsive to it but to bring back you
know the Sapientia laceration to bring
back the cultivation of wisdom in to
write these dialogic practices that's
one of the core things of dialectic
right is to have the deep
interpenetration of the right the
recognition we and remembering and
realization of a self-deception coupled
to right the participation in the
overflow that's afforded by dialectic
day they are that you point Andrew it
actually says one of the things I've
been arguing for philosophy ax is not
just circling it's not just
interpersonal intimacy it's in that
intimacy shifts on to intelligibility
itself and is governed by a normativity
of overcoming self-deception mmm-hmm
yeah that the the the the interpersonal
intimacy is is a symbol on it's not for
itself yeah exactly
let's put for it's it's a symbol on that
is put for as a bridge into the service
of the kind of self transcendence that
you're describing that's and and then
when it's it's it's a symbol on for the
purpose of cultivating the faith
elliptic rationality right in Keller its
sense of the term symbolized by Union
right some kind of Union centric
symbology it's always it's an image of
sexual Union right of the dynamic of the
dynamic process and the you know it's
it's almost its wisdom and compassion or
rationality and an energy or something
like that
all of those it's a wedding only to you
together and also the picks up on this
phenomenological experience of quasi
divine revelation that we have in the
throes of intimate disclosure I mean
that's the thing right that's that
that's that's what Marx
intimate relationships of any variety
platonic or nonplatonic right is that
there's something about the relationship
that there's something about the the
reflective capacity of that relationship
to provide endless novelty in the form
of your own understanding of yourself
and in the form of your understanding of
the other person right the sensibility
transcendence of it is such that it it
is it is it is endlessly just infinitely
discoverable right there's a property of
it that is infinitely discoverable and
so then that property becomes host I
think to the kind of infinite
discoverability all happens in magog a
neighbor home maybe home is better than
host but I like going beyond itself
because it picks up on the sacramental
ah
Oh valence of the exercise I think home
is also appropriate it's both really
well that's good that's good I like that
that's really good so I mean you know
again to pick up on the worship all of
this is - you know you get back into
sort of a liturgical relationship it's
amazing how religious these discussions
are becoming right oh yeah despite the
you know ever know where the religion
we're speaking of the religion that is
not the religion yeah more deeply
religious almost the more we get into
all these things and we find that that
all these notions like faith and the
worship and you know trance or really
all about right but we also find virtue
and we also find wisdom we also find
rationality that's why I almost always a
fix
Socratic - faith Socratic faith because
that's what's so amazing about Socrates
is the way he weds himself any right to
the other um Peter lets's commented on
in the in the dialogues because he's a
tip-offs he has a suchness about him
that allows him to reform himself to
anybody he's with right and he's a sort
of Midwife to them he ups
give birth but he also has this faith in
the logos he is willing to follow the
argument and this white also requires
the virtue of courage he's willing to
follow the argument wherever it goes yes
and it seems it always goes I was
reading Socrates this morning because of
you guys I have for the first time I'm
reading him directly of course I've read
him through other people and and the the
last part of the chapter was you know he
comes up to all these pseudo conclusions
about things and then he suddenly he
says well we don't know actually what
they're talking about here the very end
of the chapter I thought like there's a
humor there that I didn't know there is
person intended like thinking you had
this grandiose understanding of
something but really the whole point was
that once you've understood something
you you don't know anything anymore
you're at the beginning again or this
gets taken up in the Neoplatonic
practice so so the Neoplatonic universe
in which is one at which thing there's
the absolute pure oneness of the one and
then things emanate they proceed out to
all the various multiplicities
instantiation and then everything right
returns this is not a temporal process
this is what's happening in ontology and
the idea in dialectic is you're supposed
to do that same thing you're supposed to
project all of your thoughts all of
their variations you have and then
notice all the differences and then
recollect and say yes but that's just a
projection and only and then when you
recollect recollect back right and try
and step back to what's deeper and
what's affording all of the variations
that's when you realize oh but I don't
really know it and then you gather this
is how you practice that like that you
gather it back in and then you again
project it out so that you externalise
it you can come aware of it right and
then you see all the variations on the
and then you pull it back in it and you
don't stop you just keep going back and
forth because you're trying to get into
conformity with how how how reality is
unfolding in that constant procession
and return and return and what's really
cool for me is that's exactly the main
motion and artificial intelligence deep
learning right you take some data and
you can compress out what's underneath
them all the
and then you run variations from that
see what sticks gather it back in right
very it out projected out recollected in
projected out recollected in and that's
how this that's what how these networks
evolve their capacity to pick up on
complex patterns in the world that's
what gives them their intelligence right
right and then I guess I guess to then
that that Neoplatonic process that in
that Neoplatonic process beauty is
really the kind of hypostatic emissary
right that signals the realism of that
process and and allows you to track and
follow it more yet perhaps more more
more reliably allows you not to be stuck
in your tracks somewhere yeah yes it's
like it seduces you forward all the time
so they're not you're not you know you
just you don't fall asleep by the side
of the road I think beauty is the mark
of knowing by loving right right yeah I
think that's that's its point oh and I'm
you know originally of course the the
the the the identification was you know
sure really sexually but of course what
you know what Chris has been describing
repeatedly to great effect is what we're
really doing is we're exacting that and
we're using because we're not just
biological creatures we're cultural
creatures and we're we have to
perpetually Reese we have to reset your
sacral eyes the culture cultists is you
know ultimately right if the place of
worship and cultivation to to wait you
you you participate in something growing
with a life of its own right all of this
we have to Reese sacralized right as
we're recoloring we also simultaneously
we sacral izing all of those aspects of
ourselves that are properly designated
as cultural and not just biological and
one of the and an essential thing for
this are these related terms person self
and soul mm-hmm those are all ultimately
I'm not I'm not with
using their communication to be nearly
hope culturally constructed or anything
like that but they are places well they
are the primary poles through which we
interface with culture and also afford
the culture interfacing with the reality
in which it is always embedded in and
upon which it always depends hmm yeah
well played John yes and Andrew you're
right this is all in some sense in
service of the religion that's not a
religion yes and trying I have taken
very seriously the the loving criticisms
made by Paul van der clay Mary Cohen and
Jonathan Paz oh I've taken them to heart
and I've noticed something and I'm
really I've really trying to fret a
flagon and celebrate it then when I
listen to other people's criticisms and
it you know and take them to heart and
what I can often do is I can start to
internalize them into new ways of
thinking new paths of research
Jonathan criticized me in that you know
I was talking about as if it's all
individual mystical practices and so
this is what I got so involved with this
the distributed cognition it led into
the whole project of dialectic and Neil
communitas yeah and communitas and then
Paul talks in you know Paul talks
repeatedly of you know the scalability
problem both developmentally and across
various hierarchies of confidence and
power and I take that very seriously as
well as trying to say okay how can we
reinvent EO all of these polarities all
these tone offices of individuation and
participation so that we can make them
accessible and scalable yeah it's
interesting I was talking to this very
in Paris in France very well-known
meditation teacher Buddhist meditation
teacher the other day and I was talking
to him about Buddhism and my sense that
Buddhism in the West is sort of
gone awry on some level and I said what
is the use of Buddhism what and he said
I don't know maybe it doesn't have any
use you know maybe it's it's but but
it's just there's there's I just love
these practices and this kind of thing
and and he said his own teacher chögyam
trungpa was trying to look for something
kind of beyond Buddhism right something
that would be larger and would not be
would you know he would make a
meditation available to people or rather
than have it being some kind of you know
special esoteric technique yeah or
something like something that's really
available to people who cares if you're
a Buddhist or a Christian or whatever on
some level I mean I mean who cares I
mean well I I've been playing because
I've been doing going back to nishitani
in the kyoto school had an excellent
conversation with Jared Morningstar what
a great name by the way Jared
Morningstar about nishitani because I
you know because he's for me he's a
primary example of you know of an
epochal philosopher bridging the doing
east and west re conceiving you know
religion religion and nothingness i will
recommend this book til i die is one of
the top five books I would put it on the
shelf beside clay I just ordered it
actually because yeah and there's some
good books to order in conjunction with
it order these two if you get a chance
and Ruth there's the Keota school by
Robert E Carter taught in Canada by the
way at Trent University the religious
philosophy of nish nishitani kechi so
I've been you know really really playing
around with this idea of something like
Zen neoplatonism because to it the two
would constantly undermine each other
serve as n was trying to undermine
itself all the time and you would say
said you would say there's something
called the stink of Zen and that's when
you become too religious and
Neoplatonism was always is always trying
to do the same thing and and and and and
you know if we could somehow integrate
them together like I say because they're
not if you'll allow me to play with the
Wed wedding that before they're not
going to sleep easily together in the
same bed but I expect that would be
actually really really a really good
creative tension that would prove would
keep well perhaps keep a kind of
criticality for longer before things
everything eventually solidify right but
maybe keep the fire of criticality
burning a little bit longer oh yeah what
I wanted to say about my discussion with
this this person also was that he
mentioned that you know he said each
each period that we live in has this
denial denial of love he called it yeah
I mean you say that you know there in
the religious era right when people were
highly religious you know you would burn
somebody at the stake or something like
that and that was the denial of love
right somebody wasn't a Christian you
burn them at the stake or if somebody
wasn't a Buddhist they were a heretic
and and all that sort of thing and he
says but but but our denial he was he
was he's written a lot about our
cultural denial today is this
commodification of everything where and
this pseudo happiness search for for and
he was talking about our meditation you
know is usually taught as being this
panacea to make somebody to make you
calm and that's that sort of thing and
and that that actually the spirit of it
should be more and that spirit of all
these sorry I'm rambling here but all
these techniques like impermanence that
people use they've they've turned into
this sort of description of reality
that's very obvious and and stupid and
they just you just use these phrases but
but I think I think the dialogue goes
would would you always have to keep the
this the soul and intelligence of
something I think I think so I mean I
mean I think Han has been the best for
talking about our incapacity for love
now our denial for love in the way in
which we have turned everything
to consumption and commodified
everything and he also has talked about
a correlated thing was that this allows
us to circle back because of the way
love and beauty are bound together he
has this wonderful chapter where he
talks about the aesthetics of the smooth
yeah that we want we want this like we
want we we have we have re identified
but his point is we have misidentified
beauty with with making things as smooth
as possible
visually cognitively interpersonally and
his point is that what we are doing then
is is this grand act of narcissism
because what we're basically saying is I
don't want anything to disturb me or
disrupt me and that's this comes back to
your point that meditation I went on
teaching them my meditation classes I'm
doing them I don't know if you knew that
and I did I did I did yeah I've already
burdened otherwise I'd love to come but
no no no that wasn't that wasn't no no
why I repeatedly tell my students you
know that meditation is not a vacation
it's an education it should disturb you
and if you're having unpleasant
disturbing feelings good good right the
people that come in and all they want to
do and they want to talk about how they
feel wonderful you know it is
appropriate at times to celebrate wonder
and connectedness and presence but you
should also have periods where there is
demand and challenge on you yeah and and
and I guess you also have to go into the
underworld that's what this guy was
telling me today about you know the poet
has to go into the underworld and and
look at the dark aspects of your of your
world and and and of yourself and you
know that and that's also part of
meditation which well but you see that
the the you know the Gnostic and union
metaphors are ultimately Wed to that
Neoplatonic practice that I was talking
about because what do you do well how do
you really journey into the underworld
will you try to notice how you're
projecting your shadow here's the
projection and all the way and you I
mean you really can't
respectively get at your shadow and and
and the point is that I'm taking shadow
not just and it's too hard to look at
you mean it's it's you know no because
you it's you you where you have to get
to a place where I want to play with
Nietzsche's thing you can't jump over
your own shadow right it is immersed in
the very activity that of you're looking
at your shadow it's it's a meshed it's
like this
let me give it's deeply like this you
are so wise with other people you can
give your friend amazingly good advice
right but trying to do that for yourself
is almost impossible when that that's a
homework of wisdom where people can
successfully do that and what you have
to do and this is why and this is mores
point about self-knowledge requires
distributed cognition and Berbers point
rationality requires distributed
cognition because only in you like
reflecting back on me like my
projections and if we can if we can if
we can move that from being an
unconscious process of CO identification
to an explicit one like in therapy right
only then can I recover from my
projections what has been otherwise
inaccessible to me that's how I can
integrate that which means individuate
right with the shadow the shadow is the
disruptive things that I have to project
out so I can see them the way like the
how literacy makes your thoughts
available to you and then I can from
that gather back in and gather in that
criticality and that's what actually
individuate smiie and moves me forward
hmmm III mean and this is what Jung
thought I mean dreams are a little bit
weird because dreams are sort of other
they're sort of alternatives to your ego
mind but it's very I mean this is one of
the things you were you're reading
Socrates Socrates spends a lot of time
putting people into a pouria because he
wants to disabuse them of all these
incorrect yet intuitively obvious ways
of how we give self-knowledge well I
just introspect bullshit you will not
get a lot of if most of yourself will
not be found
right oh well what I do is you know just
uh you know just the things I like or
choose no that's bullshit too right well
the things that I sort of you know
assent to well no that's not enough
because I don't know what you're
committed to but the true normativity of
you is until I see you having to
interact with things that disturb you
and disrupt you mm-hmm I mean I think
mores book is brilliant about this it's
just bringing out that there is so much
aporia in Socrates because he's trying
to get people to give up our feigned and
fallacious sense of expertise about our
own self-knowledge this is what we also
lost with the notion of a soul if you go
back into you know the Christian
tradition the soul was deeper it was
that part of you there was a God given
part of you right it was that part of
you that transcended yourself awareness
because it was that part of you that is
you know striving for relationship to
what is ultimate God
so I mean Socrates's process of aporia
is to humiliate in the old meaning of
the term people's pretended expertise
which is a kind of arrogance right about
their own self-knowledge because it has
to be found in dialectic I mean this is
now the the convergence of this ancient
argument that self-knowledge is only
available in dialectic in this new
modern argument by people like Sperber
and my good friend Greg enric's
that right that reason if reason was
designed by evolution to work within
distributed cognition not just inside
people's heads hmm that's very clear
yeah so if you have a confirmation bias
and I have a confirmation bias but they
aren't the same confirmation bias you
know what we'll do
we will come in with our confirmation
biases and if we probably come in good
faith let's right you and I will disrupt
each other yeah you will disturb each
other out of it in ways we can't do with
our own cognition now I'm not saying you
can't do things like journaling and
cultivating active open - you have to do
those you have to do those - but there's
a there's a place that you and I
can get to in dialectic that we cannot
get to on our own yeah yeah there's a
place of self-knowledge that we can get
to in dialectic that we cannot get to on
our own because we have to disclose who
we are before another person's right
you have to externalize it and we have
to give up ownership over what we're
saying and doing and let other people
appropriate it and transform it before
our very eyes this is the thing that you
face like when you're when you realize
the performative aspect of your
cognition it is always going to get away
from you I know I used to carry this
slogan I don't like such I used to carry
the slogan around and use it sort of
very um one-sidedly but he said you
never complete a book you only abandon
it and the one meaning of that is you
can't bring things to closure but now
and then I realize there's a bigger
thing because as I start to put stuff
out into the world I realize what that
abandonment is it's those things are
gonna take on a life of their own
within distributed cognition and they're
gonna get to places that I could never
have gotten to with them hmm
I'm thinking again of this whole thing
of Moses not getting to the Promised
Land right he's this is our lives we
build this whole thing and in some sense
we have to deal with the kind of
disappointment of where what will lead
to or or we have to give up our our you
know project and I offer it to others in
a sense yeah I think I mean part of what
we need to do is right yeah to shift and
this isn't this is my deep I mean you
know that I love the Platonic tradition
deeply but this is my deep critique of
what goes wrong in the Platonic
tradition which is the the conjoining of
sacredness with perfection and where
perfection is a coming to rest the later
Christian Neoplatonic Christians replace
this with epic TASIS that we are aware
of where we are in permanent self
transcendence that
is the field that affords a permanent
self-transcendence and the vision of God
is not to see God in rest
what do more and more see the way God
sees so there's no final resting point
or Nirvana or enlightenment or you know
here I'm home now it's more like
continual well is there is there a final
resting point in your relationship with
your spouse do you now say I'm done I've
completed love we don't complete any
virtues we don't complete virtues and
thinking that they even complete s is
incorrect right your love for your wife
your faithfulness to her those are in
completable projects and what their way
John Kahrs John Besh won't throw this
brilliant book the religious case about
belief and then he there's finite in
infinite games right virtues are
infinite games they're games that are
not meant to end like a good
conversation like a good deal logos
right and virtues are always infinite
games that's one of Plato's great
insights that's why we can never be
completely virtuous only the gods are
capable of that infinity so that's why I
can't be completely very true SF well I
don't mean to make a joke that's that's
that's wonderful yeah that's fine that's
that's very well it also it makes me
think that our our beauty is in our
imperfection which is kind of it's it's
it's a terror and it's a relief at the
same time well that's what Rilke said
right that every beauty is in vain jold
it's just slightly failing to kill us
right and you know in the in the Asiatic
there's a Z attic aesthetics of you know
of wahby that we're you know and this
brings our open cup or something at a
broken cup because what does the crack
do it reminds us being mode of the
suchness of this right but at the same
time it's exposing us to how everything
right it's tapping into the
inexhaustible 'no speak of
happens when I catch the suchness
because of the crop the cup is
beautified and the more earnest of
reality speaks through it's like Leonard
Cohen's line there's a crack in
everything and everything yeah so the
light can shine in and also in that
Japanese aesthetics they say that a
it's like a woman or a man who's just
beyond that prime that they consider
that to be beauty not yeah not something
in its prime a perfection of life but if
somebody has gone just beyond the prime
so that it contains life and death
within it it's it's it's not this false
promise of perfection yes excellent
that's exactly right I think that's a
beautiful thing you just said and so
notice how we can't talk about these
things without all of these all of these
nodal terms coming up Beauty love wisdom
faith soul right there's a particular
particularly beautiful analogy to be
made about the role of analogically the
role of silence and the V so you know
one of the things if I can sort of use
this metaphorically at least at first
one of the things that happens in a
disclosing dialog is that the silence by
which you are heard deepens and
appreciates the meaning of what is
spoken now the silence in the margins of
any given utterance is always infinitely
greater and more engulfing than the
speech that's proffered into it so
there's a way in which that the silence
is infinitely appreciative of sound but
sound also contains the presence of that
silence right as though between the
notes of music as though between the
syllables of speech and so one of the
things that happens I think when a
relationship becomes loving and faithful
and all of the ways in which we've just
defined it the silence of the
relationship becomes more and more
pregnant so you become accustomed to
speaking into the silence of the
listening ear knowing that whatever is
spoken in to that silence appreciates by
virtue of the fact that it was spoken
into that particular form of attentive
silence and then when
then when when that relationship becomes
more and more knowing its particular its
particular auditing silence becomes
something that you can internalize more
and more right which i think is in many
ways what Augustine's project was with
his confessions right he's speaking into
the silence and to allow a silence that
is infinitely knowing an infinitely
knowable and so is hearing himself heard
in the in in in the property of that
silence and so it's like the
relationships going back to your
relationship to the to the tension
between such and more for instance that
there's a way in which the tension
between such and more can be analogized
by the relationship between sound and
silence and a more encompassing of
silence that the sound becomes the more
the logos of it deepens deepens deepens
and appreciates and so to me I think
that that's a way of understanding both
the dynamic the dynamic of the
comprehending relationship as as as a as
a as a symbol on for poetic love and
it's self transcendence but also then
its capacity to be interiorized as a way
of performing the dialectic interior Lee
because I agree John I mean there's a
way in which we cannot we cannot self
introspect reliably to the degree that
we can do so in a distributed fashion
but then when the distributed dynamic
becomes interiorized
it does become a way obviously
internalizing the sage as you often say
it becomes a way of cultivating that
practice it within the it within the
confines of your inner life but I think
that has everything to do with with it's
not as though you're just importing a
dialogue and then running it on the
thing the thing that you're
internalizing is not the speech made by
the other person it's the particular
comprehending ear of silence that they
lend to your speech and thereby
pronounced it's more nests ok I want I
want a riff on that because that was
beautiful the music I felt I felt two
thoughts came to me and that was music
and clairvoyance there's a kind of
clairvoyance that happens but
to people and musicians when they're
playing together and go ahead John well
I I want to play I want to I'm one of
them VOC both senses of the term
articulation which is to you know to
speak but also to break things into
their parts right and what chris has
just made me realize what she often does
is the way in which the silence isn't
internalized into the articulation of
our intelligibility and and that the way
aporia are those moments of that well it
depends you have to have cultivated the
correct receptivity but aporia is those
moments of silence in which you
appreciate the mourners that is beyond
you right and it demands a
transformation for you and so what I'm
suggesting is one of the things we do in
dialectic is we learn to seek those of
Hori --is that articulate our
intelligibility in just the way chris
articulated they're just late articulate
I'm reminded of an ticinese when asked
because he didn't write the volumes that
Plato wrote he asked what did he learn
from Socrates and he said something and
right he said well I learned how to
converse with myself and everybody was
kind of like what what he meant was just
what Chris said you need so much time
living with Socrates mimetic Lee right
that he had internalized the circuit
that's a Socratic process and he was
capable now after only practicing it
years in dialectic of doing it himself
so dialectic is not just a social
behavior it's also it's something you do
you know you speak with God in a sense
or look that's where you learn how to do
have you learn how to speak with
absolutely are by nature and that's when
you're the most
that's when arguably that's that's it's
bets if if the process there's a
fruition that's that's it yeah
epoch TASIS I mean the neoplatonism it's
all I think very implicit in Plato but
the neoplatonist bring out those two
dimensions very clearly in fact they go
a little too far they tend to emphasize
if you'll allow me the vertical
ontological aspect
of dialectic within you the the the the
discourse with one's own soul right and
that's how Flatow by the way define
dialectic you know discourse with your
soul right they tended to emphasize this
but there was that's because they had
they lived in a school and it was so
taken for granted that the ontological
right right
we intrapersonal was embedded into an
existential interpersonal yeah yeah and
a community both both are always there
mutually informing and transforming each
other Chris right and that's something
and that's something that Socrates I
mean he alongside the socialized
dialogues in Plato Socrates I mean I
think that's what's represented by those
moments of reverie that Socrates
famously has when he pauses for hours at
a time to listen to his diamond right
that's the that's the end that's the
interiorized
excitation of the socialized dialectic
in the fall and the epic TASIS form that
you've just described yeah Socrates
makes it clear that the examination of
others the Socratic examination of
others is always for reasons we've
already articulated always always also a
self examination in Socrates I forget
which dialogue it is but he says you
know after I'm done talking with you I
always remember that there's a man
waiting for me at home that I have to
talk to and that's his own soul yeah
yeah and then it kind of feeds back to
though doesn't it because for for like
the sudden that the the the dialectic
that Socrates carries on with his
diamond also is what is also what
indicates the Kairos of the socialized
alloys and the point of his entry into
those dialogues right he's guided he's
guided all the while by his inward
dialectic and and that's what that's I
think that's precisely what tutors him
to guide the socialized dialect because
effectively as he does right so there's
like there they're two concentric
circles running on one another
yeah I think throughout the entire
corpus I think that internal dialectic
you know transforms the mind into into a
so it's able to achieve a state in
process that is in deep conformity with
the states in process of distributed
cognition and ultimately of the
environment
I think dialectic is ultimate because it
is an act of love it's ultimately about
transforming to yourself so you have
more and more have the perspicacious
capacity to enter into conformity with
the logos and then through the logos
into conformity with on toes with being
that's how you get ontological you you
know you you you you get into affinity
with the logos conformity with it and
then through the logos you get into
affinity with on toes with being mm-hmm
I was think just thinking as you are
speaking that it's this is very high
conceptual stuff but also it's very
simple at the same time you know totally
it's a conversation you're having with
your wife or your children or or or when
you know you you go for a walk and you
look at it it's not it's not it's not
all this complexity of contents concepts
it's just the seeing attune to reality
right being it yes that is giel ability
that's the thing that Paul is keep
looking for and there's a scalability of
this course that is scale that well
that's exactly you know as soon as we
are persons we are in discourse because
we become persons through discourse
right and so yes this is very in some
sense it can reach up or reach down
whichever metaphor you want into the
very foundations of your fundamental
framing of reality and how your being
you know framed to reality and by
reality right all of that it can reach
to that as you said this very high
conceptual stuff but it is practicable
in the most and I don't want this to
sound like an insult in the most mundane
discourse that you can engage in mmm-hmm
this is what I mean about it being
scalable because every disc like nobody
has to be an expert in Neoplatonic
philosophy to have found themselves in a
conversation that takes on a life of its
own and takes all of the participants to
place
they couldn't get you on their own
everybody knows that everybody has a
capacity to practice them all we are
trying to do is articulate this more and
more and more theoretically but also
with with practicable consequences so we
can afford it's in I know it's
enhancement it's exaptation because of
our current situation and because of the
emerging potential of this of these
media and these new communities of
practice we have to somehow exact
ancient dialectic into the current you
know into these current new communities
of practice and this new medium of
communication you know so it's an end
soling process yes I say like to Seoul
again and you know in that that's a big
part of making no that's the wrong verb
exactly the wrong word that's a big part
of affording somebody becoming a person
right that installing process and what's
it what's really interesting is I saw I
saw Justin I sorry i souls not something
we have of that we're born with a soul
is something we become and solve through
through time through my like I like in
fact I make you verb the way you have in
a verb that picks up on like connections
to embodiment and enactment yeah yeah I
think it is and so I mean this is again
this is a way of trying to reinvent you
some of the practices of theory on the
ancient world were where they were sort
of practicing sort of animating things
and we look at thatmy go that's weird
magic and you know and I don't doubt
that there was there was degraded forms
of it in which it's weird magic but
there are also really powerful forms of
it because you know professed for
example says that internal Theor G is
way more important than external fear
Jeff and what it was is about this
process right
like you said open souling things uh
reanimating them setting them back into
their proper motion the the you know
psyche is wind blowing it's a it's a
self moving thing when we when we can
deeply remember sati how everything is
suka everything is self moving how the
logos is not just a set but a continual
gathering and unfolding like that that
reanimation so that we're constantly
remembering the morning into the
suchness that was also a big part of of
this whole set of ritual practices that
we dimly understand called fear Jia in
the ancient world so you're supposed to
always be practicing furia you know
contemplation meditation reflection and
fear Jia and and then that was also
ultimately supposed to leave the theosis
you're gonna become more and more
godlike by doing it yeah I thought of
the reanimating the death star again an
image came came back to me again well
the zombies as obvious is is the horror
of of what reanimation looks like when
it cannot be properly housed within a
world view it's it's horrific
reanimation right yeah
reanimation is the wrong word I guess
yeah in souling I like my word and so
but so that's a way of thinking about it
is the zombie as a retro Resurrection
without any installment sure I mean part
of it I mean the difficulty with
Darkness is you know it stands for many
things as a term because there's a way
in which the darkness is to the light as
the silence is to the sound to that
there's that sense of Darkness dichiara
darkness yeah well yeah yeah
and so yeah I mean
but there's a sense in which a lot of
what we might think of darkness is just
the other nests of things and their
capacity to disturb us and disrupt us
now we can either resist that and
hardened against it or we can like Rilke
was uncle is saying we can get an
adoptive relationship to it so that it
starts to disclose itself as beautiful
beautiful doesn't mean comfortable
doesn't mean smooth I like that point in
the Lord of the Rings where Galadriel is
considering taking the One Ring and she
said I will be like I will be beautiful
like the sea or it was it oh yeah and
all men will fear me and you know whoa
and that's the sense of beauty that real
cos fucking about so I'm trying to get
Andrew that the beauty that I'm talking
about is not the smoothness he has a
likely that kind all within it and in
which it's not this false luminosity or
love and light which actually is is a
very dark thing because it's a denial of
you know the other helpful of life this
was part of the the transformation of
the Lucifer metaphor of Light Bearer and
that the idea became and this was so
much with bullshitting is that Lucifer
bears the light that misdirects your
salience and and right and and and and
it makes you not seek the good mm-hmm
yeah Christie will go gonna say
something kress say something please
I was just but it's always a pleasure to
hear you talk no no no I I was just
gonna say that that you be I mean be
beautiful the idea of of beauty as
something that necessarily that
necessarily destroys and recreates
yourself that if that that the roughness
of beauty and also the roughly roughness
of love is such that you cannot
encounter it without being so changed
and if you can encounter it without
being so changed then it has been it is
less than it is less than it is less
than the fullness of its nature it is it
is less than the fullness of love if you
can encounter it without also being
transformed by it so there has to be a
crack in everything you know there has
to be like one of those things about
Leonard Cohen is his voice became more
beautiful when he lost his voice you
know and same with a lot of singers who
who have these broken voices somehow
they're more powerful when they've been
broken or some aren't though because
they left them at church yeah that Prime
but they still have even the ones that
are that are very pure whatever still
have a unusual strange quality to them
oh yeah they're not they're not
surprising in some way right yeah I was
gonna say the neoplatonist picking up on
what Kris just said really understand
the process and this is like so of
giving birth and the socratic is the
Midwife and they talked a lot about that
that the the strain and pain of labor
that goes into giving birth and that if
you try to give birth and think about a
Howell concept is ultimately based on
conceive right if you if you try to give
birth without the pain of labor you will
have a stillborn
entity mm-hmm which all right that's
profound yeah but it's also hopeful
because yeah yeah it's also a hopeful
thing because you can't avoid the pain
of birth right it's nothing something
that nobody even can avoid destructive
pain indicates a pain is the real
indication of the real potential of real
death
that's what pain is it's it's it is your
mortality taking you by the throat and
let's remember that before medicine
right before modern medicine in a
quarter of births there was a death of
the mother of the child or the mother
and the child there earth was always a
very dangerous thing in the ancient
world
that's why midwives are so important
because right they help to mitigate our
mortality so that we can give birth hmm
that's what dialectic is which is what
inflex the process with its share of
danger which i think is something that's
not adequately appreciated about this
process about the dialect to provoke
philosophy in general because we're too
comfortable is that it's dangerous and
and you know and the Association of
wisdom with danger I think is not
intuitive for a lot of people I don't
know that it would have been intuitive
to me either before undertaking it let
every instance of it risks a form of
dispossession that is utterly utterly
destructive and that is I think
necessarily so just as just as love is
just as love does and so I think that
it's it's darkness has to be properly
manifest in order for its sabhi ntral
promise to be fulfilled that's why it's
the dark night of the soul yeah and I
thought of this notion of sacrifice as
well there was one thing I wanted to
talk to you guys about is the notion of
sacrifice and the scapegoat and because
I've been thinking a lot about that
having read their ending Gerard and I
saw Satan fall as lightning yeah and
maybe that's that's that's a whole other
big topic that's bad you can't get into
right now but anyway what you said Chris
struck me as quite profound but notice
what we've done cuz we've enacted it we
start with this notion of soul and
notice how we we've done all the
procession if rejected it out right into
all of these variations almost like the
projection of sound and music right but
we're also periodically which we keep
circling back and gathering back and
we're trying to find what is the thread
running what is it the symptomatic
thread that runs through all these
projections
and thereby I can retrace back to their
origin originating source right because
we haven't disclosed it fully of course
we haven't but you know we've enacted
the very process I'm talking about we
cycle at we project out we gather back
in and we're constantly doing this and
we've just done it all over Seoul now
have we come up if you know what I don't
think we have a donation but are we now
in a are we now in a more right
relationship with the reality that is
referred to by Seoul I think so I think
so - yeah so I think I think that just
the notion becomes more evocative it
doesn't take any final form or structure
or are certainly not any kind of
certainty attached to it ya know it's a
it's like we come within range of
knowing by the light of that which we
cannot define yeah III think I think it
these things are always epic static for
us we're always right we're always we we
get at rejected sense of them in our
constant trajectory towards them that's
that's wonderful but notice what you
have to give up you have to give up the
having mode the having mode is about
completable goals right now III can
drink until I am done yeah but becoming
wise like right there's no doneness
there's no there's no it's final
uncomplete in fact this that's a sure
sign that somebody isn't why right and
having something to say has to be given
up as well in a sense yes mmm I notice
sort of a silence overtaking me and then
the compulsion to speak the to move
right I mean right now I'm tending to
speak a lot because I'm I'm I'm very
much caught up in trying to voice what
is what I'm trying to follow I'm there's
a vocation for me I'm being called right
and I'm trying to give voice to this
calling the sense of being called and I
feel a particular urgency
how its impregnating me and impressing
upon me but also the urgency of the need
of the situation we're in both the
meaning crisis in the particular the way
it's being accelerated by the COBIT
crisis but I appreciate what you're
saying Andrew I think I didn't mean that
as a criticism or to suggest that you're
not speaking too much too much I'm just
saying it's almost like there's a
compulsion to speak and you have you
have to stop yourself and say what what
why am i speaking what is there you know
am i adding anything to this
conversation or I'd like is speaking
yeah and I feel that you're being
animated by something beyond that so I
never question that in in what you were
saying yeah I I just want to reassure I
was trying to offer reassurance that I
am trying to cultivate a sense where I
am receptive to being struck by people
my insight connection criticism and
commentary that they give such that I
will take it to heart if I have good
plausible reason to believe it was given
in good faith that's a standard I'm
that's a virtue I'm trying to cultivate
and multiple times in this conversation
you've seen me I'm struck by what either
one of you have said something it was
like oh wow yeah well I'd also also
Chris has been much quieter in this
conversation and part of me is like
wanting you to speak more because
because you have such a way with words
on the other on the other hand I think
there's a dignity at other times in just
you know being present in the
conversation and that adds something to
the conversation as much as words would
add to the conversation I think so yeah
because I I mean well I was just gonna
say Chris listens better than anybody
that I know he really does thank know
come on man I mean that's not just that
as a compliment under friendship you
listen in this deeply respond responsive
and receptive way right and and and you
you take it to heart like I've been
saying and you come point so when you
come back after the saunas I mean that's
why it was that's why you
spoke of this art because you come back
out of the silence right um yeah yeah in
in like and you speak in virtue of it
and you speaking right yeah or or or try
to yeah yeah well exactly no I I thank
you for thank you for saying it that way
I think um because because to me
identifying with the rhythm of the dia
logos doesn't always mean being its
voice right because because the
listening ear is that to me like the DIA
logos the DIA logos takes that the the
various dialects and collapses them into
an entity so that a listening voice and
the sorry the speaking voice in the
listening ear collapse into unity and so
the unity of the list that the listening
ear and the speaking voice is such that
partaking of the rhythm of the
conversation can simply be that can
simply be being its form of silence
being its form of listening silence and
and you're right I I and I have this I I
share your feeling and you of wanting to
make sure that at any time
this speech is offered that it is
offered in that it's that it's tuned to
the rhythm of the dialogue so that it
contributes to the evolution of the
melody and it doesn't interrupt it or if
it does interrupt it and it interrupts
it in order to pivot it meaningfully and
not gratuitously so I like that that's
so important to me the economy of
dialogo this is really really important
to me and and and because I think it's
something that has to be finessed and
it's something you can you can get
better at and you can get more more
fluent in so I think yeah but reticence
is not reticence is not reticence is not
fear or trepidation most of the time
it's just it's it's just wait it's
waiting for the chaotic opportunity
where the voice becomes an essential
part of the dialogic evolution and and
and they're in big dignifies itself you
know
so you
I got this powerful image out of this
and I don't know if you were attending
it you know this notion of the way the
Greek chorus bears witness because in
dialectic all the people that are not
speaking are basically the Greek chorus
varying witness in a reflective fashion
and always poised to you know disturb
what the speaker has done or or do like
they're meant to call the speaker out in
both meanings of the word they're men
they're right here now and they're here
and they're with us in a sense yes
exactly exactly right and I've been
playing on this notion of calling out
when you call somebody out and that
means you're trying to draw them but
you're also calling them into giving an
account right of themselves and being
responsible like I'm calling you out
right and and so I mean that that's how
I understand the function of the Greek
chorus and what I was hearing when Chris
was I just got this image when he was
talking about oh you know all the people
participating for example in a dialectic
that the the what's happening is you
know momentarily this person is the
speaker right in the Greek and then you
all the other people are the the Greek
chorus bearing witness and and people
often it's telling that we don't
understand the dramatic function of the
Greek chorus in you anymore you know so
Chris was I correct and picking up on
that illusion III know I think so I
think so
because I think the chorus does I mean
there's a reason that the traditional
function of the Greek chorus is in part
a a a wordless X well they're not always
wordless sometimes they speak but when
they don't speak they are a wordless
expression of the dramatic irony that
knows the circumstances of the plot
beyond its own knowing so right you
listen for like the Greek chorus here is
everything that is not said as opposed
to everything that is said and so they
represent the form of proleptic knowing
that sees the meta meaning of the
narrative beyond the beyond the meaning
that the characters are living right
so the representation of that presence
in a dialogue I think is very important
because it hears and sees everything
that is that is yet unsaid that is yet
unspoken that has not yet been shown
forth and so the presence the presence
of that person shows forth the dia logos
to patterns that it has not yet espoused
just as the Greek chorus with their eye
to dramatic irony can see the meta
meaningfulness of the narrative that is
not available to the characters that are
being born out through it that's amazing
and it gives me a slight insight into
why why we're doing this as well because
we're not just doing this for ourselves
or for some egocentric reason even
though it might appear that like putting
our putting videos on YouTube because
there is these there is this chorus
around us there is this multiplicity of
voices that we are responsible to or
that or that our I don't know if I've
articulated that no I think that's
exactly right that's the weird symbol on
of this medium and true like I mean
think about well think about Socrates he
doesn't want to write anything down
because he thought the permanence of
text would write choke off the life of
lo of logos right ma plate of course
then I Rana CLE especially in a
dramatically ironic sense when I had to
write all these dramas but what we are
doing is we are doing the the weird you
know we are in souling speech here in
via logos and it has that you know if
effervescent but ephemeral quality of
conversation but it's also being made
permanent by recording we are donating
together it's also a performance of some
kind yeah absolutely yeah like it's not
just we're talking to each other Oh
kind of seems that way if I'm gonna be
taken up and have a life of itself
beyond us
normally when conversation ended the
only life it had was in the memory of
the participants now like text it will
have a life of its own independent of
our authorship and that means we are
bridging between the two things that
Plato
is oppositional we are getting the
permanency of text what we're getting
the living breath of dialogue and we're
getting feeder because we need theater I
mean this is what's missing in our
culture as real theater and I think that
is what almost what's compelling us to
talk like this and I appropriate that
that Christopher Christoph would use
these theatrical metaphors because you
know all of the life is a stage yeah it
also I think fits the dialogic process
with its share of danger we were talking
before about the fact that you know in
order to be changed by something at hat
you have to you have to risk
dispossession and you have to risk there
has to be something deleterious about it
and I think that that's the public
nature of it actually fits it with that
quality because there is or I don't know
if you guys feel I still feel that every
time I do one of these things I feel a
sense a very pregnant sense of risk I
feel a very pregnant sense of danger and
to me to me that's essential that's
essential I thinks if Sevilla said
something very very eloquent about this
too in terms of co-led that the public
nature is what actually allows for the
is what is what the the public nature of
these dialogues is precisely what opens
them to the possibility of dynamic
quality because you have to you you're
we're walking and the knife-edge and and
so the and and I think there's some kind
of there's some kind of artful balance
or equilibration that some dialogues
strike better than others depending on
the amount of awareness that the
dialogue accommodates of the witnessing
presence of the chorus that sees it from
without and and and every dialogue is a
little different how each dialogue
accommodates that presence is a little
bit different some seem to kind of carry
on almost heedless of it some are so
hyper aware that that baby
come so fraught with their their foreign
owing sense of risk that they become
almost inhibited by it
but there's some something down the
middle of those two and when that
catches properly I think that the the
fear of exposure risk by the perspective
that sees this from without is part of
what helps to insole it with its
possibility because perhaps if you make
yourself vulnerable as well and if with
three our sincerity you also become the
potential object for ridicule ridicule
or the potential scapegoat totally
totally but that's the virtue again
virtue virtue is what steers you between
the you know the vices of deficiency and
the vices of uh you know excess right
and and and I'm thinking here that part
of what the chorus does I mean the
chorus so the the hero is on center
stage the way the hero archetype is on
center stage right now in a lot of these
discourse and I keep trying to remind
people that the her like if always needs
to be counterbalanced with the hubris
myths and I think that chorus often
speaks the voice of the warning of
hubris to counter that that's definitely
what's happening in the tragedies to
counterbalance right the heroism of the
hero and and in you're supposed to you
right the the hero especially the
tragedy ultimately is defeated but right
and this is sort of more of a Nietzsche
and interpretation than an Aristotelian
but the point is that the the the person
who's partaking in right the drama
watching the drama right actually gets
steered between right hubris and an
overblown heroism and right so they
don't they're not a coward because they
admire the beauty of the hero but they
remember the mortality because the
chorus speaks of hubris and we witness
it's what we witnesses affects so I
think there's something important about
the way we have this invisible chorus
around us right now because it really
helps us cultivate a virtue in which
a kind of courage where we're not hyper
vigilant and they're therefore
terrorized into timidity or we are just
over blowin and just speaking in some
reckless and heedless fashion mm-hmm so
so the word that came to me is is the
chorus keeps you humble humility but
also also not not will it encourages
that there's some part if you're part of
a chorus you're part of a grand story at
the same time so there's this humility
and there's this this this you know this
I don't know
dramatic grandiose but you're right yes
yes excitement life or actually it's a
higher order of relevance it represents
a higher order of relevance that then is
that then is is is is gifted to the
dialogue much very much I was going to
say that in addition to the humiliation
of the hero the chorus also honors the
hero right it's right the chorus will
often you know speak the the the some of
the virtues of the hero so the the right
I just want to say this because I don't
want it I don't want to make a portray
the chorus as just something that's
humiliating the hero the chorus also
honors the hero the the chorus reminds
us the course will often remind us of
elements of the hero's path that had
rendered him heroic in important ways um
so I just wanted to nuance that a bit
Andrew the chorus is doing that you know
that presentation of hubris but it's
also bound up with a recognition
honoring of the hero if so I'm trying to
make it what I'm trying to say here here
this is what I want to say the
relationship between the hero and the
chorus is not adversarial its opponent
processing Damona processing it's a
process that's it's supposed to be a
self-correcting process I wonder if it's
something like the relationship between
the individual instrumentalist and the
doctor of the orchestra something like
that yeah I mean a really good book on
all of this how important this is is
this book bearing witness to epiphany
persons things and the nature of erotic
life and he doesn't mean sexual
eroticism this is John rusyns book
he's also what's in Canada at least he
did when I wrote this book and this
whole notion of bearing witness to
epiphany right which is bringing
together so much of what we've said and
how it's so central a process bearing
witness in this right way is one of the
deep ways in which we in culture a
people and within which we we turn them
into persons
so maybe the chorus is a person
generating function I think Chris is
right it's the it's an overarching a
higher-order relevance realization that
is yeah contributing to the cultivation
of personhood yeah very much and it
reminds us what it reminds us what what
is essential what matters what what is
alive and what is what is you know what
is who abuse and what is what is false
what is good faith and what is bad
precisely precisely because it because
it creates because it creates the bridge
of continuity between the frame and oh
it's a trans framing device right it is
it is the continuity between what is
enclosed within the frame in in this
case the narrative within this metaphor
and what is beyond the frame wall
narrative so and and you're precisely
right that the the the the the the most
the most apt description of that
continuity is precisely the relation of
faith yeah that's good and then you get
oh and I think what that does to invoke
both both of your you're sort of
familiar with Catholicism that's what
tradition was supposed to be tradition
was your faithfulness to the chorus that
precedes
it is beyond you and pronounces upon you
continuously mm-hmm yeah there's a host
or something of precisely well yeah in
the liturgy you always invoke the host
all the people not only all the people
that are present visibly you invoke all
the invisible people that are present
all the salient saw all the saints or
maybe all the angels and saints oh yeah
heavenly absolutely
so you and also you so you come back to
being in a cosmos again during a
wandering fragmented you know yeah
person and then you you you you you find
yourself situated in a mandala or a
cosmos or in a world again to use
heidegger's yeah I think so yes I mean I
I've always been struck us but Spinoza
has this notion of you know we can find
what he calls the face of the universe
which is this sort of Gestalt thinking
that allows us to enter into right
relationship with it right and and so
yeah I think it's doing exactly that
we're back to the interfacing notion
again yeah tradition is a powerful way
in which we interface with with the
universe and may and make it as you said
make it cosmic for us as opposed to just
a an empty set of stuff thrown together
not an empty stare I'm going to say a
purely logic I'm a did me an empty set I
mean a purely logical eternally purely
formal set as opposed to a logos the
difference between a Death Star sorry
eNOS you know a set is you can put any
any things into it they're just bound
together by the formal grouping but the
logo says they things are grouped
together so that they come to belong
together
and then and thereby and thereby they're
belonging to each other is how they can
include you and you can participate
their belonging to each other is
precisely how you can belong to them
I should get going guys back to back to
the the the the world as it is the world
as it is exactly do you have anything
else to say
Christopher P for Windus nope I'll let
that be the final word okay
well thank you so much that was amazing
um thank you Andrew thank you for
convening us and yeah it'sit's great so
we talked about the soul this time that
was a that was the word I threw in the
beginning and maybe if we do it again
sometime
I wonder what net what's next
I like this and you actually I like this
idea
a pregnant topic and then throwing it in
and we do that thing I talked about yeah
pick it up and then we recollected and
open up and recollect it as opposed to
just right forming the circle but
actually centering the circle upon a
chosen topic on it I think the excellent
thing we did what I really like actually
is this this three of three people um I
find it's it's much more interesting for
me in these kind of conversations if
there's three people here it's seems to
be such a much more dynamic energy than
just one person against another person
or so so that's one thing I really love
is this trio I mean I'm doing that with
other people as well well you have the
intimate chorus then yeah because yeah
the chorus is present when when we're
three for some reason we're more like
we're on a stage there's more than just
two people that yeah again and we were
actually on a real stage when there's
three the chorus is here because there
cuz cuz the symbol of the third factor
can emerge more apparently when there's
a third factor that it's a way of you
know creating a locus for the third
factor third factor to emerge very much
yeah right and if there's a fourth
person somehow one person has kind of
left out a little bit of the
conversation not always but and if it's
five it's just too many
so three seems beautiful what
anyway I'll let you go thank thank you
so much guys that was just mind-blowing
us as always and even more so this time
thank you I do and again thank you for
this always wonderful to be in your
presence thanks guys likewise