welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
so chickens I'm feeling a deeply calm at
the moment and there's sort of like a
post anxiety withdrawal as well as those
going through this anxious phase a
couple hours ago so there's a little bit
residue from that as well so welcome to
the stoah i am peter lindbergh the
Stewart of the store and the store is a
place for us to go here and dialogue
about what matters most at the knife's
edge of this moment and today we have
Amy Bevin see I think okay good cool oh
and Amy and I have a good friend a
mutual friend Richard Bartlett and Amy
comes in hi or guard which are just
gushes about her so I wanted to invite
her own and have a discussion and but
whatever whatever someone talked about
really and and there's also a desire for
the stoah because I'm sort of like even
though this is probably bullshit but
like I come from an a political stance
we're just interested in stoicism sort
of like stuff like this and there's a
desire for me to just gauge in politics
more in sort of a way that is
interesting relevant to the stoah so I
want to reach out to more voices
especially on the Left we've been trying
to do that and this is one attempt to
that and so I will also say that I have
usually I'd like to do a lot of work and
due diligence and reading about my
guests and I've done a little bit of
that today but not as much as I would
like so I'm here a lot of people in room
learning about a meaner thought for the
first time so I just wanted to flag that
as well so that being said how the thing
is going to work
the superuser is your other stolen no
the speaker will share the thoughts and
then I'll warm up some questions if you
have any questions write your questions
in the chat box and I'll mute you and
we'll go from there
this will be on YouTube so if you don't
want to be recorded just ask me to read
the question on your behalf and we'll be
ending about five minutes before the
hour today because we have an event with
Nancy Strickler from Kickstarter or the
Kickstarter Fame right after this that
being said I will unmute Emmie and say
hello hello I mean I so it made me be
like good if you could introduce
yourself you know just think like an
elevator pitch a summary I was gonna
read something off your website and said
say what I know about you but I thought
maybe it'd be best just to kind of you
to give us a frame of who you are and
what your vote yeah well my name is Emmy
obviously I am currently Mozilla fellow
I study basically information warfare
and hate groups on the Internet and I
built tools to help people analyze that
but I have a million other projects
going on always at the same time that's
that mean
I mean thrust of my work right now and
the sort of the way you've run is the
verb Elias data and used to live with
that that is yeah that's like a
consultancy that forming with one other
person
I guess our first sort of we had done a
bunch of little projects but our first
like larger project was we did a couple
impact reports for an organization
called in spiral which Rich's like like
sort of a founding voice in just sort of
like a future of work impact meta
generator if that's buzzword enough for
you yeah
so but we just kept rebellious data we
just like try to use data science and
impact evaluation and like other stuff
like that to sort help organizations
whose values we aligned with sort of
leverage their leverage their work or
dig deeper into the phenomena that
they're dealing with when we're talking
like we're trying to settle on a topic
and I was probably being annoying I
might just talk about whatever
I'm talking about what is your audience
let me know what you want to talk about
and then there's a few different threads
sort of like kind of like the discussing
that the reactionary all right movement
discussing sort of like the anarchist
feels thing that you're doing stuff a
project that you're working on with
Richard and we set along the future of
information so I wonder if if you can
share your thoughts on that just
generally in the movie we can kind of
warming up with some questions and then
pivot to the group sure I mean
information is this funny term because
it's like inherently big so I can grow
to encompass lots of things but I do
specifically study flows of information
and it did actually link all the topics
like um the reason I was first thinking
about it is because I know that this
community or at least you particularly
are interested in sort of meta mediation
of political groupings and as I told you
my background was actually in conflict
mediation although more focusing on like
violent conflicts then like ideological
political in-group out-group kind of
nationalism micro nationalisms so and
then ultimately that led me to studying
information more fair as I said and how
like States and corporations and
ideologues and different groups use the
internet to mobilize real-world violence
or just like real world disarray to some
geopolitical ends I mean there's many
different no I'm not going on at once
and basically in that in that in that
world I started realizing that like
highly centralized approaches were we're
not that adaptive responsive and so I
see someone in a decentralized t-shirt
in trying that just they have larger
feedback loops and
and like there's a bunch of diseconomies
of scale that go along with
bureaucracies that were just like not
good at handling it
the most notable be like an obvious
example would be like white supremacists
organizing because there there's a calm
there's a combination of forces there's
like grassroots interest in fascists and
like knew your action area white
supremacist politics there's also like
states intervening to like geopolitical
ends there's like corporations that have
various or like media moguls that have
various interests and so all these kind
of like top-down and bottom-up forces
are emerging and creating these complex
systems that move quite quickly and so
as like mass shootings started getting
gamified in the u.s. using like things
like livestream and other things like
that people were kind of scrambling to
keep up with what the internet was
already doing and the internet was just
doing like what I'll call open source
investigation and which isn't which is
another field that I've been like
training people in for the last couple
of years which is just like using the
power of the swarm or the collective
mind as you as you're all are calling it
here to intervene and analyze in a topic
and cover a lot more ground a lot more
quickly and so people just started being
like yeah this person who like violently
oh we like tracked down these various
pieces and figured out that it was this
person and those phenomena those like
types of dealing with it tended to be
quite agile I guess I would say and so
yeah I started being interested in
building building tools that would help
like researchers activists like lawyers
technologists various
you analyze phenomena on the social
media because I also had because I'm a
data scientist I'm pretty used to like
you know going through random github
repos and running command-line and or
like mocking up like altering people's
Python codes like make it serve some
project that I want to do but most
people didn't have that capacity even in
even in scholarly fields or even in with
the journalists that I was working with
and so that's why we eventually made
this website which I guess I can just
share here we eventually made this
website well we're making these like
this suite of tools called SMAT the
social media analysis toolkit which was
designed to let me know if that act if
that link doesn't work which was
designed to help normal like
non-technical people analyze emergent
phenomena across multiple social media
platforms and we're in the process of an
Aladdin a lot more tools and adding a
lot more tools and JavaScript and adding
a lot more different data sources and
stuff like that we have very very cool
team but yeah that's that's one of the
projects that we were working on and
yeah there's a lot of talk about
information warfare in the US because
the there's like an ongoing Cold War
through hybrid warfare tactics both from
and against the US and social media is
obviously a platform for that and people
both exaggerated and underestimate the
power of that because it's quite hard to
measure second-order impacts of social
social media information warfare BOTS
and all this stuff and like a lot of
times the method all
these are terrible like Darius Kazemi
and I have both been studying like bot
detection stuff and it's like a lot of
the methods are like a pretty suspect
but like at the same time we gotta we
gotta study all these things so that's
kind of a that's kind of a rambling on
on that mean project that that I'm doing
I guess I didn't really talk about you
know kiss filled circle or the or the
the like mutual exchange symposium that
we're running but oh I know one other
thing that you and I discussed possibly
talking about here that would make me
feel a little controversial which is
that and I'm happy to chat with people
about this which is that I believe that
there's a place for no platform in like
how we look at political intergroup
mediation and I mean by that is I
believe that while free speech norms are
incredibly important and we should build
ideological immunities to engage with
really heterodox ideas and we should
like learn to think through really like
complicated or taboo topics there are
certain types of topics that it is
poisonous to the discourse to give a
large platform to even if you're doing
independent study with or like private
conversations with and I believe like
fascism is one of those ideologies
because of the way it sort of utilizes
like ticks in the discourse sort of like
weird deep impulses and Pete
to to sort of overcome like good you
know stoic discourse it discursive norms
the least you know the most obvious one
being like the will to power or just
like I mean that the there's a scholar
there's a scholarly definition of
fascism that's like challenged
challenged and had a culture nationalism
is it's called the the minimal
definition of fascism and what that
means is like an ultra nationalism that
has a birth a myth of rebirth caked into
it and that that ideology is has kind of
this emotional potency because it says
after we commit this ultra violence
every every wrong that's been done to
you is going to be righted and you're
gonna be the new leader and we're gonna
dominate all your enemies and destroy
them and that's got this kind of like
subcultural aid thing that that makes it
kind of potent and so well what
organizers on the ground saw for a long
time was that whenever like a liberal
platform would like invite on Richard
Spencer for a debate or whatever even if
even if that person was like countering
their every point really carefully it
would just really boost it would really
boost like recruitment and violent
activity on the streets because the
central force of fascist ideology is
it's just a show of power and by being
on a large platform you're making a show
of power and so it doesn't really matter
what was said
and so that's anyways that's why the US
only negotiates was like the Taliban and
secret base argument there is like
you're always making choices about who
you invite on your show
or whatever your show literally
or anybody's show figuratively and
there's sort of like a which wolf do you
feed thing and I get that it's delicate
but I think that there are lines in the
sand that are important to make and the
last thing I'll say about that is a very
conscious tactic of white supremacist
groups is called entry ISM and entry ism
is basically just trying to and fascism
is like up scholars it's very known that
it's like syncretic it can change shape
it can adopt characteristics of whatever
ideology it's trying to infiltrate and
so you can make a sort of left-wing
presenting version of it you can make a
sort of far-right presenting version of
it and groups will very openly use those
inroads to recruit and slowly drive the
discourse into more and more like
ultraviolent repression of minorities or
whatever their end goal is and so i
think especially communities that are
trying to engage in this like
transcendent vision of political
communities needs to have a very robust
understanding of how entry ism actually
works in the real world regardless of
how like an ideological free-market
could or should I work and so that was
my that was my maybe controversial take
for the store I love it yeah there's a
lot of juicy stuff there let me see
where should I begin just maybe
understand a portion of it you were
saying sort of how it's it's good to
have your ideological immunities to
maybe have this like intellectual
sandbox where you can kind of click
devil's advocate or explore these ideas
or advocate to your own ideas I should
say and explore ideas that are dangerous
but at the same time we should know
platform certain people because of maybe
not information hazards but like mimetic
hazards that could emerge from it
that could basically hijack people so if
that's true when you're having that sort
of like engaging these ideas privately
is there certain ideas that should not
be engaged in privately as well in order
to like build that ideological immunity
so when I first started researching
fascism like maybe five or six years ago
and like more of a professional or
scholarly capacity I spent a lot of time
trawling this one particular board that
was like the most infamous and I think
that mimetic mimetic contagion is a to
me I don't think of it as like a literal
phenomena I think when people try to
study it as a literal phenomena it gets
a little murky I think it's quite
powerful metaphor so I used it anyways
and when I when I was like engaging with
this board it was like it can be quite
hazardous to your mental health for one
there's just like that basic notion like
reading just like really really alarming
a lot of really alarming garbage for a
long time can just like really degrade
your mental health so there's that like
information hazard it but then there's
also so there's like another part of
this is that there's inherent limits to
what a brain can process meaningfully
and so when you get information overload
it's quite common to just like accept
some parts of it because you don't have
the time to address it all in real term
in real time and so like in in like
going through a lot of this content and
trying to engage with it even if even if
the points that are being made aren't
that good sometimes if you just don't
have the mental capacity to like think
through every single point
you'llyou'll in my experience later on
find that you hadn't really challenged
one of these ideas and it had been just
kind of simmering in your brain and then
also know it like comes out in some
weird sideways way and then I'm like oh
that's bullshit but I didn't realize
that that was bullshit at the time
because I was reading other things that
were way way more bullshit and I think
that's one of the risks of like so if we
are using the mimetic contagion metaphor
that's why we do like we vaccinate you
know we don't just expose you to like
you don't just like run into a crowd in
a pandemic normally to like you know you
like gradually expose yourself until
you're familiar with norms and like
deviations of a particular mutation so
um it's like oh what came to mind there
is like when I was doing research on the
culture were more actively like going on
that the chance and the Paul boards and
just how like really nasty it can get
and dark with you know the anti-semitic
racist memes all the type of stuff and
it it wasn't always like that
- it was almost like it they they did it
for my control at first but then just
like you become what you're trying to
troll there you become what you're
pretending to be or whatever the troll
that you're pertaining to be and then
they're actually become like white
supremacists or Nazis or whatever so
yeah and if you just plug into the
fortune just makes your body feel at
least for me it just makes my body feel
really nasty after an hour of looking at
that stuff so on sort of the I know you
did a paper on like - alright and the
global information warfare and the you
make the the stance that we should not
platform certain people and I guess the
question is where is the line that you
draw there because when I was
researching the more you say the white
supremacist constellation of the medic
tribes you can kind of tease them apart
at least in a propositional level like
there's like wait identitarian
who just want to be proud of being white
and there's like white nationalists then
there's like white supremacists and yeah
I think you can also make the argument
that if you just kind of are attracted
to one it could lead to the neither
which could lead to another like a
slippery slope type thing and then
there's people like I don't know what he
is now but stefan molyneux who's was
gesturing strongly a lot of this stuff
but I think he never really said he was
it and then there's like Lauren southern
who was like troll ish Lee may be more
of a troll but sort of like roles or
that kind of constellation as well so I
guess the question is where do you draw
the line I'm like okay these people
should not be platformed well it's
convenient for me that you chose Lauren
southern and stefan molyneux because
stefan like started out as like well he
just ideology hopped for a while but i
remember like six years ago when he was
like I'm a mutualist I'm a libertarian
above this I'm Ivette and then and then
eventually he was just became a full
like race realist
he just started he just started blogging
really openly about like IQ different
cartage by a study found any funded by
the Pioneer fund which was created by
will cliff Draper who was literally a
eugenicist it was literally creating
science in order to in order to promote
a Nazi agenda like
some people are still citing this shit
and then Lauren southern is a good
example of like I guess we called Lauren
southern light in our in our study
because yeah of course there's all these
in-group rivalries within like the
broader like fascist like ecosystem
Lauren southern went this and this is
not like some cold war propaganda but
there is this like really weird group of
fascist and Russia who all just called
do Guiness and Lauren southern went to
go meet Alexander Dukan who's like he
co-founded the National Bolshevik Party
and I think that's a really good example
of how weird I mean this is pre is as
pre internet politics but now like we
call them knots bowls which is basically
like Nazi Bolsheviks they're like stress
they're like Otto Strasser they're like
the left-wing of the Nazi Party and so
they're like we're communists but we're
also like you Genesis which it doesn't
have to be ideologically coherent for
some people to think that it has like a
sexy aesthetic or something and hop on
so yeah she went to go meet with this
guy because he's a powerful force in
internationalist fascist communities he
goes and meets with Italian fascist
parties and and all this stuff but he's
a really good example of this like he's
really good at mutating his ideology
he'll put out a video he's like I'm not
a fascist I just believe in that you
know the Russian people are you know
genetically better than other people but
that's just a coincidence and I just
wanted ultraviolet bureaucracy and
pillagin and culture nationalism that's
also just a coincidence and so even if
she's LARPing the fact that she
to like talk with this to with I think
she went with Britney penny boom if I
have a call correctly it's like even if
it's a LARP you're still creating
international fascist networks and
propagate literal propaganda so it's
kind of like when does you know the
thing that you're describing when does
the LARP become the real so yeah I guess
I didn't answer your question when
where's the cutoff line dunno context
definitely we have to engage with the
realities of pipelines pipelines exist
but we don't want to be like we don't
want to overreact in that caricature of
social justice way of like whoa people
are so delicate they can't handle ideas
and sort of feed into fascist propaganda
though like they just hate us cuz we're
right you know like this thing so let me
let me let me go here then first like
you'reyou're cutting up a little bit so
unfortunately it looks like we missed
your spot on stefan molyneux impression
so maybe if that ever comes again we
will hopefully get that recorded but but
so on Dugan so here's a confession time
so Michael Miller men who is the leading
scholar of Alexander Duke and he was on
the stoah he's a friend of mine he
wasn't in Toronto he's a PhD in
political science department and he
almost didn't get his PhD because he
insisted on writing about Dugan but he
ended up getting it and there's a
controversy there and through him I got
interested in Dugan and I was reading he
didn't fully read it read read it but I
read the fourth political theory and I
was fascinated by it that's sort of the
arguments any mages from a very abstract
philosophical area and I wasn't from I
don't know the stuff that you just said
about his connections with the ultras
movement so there's a thought that
popped in my head well wouldn't it would
be interesting to talk to Duke and bring
him to the stoah and then that is
motivated more out of at least visit my
reading I could be wrong with my own
read but motivated I was a curiosity to
learn more about his ideas in that route
so that being said what would your
advice be to me
so how much have you interacted with
other than your like academic friend how
much have you interacted with like
actual do keenest s' like on the
internet or otherwise yeah practically
zero so there's a huge crossover with
skinhead movements with like like racist
street gangs and so if you if if you're
like me and you and you've liked spoken
a little bit about like these gymnasts
networks what happens is you get like
really really weird people in your
mentions and all of a sudden you have
these people in your mentions talking
about like a graciousness of the
ubermensch and you're like how did this
happen and the way that it happened like
I was just talking about this other
abstract philosophical thing and the way
that it happens is like dog whistles
basically and so like we like there's a
bunch of these concrete examples that if
you want I can like explain more later
of like people who roll in those circles
like pepe escobar maybe would be an
example of someone who's like a little
bit of currency in the left but also has
currency on the far right spreads
conspiracy theories but also then slowly
creeps in like hardcore anti-semitic
contacts content and rolls really heavy
with the with the do penis crowd so I
think that what would happen is you
would you would see yourself in this
position in this like enlightens
ideological position of like engaging in
with interesting topics and you would be
encountering a person who has devoted
his entire life to very strategic forms
of entry ISM and no matter how smart you
are you wouldn't
you prepared for the secondary impacts
of that and what would secondary ELISA
was theoretically play us out let's say
if I I brought Dugan in and then we had
like a friendly exchange like you and I
are having right now about four
political theory or whatever
what would kind of a second-order
effects about B I mean you know Dugan
was in a forward assist base in the
assault on Georgia I mean he's kind of
lost influence in Russia a little bit
like people kind of see him as a crank
to some extent in his whole like his
borsky Club crew but it's like I wish I
could come up with an America with a
u.s. or Canadian parallel but there
isn't exactly one it's like if Ron Paul
actually was super super powerful even
though they are very different
ideologies like if Ron Paul actually had
if he could actually compan him like
command a military unit to to annex a
country like that would be pretty
chaotic
if Broncos in extinct countries that
would be pretty I I just think you would
do his work for him he'd be glad to come
on your show though and is I just think
there are much more interesting I also
think that even like the framing is
wrong like there there are just more
interesting conversations to be had like
I think that fascism has a very
interesting aesthetic but it's like
politically really incoherent and so for
people who are drawn to political
ideologies for more aesthetic reasons it
tends to have a seductive appeal that
being said I could also almost make the
argument that like you know fascism and
anarchism are the two most coherent
political ideologies dooms
battle forever and so just that broad
kind of concern there on your behalf of
inviting us to the this platform and but
by the lake I'm not leaving the stoah as
is placed for broadcasting like I don't
really give a shit about the broadcast
medium
I got throw this on YouTube but all the
comments are disabled I'm happy to put
it kind of a moment's notice but it's
more about building kind of community
here I'm more interested in with the
people and we also have with these kind
of sense-making Q&A is we have like a
wisdom gym as well we're doing these
sort of spiritual practices ecology of
practices to kind of give us more
sovereignty and help with communitas and
so the concern I'm hearing is that you
bring a guy in like Dugan who might say
a lot of interesting things at
attractive things on one level if you
can look at it from like a sort of a
meta abstract point of view but if
you're blinded to all the kind of
political machinations that he's doing
the entry ISM then you're gonna get a
wave of noise come in that could just
disrupt your community and overtake it
from within and that's what I'm getting
the concern so counter to that is
Waterman's if you're playing your own
game though and you you sort of court
that noise in such a way but you
transmute it into something more healthy
more beautiful more wise yeah I would
say it just like doesn't work like that
in real life so one example is like
green movements and so I have a paper
coming out soon on like the history of
eco fascist movements and all the way
back to like völkisch like Nazi green
movements like environmentalist
movements to like intentional fascist
co-optation of like environmentalist
movements both in the US and outside of
the US and so what happened in that case
is like I'll use a I'll use a very
concrete example there's this
organization called earth first which
was engaging in like mostly nonviolent
direct action I
against extreme polluters in the US and
they had this big tent policy mostly
just being imposed to industrial society
but like not having strong political
they they identified as a political in a
sense so this gets into the the danger
of a politicize 'im in a political world
and what happened is there emerged this
can first there emerge this conservative
wing of earth first but then there
emerge like an explicitly fascist wing
of earth first and the damage that it
did to green movements was so
substantial that it took like many many
years to like fully understand what had
happened and then to like reverse it
even though they in their own mind we're
we're doing some some degree of
conscious like interchange they like
they knew at the time that they were
dealing with these types of people but
they thought like well we have this
other goal and we can handle that or
whatever and like I guess I guess it's
hard to explain what the experience is
like unless you've experienced it but
like once the community realized what
was happening which is that they were
becoming a reactionary movement it was
really hard to like kick all those
people out and then rebuild their
charter eventually they became like
eventually realized that like anti
racism was had to be a part of green
movements and developed a like a more
coherent ideological framework about it
but it just
such a waste of time and energy
basically like when they could have been
doing their actual stated charter yeah
in the Pacific Northwest there's been a
lot of problems like that mm-hmm okay so
thank you for answering house let's
pivot to the QA again if you have any
questions for Emmy just write in the
chat box I'll call on you you I meet
yourself and you could see a question if
you want me to read in your past let me
know so we have Jack you have a question
yeah hello hi it it seems that the the
Internet can be a place where people can
find genuine places of connection and
safety and where they wouldn't find it
in the physical world at the same time
it can also there's groups that can find
connection that are that are complete
hate groups right so I was wondering if
these these hate groups pollute these
groups that are trying to come together
for genuine connection in the contact
and you can sort of become a positive
feedback loop or one is reacting against
the other or this hate group trolls a
genuine group and they turn them into
something that is toxic like they are
yeah so I work a lot in the or I'm like
very connected and the peer-to-peer
space like p2p technologies such a
scuttlebutt shout out and there's like
serious concern in the scuttlebutt
community because when you build these
radically free technologies it's
inevitable that the worst type of people
use them for the worst type of things
and like a trivial example of that would
be like you know maybe this is airing
our dirty laundry a little bit but like
if new users
came into this ecosystem and all they
saw was like white nationalism and child
abuse content then that would destroy
the entire like incredibly powerful and
beautiful project that they're creating
which has like this super super radical
potential for for like well-intentioned
communities I think the worst part is
that well-intentioned communities are
the most vulnerable to like game
theoretical like cheating dynamics like
anyone who would abuse a good faith
discourse anyone who like really
believes in discourse and in like
kindness and in like these like very
precious forms of connection that you're
describing that are kind of imbued in
the spirit of the Internet are the most
are the most vulnerable and I think
that's why I like left a lot of leftist
movements like got caught so off guard
for this thing because they're so like
ideological and they're so like we
should be nice to each other that when
someone came in who was like a fascist
or whatever they were just like we
should just love them harder and like
you know doesn't it doesn't work against
like like a conscious or unconscious bad
actor there's like a weird tragedy of
Commons that can happen in the discourse
so I don't know if that answers your
question but yeah I think you're right
Manek you have a question yeah hi yeah
now only when you said when you
mentioned that racism is incoherent I
was just thinking of you know all the
links back to why we have these
perceptions of the other why we
subjugate people everything from your
one-on-one in relationship with anyone
to society and I'm really feeding a lot
of that right now as I watch the
protests as I look at all the ways
people are responding it to it and it's
just pondering is it cooking coherent
because it feels incoherent because it's
based on this whole fear of others and
of another and the control another has
on you or your perceived you know your
perception of power that someone else
has over you in terms you know power and
control come in that so she's wondering
do you think that's why it incoherent
well there's a lot of reasons that I
think it's incoherent I I definitely
think the like psychological aspect of
authoring someone that you describe is
pretty central let me think of the right
way to say this so there's that minimal
definition of fascism that I used
earlier but I think there's off like
what we often associate is a handful of
other characteristics like
traditionalism methanol ISM scapegoating
of an other ultraviolence handful of
other things liberalism maybe would
commonly be like a fellow traveler but
when we talk about that scapegoating of
the other that you that you discussed I
think that that's kind of a turning
point like
it's hot it's like fucking hard to be
human I think like everybody understands
that it like hurts to be human and it
hurts to care and it hurts to be like
constantly crushed by the world it just
is like painful and there's a lot of
beauty and we all continue living
because there's a lot to live for but
it's just hard and when you promise when
you promise something someone that that
pain could stop that that pain is real
that pain could stop and it's the fault
of our one true enemy
I think that's appealing in a very very
simplistic way obviously it's a lie but
it's a it's a complete sham but there's
like there's an appeal you know to feel
better in that way and I think the other
part of it that I would get into is like
the human desire for simple stories and
I think fascism is the simplest story in
a complex world it's like if we could
just have order and stricter hierarchy
and get rid of this our one true enemy
which happens to be kind of a of course
once your enemy ends up being kind of a
broad category that's game good that
scapegoat keeps has to keep getting
expanded because I can't just have one
true enemy you know there's there's like
these information dynamic problems and
so like fascism isn't that good at
keeping the trains running on time
actually because because it's just like
it it has it hasn't its events an overly
simplistic view of complex systems
basically what I intended pond about
Italy just pond about Italy back in the
body like keep it a trains running
yes so I think that it's much so there's
like a safety in a simple story and it's
much scarier to grasp a complex story
and that like all of our duty is to try
to hold a complex story together even
though it's scarier
it's like scarier to love each other and
support each other in that way yeah No
thank you that's uh that was many
threads into those I mean they all come
back to a very coherence because either
you're trying to simplify and people are
not that simple
yeah the incoherence of just perception
right and how we emotionally perceive
and then makes constructs out of it
Thanks thank you for that yeah like
maybe one one more simple example that
maybe people with like look at maybe
using a simple example it's like I
talked about eco fascism earlier and so
now there's this like emerging movement
that's like will solve climate change
with fascism and like I think that's the
perfect example of a false promise like
ah yes a highly centralized system that
creates perverse incentives up and down
a very rigid hierarchy of patronage
networks certainly will be agile enough
to support really diverse communities of
scientists that transcend racial ethnic
religious and ideological political
backgrounds in order to actually solve
the problem at hand
it's like it's a really good example I
think of like the false promise of
extreme hierarchy yeah thank you so duh
Darrell do you have a question yeah I
just I wonder if maybe it's a little
naive but is there any way that entry
ism could work the other way where
people could have expand their horizons
and think about that and become less
fascist because of people working to
work with them and and I guess the
second question is what is scuttlebutt
community talking about doing about this
potential vulnerability of the
kind of naive left perspective about Oh
will just love them to death like is
like how do we protect ourselves yet
still allow ourselves to love question
so I'm not actually opposed to to like
like I said my background is in conflict
mediation and the inherent truth of
conflict mediations that you like you
have to engage at the level of being
human with like the worst of the worst
and so I personally have had tons of
deep conversations with really really
dangerous people I like had a long
conversation with a former atom often
member and atom often is like maybe you
saw the drama about them recently but
they're they want to they're they're an
acceleration astaire Nazi organization
they want to like destroy infrastructure
and kill as many people as possible I
had a discussion with a former member
technically but nonetheless we like
talked about ideology so counter
recruitment generally doesn't work and
generally absorbs a huge amount of
resources
it's like extremely draining most like
anti-fascist organizations tend to keep
their DMS open for people who are having
doubts ironically a lot of fascists tend
to trust anti-fascists more than like
other counter recruiters because there's
like a shared understanding of like
extreme ideology or something but that
being said also some degree of people
are won over by like sort of liberal
outlets like there's a the one of the
most famous cases is I think it's called
there's an article called the white
flight of Derek black which you might be
interested in which is about how the
son of one of the most famous white
nationalists in the United States turned
tail after going to a liberal college
and getting invited to a Shabbat every
week and he was doing some sort of like
you know at a distance at a distance
study of like social justice warriors
but then he got exposed but they kept
inviting him to Shabbat I don't know
these are the kind of the stuff that
liberal dreams are made of and it
generally doesn't work but when it does
work it's like can be pretty powerful
there's people pursuing all kinds of
avenues for like smart forms of entry
ISM and and like good-faith engagement
with the other even when the other is
extremely dangerous I think it's just
careful it's just important to consider
how that work gets contained there's
kind of like a counterintelligence angle
to it like if you're just actually doing
like some sort of weird like information
warfare against fascism versus if you're
like you know one of these d
radicalization organizations but even
the D radicalization organizations face
a lot of complicated things there's one
called light upon light and there's one
controversy about whether they're
actually just platforming white
nationalists because they like said this
guy Matthew haibach was reformed when
actually he has basically the exactly
same politics that he had before which
is that he's in not school he's still
like white ethno state he's just not
street brawling and so then they gave
him a huge platform to talk about not
spoil politics you know but there's a
lot of really cool D radicalization
organizations to like exit in Germany
and yeah as far as scuttlebutt I have a
big paper coming out for for the Center
for analysis and the radical write about
it I guess in short let's go to what
community is like
very very brave the developing community
the developer community is very willing
to have difficult conversations and my
experience and so they're engaging in a
ton of strategies at once but
peer-to-peer technology is like the
ultimate free speech technology in that
nobody can be controlled entirely you
the FBI can't subpoena scuttlebutt you
know you like century that's a good
example of where I would say centralized
approaches fail and you have to have
these kind of like broad-based cultural
like things going on you have to like
make it not fun to be a Nazi but yeah I
think it'd be a little too complex to
dive into in total they're also doing a
lot of UI stuff they're like thinking
about UI stuff they're building like
they're they're having a lot of
discussions about threats and threat
modeling so yeah that's the short
version cool
thanks for that Darrell so we do have to
close out now another session starting
right after this but any brief closing
thoughts or anything you'd like to leave
us plug me I can't really see but if you
contact me then maybe I can it was the
best way to contact you you can reach me
at AMM I be at protonmail calm and if
anybody wants to continue this chat you
can go to the game be cafe I don't know
this can't be coffee as we did I do have
one last thing a organization I work for
c4 SS org
speaking of kmb we're gonna start a
mutual exchange on decentralization and
economics and there's gonna be some game
be folks there but it's gonna be kind of
hopefully a wide discussion about those
sticky questions very cool very cool so
Amy thanks so much for coming today
I would love to there's like multiple
threats that we could pull apart there
I'd love to have you have you back on if
you want to continue this discussion
feel free to jump on the game be coffee
Nancy Strickler co-founder Kickstarter
it's gonna be on in a moment on a
different link you just go on the
website to RCP and tonight we have
welcome back Daniel Thornton party he
went on like a 75 day retreat we're
gonna pick his brain see what happened
there and the stoah is based off a gift
economy if our viewing there's a gift us
for freely freely to use this time of
need if you're inspired to give it get
to the store just go to the website and
go to gift economy section alright that
being said thank you everyone
[Music]