it's weird how there's this you know you
get this idea that some people's will
say you know on the right even you know
liberalism or libertarianism is the
failure of our culture this idea of
individual rights or my individualism
and autonomous individuals and I think
to myself wait a second libertarians
don't have any power that's not their
fault but what they are getting at is
that is this this weird relationship
between a cultures individualism and the
rise of tyranny it's this weird thing
how it works together if you have this
individualist mindset somehow we get or
more collectivist and more and more
expansive than our government right it's
beautiful well I think it goes like this
I think it's really a two or three step
process you feel a wrongness in the
world right and it's in its and it's a
it's a felt sense right first and
foremost is the felt sense second you
can't fix it
you yourself and by you I mean yourself
and the the real and the relationships
that you can count on don't seem to be
able to solve the problem
now what do you do typically what we do
is we escape one place you can get to as
you can you can deny the problem you can
make up a story that points the blame at
something and renders you virtuous and
those are the two moves right the first
move is you find something which is vice
you pointing the blame at something and
the second thing is you render yourself
virtuous some Volks escaped into
libertarianism and they point to point
to blame it thorat Arianism or at
collectivism you've it is an ism and
renders themselves virtuous the
autonomous no individual some folks
escape into social justice and then they
point the blame at fill-in-the-blank and
always render themselves virtuous that's
not that's the third move right the
first move is there is a felt wrongness
second move is you feel powerless the
third move is you escape now the problem
is if you're sitting in that third move
and you're trying to figure out how to
solve things from the third position
you're gonna reinforce the second
position because the third position
can't solve anything it only makes
things worse and all and the worst part
is it makes things worse in a way that
actually creates simple categories for
other people start dividing and
conquering oh I'm a libertarian and the
social justice folks are clearly
collectivists so it's not just
collectivist in principle it's
collectivist in practice by the way they
don't like me they're certainly they
yell at me a lot they point the finger
they seem really mean and angry and
sometimes they even punch me so now I've
got a real out reality that's now that's
the force move there's a reality that is
in fact really real which increases the
reality of the wrongness but it's
actually tied to the third which was
never real in the first place which is
tied to the second which is real real
and all the way to the first right so
this you get real lost and get confused
and this is what's going on right now
you can see it like surging through
social media you just sort of step back
and watch social media that lends you
keep seeing people who are fundamentally
powerless fundamentally feel powerless
so they keep making up stories to try to
feel somewhat agenting and then they
mistake their stories for reality and
become actually powerless
so it's it's the site again it goes back
to when you're in a stagnant universe at
least you feel that way and you can't
grow the pie the only thing you have to
do is to turn to your neighbors say well
it's the choices you've made
it's your race it's your gender it's
your ideology which is causing the
suffering in the world you need to be
quarantined with all guilt quarantined
on to you you need to quarantine all
guilt onto you and cut it off that's
that's the scapegoat mechanism it's
still dry happen it's nice you know this
other place is right you could put it in
this into the stone on the ground right
I think everybody's had that experience
as a child and stubbing your toe on a
stone and blaming the stone now first
and foremost so stay in particular
that's a very nice simple simple example
I don't have to be too highfalutin right
walking along and I stub my toe in a
stone what happens well I feel pain and
and the consequence the cause is in the
past can't change it I am in fact
actually powerless so I feel
uncomfortable and I'm actually powerless
so now I have a choice what do I do
well the energy the energy of pain is an
energy of change and I want to change
what happened but I can't because it's
in the past so one of the things I might
do is I might blame something I could
blame myself that's uncomfortable
I could also blame the stone it's funny
that's the metaphor for the gospel
transformation and the Bible scandal on
the stumbling block that you've stumble
on to in the field and that's the that's
the scandal that that causes either
mimetic rivalry because what's when
Peter confronts Jesus and he says you're
not gonna die on the cross we're gonna
do were the one where the 99 we're gonna
go beat the 1% okay it's time to have
the revolution Jesus you've got a
movement here your poll numbers are good
let's storm the castle
and Jesus says get behind me Satan which
means get behind me accuser you are a
stumbling block to me so you're a stone
that I've stubbed my toe on you're
trying to draw me into doing things the
way of that scarcity mindset that's
right that's right that's that's a real
 me this is
silly a thing to say that's a real
insight yeah yeah it's a real insight I
think it's a crucial Landa right cuz
it's too easy you can't help it right
you kick the stone there's a whole lot
of instinct that says well maybe what I
should do is kick I stumble on this day
maybe maybe I should just kick this down
maybe the stone got in the way and it's
even harder because you have to realize
this that the first thing you have to do
is you have to recognize that the pain
probably pulled you out of your
connection to the sacred right your your
scent your now you've been pulled back
into the profane and if you can build a
capacity now we're very simple again and
I stuck my toe my toe hurts the capacity
to actually first and foremost recognize
what it feels like to be pulled into the
profane and to slow down take a breath
look at your toe is it painter is it
harm if it's harm is it harm or is it is
it real damage you know do I have to
actually deal with something but I do
let's deal with something if it's just
pain are there any things that I could
have done better that I can use to
change my capacity to move forward in
the world if no then it's in the past it
is simply a part of reality that happens
to occur if yes then let's grow in that
direction as challenging as that may be
which having a two-year-old at home you
see that two-year-olds don't really have
too much of a trouble with it yeah they
stumble and fall they cry because that's
what happens they allow the crying to
pass this room without getting too hung
up on blaming anybody and they figure
out how to get better and you know you
just be be be like unto the child and
learn how to learn from your mistakes
about blaming anybody it's probably a
pretty good ancillary to that particular
rule yeah the kingdom of God is like
children that's what it that's what it's
about
yeah yeah that's the idea to be to be
child to have that childlike lack of
desire to scape go and tear down
something else I think that's a picture
we're trying to describe yeah you know
and it's funny because and I want to
name it we were having a conversation
which has a feeling of feeling a bit
theoretical but it's
I was living in the in the native
language and and yet you know I'm
sitting in my my chair using a computer
to talk to you over telecommunications
infrastructure and you're at a makeshift
version of a boot because we're
quarantined right voluntary quarantine
at least on my part I suppose in some
sense it's always volunteer and that's
important to recognize right
but things are things are afoot
normality is definitely not going on
outside I think I was yesterday with the
Pentagon had that whole aliens thing and
everybody looks at and goes yeah it's
gonna take a lot more nail Ian's too
weirdest out these days so I'd like it
to invite people to accept the reality
of the signs and the reality that you
can actually look around and go oh this
is that thing this is the telling us
that we're right now in the process of
making a real big choice and whether we
spiral down into the inevitable spiral
of mimetic desire into conflict in decay
Oz into terror or we take this this this
stumbling block and we stumble up and we
acknowledge oh that's right I have to
remember the difference in the sacred
and the profane and I have to to return
back to the past before I do anything
else and how do I proceed forward in
this space more deeply in the sacred
than I was before and find all those who
would be friends you know in the and the
Quaker sense and the Society of Friends
the Society of those who agree to
support each other in maintaining their
individual and collective integrity in
the shared space of peace and grace and
the sacred and then build from there
right because that group that group of
people you know a group of people enter
into an agreement around that kind of a
shared directionality is the only
possible way out of this mess right
we're not going to get there by pointing
fingers and we're not going to get there
by having a boss tell us what to do I
don't if you've noticed they're not very
good at it
and we're not going to get there by
blaming the boss either yeah that's
right that's the revolutionary counter
spear that imitates the spirit of the
state itself both of them are the same
thing and they both lead to destruction
revolutionary overthrow and the
imposition of the old order they they're
almost they're identical twins