no like me
hi it's weird how it's like says you're
live and then it counts in but it's not
the same amount of time I don't know
what happens I'm hurts but it says
you're live or with a good times for
it's going to clock starts counting
because they're not the same but um no
I'm on here except that my brain is so
I'm really tired today and I also want
to plan a bit of what my plan was to go
live with my first weekly hour-long
conversation on Monday but I'm not gonna
do that because I've like three things
booked on Monday now because I'm going
camping at the end of the week so anyone
else fits life and around work I don't
know my whole life becomes like these
little incidents it's like I'm going to
a B that's like 70 weeks of preparation
you've nothing with a bunch of people
which means I got to get on the
spreadsheet and figure out what's going
on with that but Oh going whale watching
when I come back from camping because
going before was gonna be a little too
hectic so we're gonna go after instead
but I called sorry I could tell this
story properly
my dad has has often said that it's one
of the things he really wants to do is
whale watching um it's on his bucket
list it's on my bucket list so for
Father's Day in June I got him like a
gift certificate ie a card says her
going while watching because I hadn't
actually paid for yet and and then when
I looked up when the best time was over
the summer September was both humpback
season and Orca season so it was the but
it made no sense to coat in September
and so I called to make the appointment
and it's it's expensive while watching
it was liked over $100 per person
there's three of us going me my kid and
my dad three generations and so I phoned
and it was by cousin that was the picked
up the phone I don't know if she's
working there anyone else could have
picked up the phone anyway I got a 50%
off discount for my watching even more
so the fact that she was working there
the fact like it was just it was perfect
I love it I love those things even in my
leg
I was a
I felt crappy this morning when I woke
up yesterday was a really good day I
went with my kid to her school has one
of the campuses is on a farm and I went
there and it was just an amazing day it
got to cuddle horses even though I don't
know like I don't know horses I'm not
like I know dogs I know dog language I
don't know her his language but I'm
learning being around them and there
were goats and I just loved I loved
being at the farm and I love the kids at
her school they're just it's amazing
amazing people and then afterwards came
home and had a nap because I needed one
and they went to cohousing for for
dinner and just like was just lost in
gratitude yesterday like just calm
gratitude oh no I but I'm and I woke up
early to my kid welcoming up a little
earlier than my potty you wanted to wake
up and I probably needed to sleep a
little later oh my god II want to wake
up so I'm doing a little tired today but
not allowing it to sink me further not
allowing it to be like I guess I guess I
followed it's like no yeah it's like I
want to go on to Facebook group them I'm
started and explain what it is exactly
I'm doing seven posts at cut of all
summer
and explain what I'm gonna be explaining
here which is what I'm planning and what
I'm doing though the weekly one-hour
timeslot I'm just gonna be on Mondays
antennae I'm watching that I've talked
to my person that I already have or
maybe I just make it you can just make
it to six doesn't need but making it
yeah one weekly conversation which is in
the beginning gonna be me explaining it
and me rambling for an hour
totally fine because no one's gonna be
there I'm also in order to get more
people there and in order to engage
people in between let me do in Twitter I
don't think I'm deranged aground just
put my new thoughts come I'm just gonna
be like hey here's Cyrus the world get
to co-create they're all different
brands in just because I'm using what I
already have like that's not true these
are the Facebook page I have a Facebook
page I have a YouTube channel and I have
a Twitter account that are all under cow
Mach recei Eve
and then the emails club of democracy
because it was its pre-pre name that you
don't like and I'm not rebranding those
I'm not really doing anything with those
because the other piece it because
that's kind of me and my vision of what
it's what it is
the other thing is together tech which
is what we are creating together but I
want to like give the big picture of it
so that's the website that I created
three weeks and that's website and I
know I'm Sarah started technology
company and I'm not but all of it
I'm transparent in my it's kind of weird
that we don't work that way as a society
that like Donald Trump got elected off
of bravado and ego which I don't think
would have worked for like a woman or
like Obama or like anyone it was in a
white male that was rich probably
wouldn't have worked for but cuz I'm
were just like oh you're full of
yourself like he's full of himself
thinks he's the best at everything he
sucks at everything like even business
which is one thing sucks at real estate
he sucks at it he has he's made money at
it but when you listen to his business
contacts and stuff he's been he's broken
people he literally breaks their
finances like makes them broke and um
anyway I had some people have the
opposite like some people overestimate
their skills and the people
underestimate their skills very few
people know a spot-on with your skills
are and I'm not saying that I do
constantly I'm like wait am I better
about that other people worse without
necessarily knowing but I'm honest about
where I lack and where I excel to the
best of my ability and we're not
supposed to do that in society you were
just a fake it till we make it or
something like a no trust me with
everything I know all technology what
are you talking about it's like no I
don't I don't and yet I can see the
vision of it like the more that we need
people to look a certain way like oh
you're a business person but you have
tattoos like it's like we is that
hurting the business fine is that
hurting anything anything there no it's
not so why does adder like we're just so
sub
consciously and somewhat more
consciously driven by like what someone
looks like and how they sounds and how
they like I'm fully honest that I have
some brain issues those don't make me
less intelligent in the ways that I'm
intelligent they do make me less
intelligent ways that they've their
brain damaged and so knowing what that
is I've had to like change my life to
like figure out my boundaries and figure
out what works for me and but like being
that in society makes me look like I'm
weak and that was one of the things I
learned this summer was how unfuckin
weak I am even when like I had kind of
convinced myself like it's like because
when you can't get out of bed because
you're exhausted and you're in pain all
the time that feels like we can s and
yet it's not it's like getting out of
bed every day getting going through life
and like what is it there to offer today
and what is it that I have to offer
today it's the opposite of weakness I'm
a single mom who I want to say tries my
best everyday but that's not really it
tries my best out trying my best
I have degrees of separation like I know
it's not my best best but it's the best
I'm capable of and I don't know there's
so much power there and there's this
split in me between like feeling like I
should be a thing so that I look
professional and people are gonna trust
me so that this thing can get made like
not using the word thing for things and
at the same time like no that's not who
I am being more authentic and more
vulnerable and more honest is what I
need to do like it just dig that deeper
and deeper in a positive way I'm like oh
there's another layer of honesty and
another layer about that just even I
didn't even have access to now it's
there hey yeah but figuring out how to
move the project forward within my
unique space I can't do that it stresses
me out
nope that's not happening but this
doesn't stressed me out being on for an
hour a week is what I've kind of wanted
to do with the Facebook group like it's
but they weren't available so it's like
because they have jobs still like people
with Jonah's health a disability not we
have like time and energy and a life to
do other things so yeah so picking is
time and then having people come on
board that are available during that
time period who want to be the
equivalent to the board of directors
then and having twitter and between
those two getting membership and numbers
up cos 0 2 it's not it 0 I like just
because I sit here and talk to myself or
whatever long
I know Doan joins which is good abstract
certain people do rube coming and it's
interrupting me talking about self but
the point is for those hours for it not
to be me talking to myself for it to be
the website you've looked at that you've
gotten kind of up-to-date on what that
is I can even post like here's the board
of director meetings which will be the
live videos like a good link to those
things I think I could even handle that
level of technology and then so you can
see like the list of and what be what
like I won't know how to do this on wigs
but there's possible they have a link to
another another thing that has like
tasks that need to get done and people
offering to do those right like if I'm
like ok well we need to a crowdfunding
campaign hey I can do that I can run
that for you awesome that's what I want
I'll be able to take off my plate
and do it I'm not I'm just sitting with
no I eat feel like I'll eat your carrots
I'll eat your peas gonna ain't eatin the
peas because it disgusting the rest I'm
gonna keep my nemesis unless they're
fresh from the garden raw gross I will
have a tantrum I feel like I should go
and even with my current brain explain
to my we the people people what's going
on
we're going live yeah so which means I'm
gonna have a scheduled call at 10 a.m.
here and then yeah do some
maybe I'll type it out I feel like it
might be easier to type it up instead of
do video cuz people don't watch videos
that's why in my plan so far has not
worked was okay I'm just failing in our
interruption and not feeling whatsoever
item sometime feels like time to donate
it was time 1412
we just read my email on life that was
like so important
and it was really important to I'm just
not it's not important to me like I mean
it's not let me buy that I'm in no way
participating to what that was about
and so me knowing about it isn't going
to help but that's not true I could've
like I was going donating to a refugee
family like do I have anything I don't
have anything for those age groups I
don't know anything of mine yeah I need
a list and like actual things they need
and then it wouldn't trigger like coax
they do have one of those I was one of
my ideas when the sorry the Syrian
refugee um the worst first started and
the picture of that little boy on the
beach and during that period of time
feeling I want to do something and I've
no idea what to do and then think that
like Canada is welcoming I don't know
how many my thousands of refugees and
what was that like
you'll have to flee their homes you who
make priorities and clearly like in your
lives or what matters and the clothes on
your back and you might be able to bring
like your phone but you can't bring and
there's some things that we can't
replace right like strangers unable to
replace your photo albums and your your
memories but if you were a violinist
even if it were you weren't like a
violinist you were just like I enjoy
playing a violin I had a violin I had to
leave my violin behind like that one
piece that like a lot of times expensive
but it doesn't um but it's like your
hobby or your passion or your or your
job like oh I was a hair dryer like a
hairdressing you might have brought your
stuff with you is you can make money
while you're going but like that level
okay tools for my for my trade having a
website that like connects people with
that like hey kind of like a make-a-wish
Foundation but for adults for Refugees
and aren't dying like here's the one
thing that I would want I want a piano I
want maybe an experience but my guess is
that so the point is this like you'd be
leave experience you've got a lot of
experience didn't leave that behind
it's the what you had to leave behind it
like is super meaningful to you how to
give that to someone but like that
website origami ain't cuz I'm not way
from websites I'm making the thing that
makes the websites so that I can have an
idea and it can get made if it's worthy
because I mean if people heard that idea
we're like the families were like we
have nothing we want and the other
people were like we're not gonna give
but doesn't call to us then that
wouldn't and therefore shouldn't get
made like if there was never gonna be a
people an audience for that then it
shouldn't air from gettin right in the
first but it didn't you just not even
put any money kindly put thought into it
and I literally have dozens and dozens
of website in technology I didn't sell
and I don't I don't think they're all
gold i some of them are gold something
oh some of them it's like not up
it's figuring out which ones have that
audience
how about threshold of usability because
when people hear about them or like yeah
does that exist yeah when can I get on
when can I get on that right
and those things get made first and
those things and we would make them we
make them for purpose to center profit
because the things that are out there
that do make my life better would be
made even better if they were made for
purpose and profit like Facebook is
amazing and it's helped me stay in
contact with people and feel community
from within my house that I don't really
have access to without that or it's out
a similar platform but I can get advice
from other parents that I can like see
what my high school friends are up to
see their kids see that I can connect
like not Facebook but like Skype helps
to save contact with my my family like
we could we didn't live close to my
grandparents and we didn't I loved my
grandmother but we weren't and talked to
her weekly and see her on skype right
my kid is also growing up without her
grandmother close by and it's not like
is very connected to her even though we
see her every couple of years in person
still connected another point I got
sidetracked there then a profit versus
purpose if Facebook was designed
actually to connect us if it was
designed for people to have true
authentic connection from within their
houses because they can't leave the
roses or that that level it would look
differently if it was created to create
connection and not drama so that people
stay on so it creates ad revenue it
would just it would be function
differently and so creating those things
like every industry is created for
profit which isn't a so abadan of itself
except there's so much inefficiency
there there's inefficiency competing
with everyone else who's competing for
profit there's an efficiency in the
tension between the corporations and the
customers and that they have different
wants and needs
there's tension to the boy at the law
and the corporations and some of that
will still exist in the news in the
newer system and if they're all going to
exist at the same time cuz it's not like
will exist a new system it's new system
and if it as and if it's successful it
grows which is the beauty it's not
tearing everything down to zero and then
recreating eggs we suck
as a species historically we really suck
at central buying both like actual
central Communist planning and
scientific like oh no this just makes
sense we just broke it down to his
components Oh make no no never do that
at least don't do that and assume that
that tells you the thing about the whole
because it doesn't you can't break a
hold down to its components understand
the components and understand the whole
gives you a piece of it but you like
when we created a biodome we didn't we
need no soil like oh we can't just
sterilize the soil the soil actually
needs to be alive
good to know good to know mm-hmm it's
gonna be a very lazy day oh I kind of
want clean my house ledger mask
it's not happening if you clean my room
the feeling of energy my body it's like
zero want sleep oh they sleep on that
and create when it feels right right
this is not me
listen you do and for the record totally
not stir like really not sometimes
during the day but not right now that
like the way I talk about it let's talk
about drugs and use for medication like
that I do I don't I don't really care
about what I'm supposed to do even the
politically correct stuff like I was
talking to someone this past week and I
was talking about poor people and how
poor people like you use the food bank
and how it's degrading and as and she's
like we don't say poor anymore it has to
be low income like I am for verson and
like I'm good with pork it's not the can
low income it means poor I don't mean
poor in integrity I don't I mean poor in
resources I mean this is like I don't
have enough resources that's what I mean
chorizos things and I get that they're a
bit of like
you can't correct the group that and
even if I was even if I was and I was
super rich maybe then maybe then I was
using poor people but it's like we can't
lose all of our language at once I don't
have to explain that concept in a way
that doesn't sound completely horrible
but requiring us to lose all of our
language is ablest and so who wins the
group like especially the irony is
there's way more terms in ableism like
that we use the word lame that we use
the word crutch that we use the word
blind and deaf and dumb and all this all
this but also requiring people to lose
that language and that that's just the
same for everyone that we all are
disabled to do that like just oh yeah
just cops are calling people by day
that's just like got that girly grammar
correct in your brain it's hard for me
to lose language I have to do it
systematically I have to be like okay
what's the most offensive thing I could
learn not to do at the moment and to me
the ablest ones aren't the ones that I
want to lose just because money some of
them actually I'm like I don't know how
to explain these things without using
that language and figuring that out is
too hard for my brain so I'm going to
use that language and they cut out the R
word that I grew up with and I cut it
out I'm like yeah that one is I can do
that that one is like Beyond and I can
cut that one out but like oh I turn to
deaf ear like I literally turn to Bezier
I got one like that's like how else do
you explain it it's like I'm hard of
hearing in one ear like I'm definitely
I'm single-sided deaf like like they're
so the deaf community is down with me
like I'm like I don't I don't know it's
just too much it's like everyone plays
their language everyone have emotional
intelligence everyone a societal
intelligence
everyone just be until it's like
requiring people to be a certain level
of intelligence any intelligence is
about the epitome of ableism so how can
you fight ableism will be enable this
okay
I think just that just like if you're
able to don't use these words but don't
correct people but like but do correct
people because are they gonna learn like
it's like just existing in this space of
like oh yeah this is uncomfortable as
 it's like we're just gonna have to
deal with it and dealing with it on t we
could create a society of it deals with
it because I don't think it's about
everyone losing everything like getting
rid of all offensive language and
there's like no humor left you know it's
like no there's we need humor humor
helps people evolve helps people deal
with the that's going on in the
planet and even if I find it offensive
like doesn't mean it's not okay to live
on the planet like doesn't mean it's not
okay to exist because someone else needs
that and I can turn it the off so
having an humor especially like humor
supposed to be like on the edge so of
course they're gonna go over the edge of
course that's connected and there's
clearly better and worse comedy at that
like ones that you're like oh that made
me think but it's like no to my head but
like rape jokes are never funny it's
like except when they are like except
when someone writes the perfect joke
that like isn't supposed to be told and
it's funny and brilliant and like all at
the same time it's like yes that's the
one other people telling them that are
like just to throw them in just to be
offensive or like whatever you go fire
it's like my five-year-old beauty and
beauty like it's like it's that level
and it's like okay because she's five
and it annoys me and I tell her to stop
cuz like go somewhere else and do it
because I can't have a listening to that
all the time
I thinks like but it she's five and it's
like yes some 40 year olds are five as
well some 15 year olds are also five I'm
five sometimes like we don't just
chronologically age and everything
follows that so we're all at different
levels and honoring I like okay where I
think it's I drank it all today so I'm
going to able hit some rape jokes this
about oh by our loved ones gonna be
let my brain and mind wander and then
benefits but I get it people look at me
especially people who are successful
it's like that's never gonna be
successful you are never whatever you
got going out there like you're not
gonna certain tech I'm like watch me it
will happen because we're gonna I'm
gonna find the people that they're ok
with this
they're ok with my mind wandering all
over the place they can see the
brilliance because I feel the brilliance
I can see the brilliance and other
people and then seen it and other people
can see it myself like all of it at the
same time I'm like oh I see where I'm
 too
like don't they started all the time I'm
gonna be swearing more and more that's
not something I'm trying to try to make
more of that not less of that maybe less
other people's children maybe even a
doubt it I just not dealt with fighting
for it all the time um but then I'm
unorganized I know that's not a great
trait it's also not within my ability to
change it I think it's not I'm never
probably gonna have nice clean house and
I'm able to keep clean
naturally like oh let me take ten things
into my room so I can do a thing it
would have taken me 30 seconds taking me
less time to just do it there and like
bring all these things over and then do
it and then don't put the things back
because bringing them here is unnatural
putting them back not so much and do
that about a dozen times a day how did
my place get so messy all the time who
misses my place out so rude if somebody
kind of messed my placement I live in a
amazing time right now
maybe I do just see the world with you
differently than everyone else but
you're more like people don't care
people are stupid if people don't I'm
like we're talking to I mean yes in the
like general scheme of like what I see
on the media agreed but when I talk to
someone one-on-one anyone someone on the
bus I'm gonna to bus stop someone who
doesn't have a place to live someone who
is a rich CEO like it anyone in fact
those ones are probably the least they
are intelligent in at least one area at
least their emotional intelligence and
their street smarts or their like they
have something that they are excel at
even if what they excel at is like being
a criminal it's like it's their skill
their their skill then yeah okay at
least about themselves and at least
about their families but even more so I
don't know a single person who doesn't
care like they might even they might
verbally say I don't I don't care about
other people it's like right so what
would you do if you won the lottery oh
well let's start oh and this might be
they don't care about people but like
let's start a rescue for animals okay
that's carrying that has a needed thing
that needs to be done and that's like oh
I mean I play soccer all day all right
people need sports want to teach other
people soccer want to play with other
humans gonna I don't know code a soccer
field together there's lots of stuff
like if she goes tweet some stuff except
I don't even know what am i tweeting
what is going on well watching
I can't wait I've seen a horse was like
astronomically healing from yes you're
not healing like physically just
spiritually I'm still in pain and
exhausted but like their big eyes and oh
they're just so big and also I love them
and a whale just like multiply that
times and you don't get to see them on a
constant basis nothing I've ever seen a
whale in the wild I've seen them from
like the ferry boats
I think orcas definitely dolphins but
being there like just feeling their
energy now and it might be that they
hopefully thought about experience
hopefully it's not like going to the
zero this was horrible we never should
have done that that was so mean to be
whales I think to some degree there is
curious but us we're about them they're
probably a little bored they're like you
know many humans we see like 20
boatloads a day since eels it's an otter
possibly definitely beavers seen lots
lots of animals but not whales no I'm
going to it's funny for me how I'm both
kind of okay with spending money on
event like things that are experiences
cuz that's what I come I have exactly
right money so I hate making money on
things at the same time I've never
regretted after a fact bit like gee I
wish I hadn't gone no that's not true I
guess I kind of have like I was shutting
down to that concert that was horrible I
wish I had gone but like not in them
Todd he's good so it was good I don't
regret it
strangely oh oh say on the plan which I
think I was at last time to weekly
one-hour videos so I'm going to schedule
them and then do them schedule them and
then do them
and then Twitter and though I'm site and
the website is the big picture it
explains it all and I have that fake use
from people who are like right but what
about this which I don't got any
remember I haven't explained
everything's like oh I didn't explain
that already I didn't explain that key
part of it and my brain wants explain
the whole thing like this knew once and
this knee wants and this knee wants and
this so it's like I explained that all
at once which means I'm not explaining
anything all right
you're talking about the technology and
how and the why in the word all at the
same time you're not talk about any of
them like all right sometimes like wait
how's this differently communism like
well let me tell you this is none but
it's got the good parts and not the bad
part I guess I could do that just ask
myself my own questions like verbally
ask them like how is this different than
communism and then answer my own
question but ever for other people
asking them because otherwise I have to
think of the million the pop of ideas of
questions that maybe people don't worry
about don't want yeah I'm gonna go and
go do something more useful in talking
to myself all right take care no viewers
and I will see you know if you were
saying