what good morning welcome to meditating
with Jabra Vicky I'm a cognitive
psychologist and a cognitive scientist
at the University of Toronto where I
could chemically and scientifically
study phenomena like mindfulness and
related phenomena like insight flow
mystical experience transformative
experience higher states of
consciousness and the cultivation of
wisdom thank you for joining us I've
also I'm also a practitioner of the
possible meditation Tai Chi Chuan Chi
cung for over twenty nine years and I've
been teaching the past not Mehta and Tai
Chi for close to 20 years so both but I
bring both a scientific understanding
and an existential personal
understanding to the teaching of this
practice and I tend to integrate from
the Buddhist traditions of apostle and
Mehta the Taoist traditions but she she
come and from what we're learning about
all of these phenomena from cognitive
science and cognitive psychology this is
a course you're welcome to stay but it
is a course every Monday is Dharma day
today's Monday is eternity and it builds
on previous lessons that I've taught the
previous Monday's in the description of
this video you'll find links to previous
lesson sessions and so you can catch up
what you've missed so that where I'm
explaining things you'll understand more
deeply what's going on and you can get
more deeply into the training that the
practice is offering you Tuesdays for
Fridays we sit so I'll often review the
lesson I taught on Monday and then we
sit together everyday at the end there
is a question and answer period please
limit your questions to questions about
the practices on teaching in this course
if you have more general questions every
third Friday at 3 p.m. est we live
stream a live Q&A in which I answer more
general broad
you might have so today I want to talk
about a very important principle and
it's the principle of integrity now when
I say that word what tends to happen is
and not completely inappropriately but
nevertheless a little bit off what I
want to focus on people here sort of a
moral term a virtue and of course
integrity is a virtue and it means
something like being true to the
principles that you hold our most true
that has tended in our culture to be
conflated and confused with authenticity
and I think sometimes when people are
saying authenticity they really mean
really being integrity because integrity
is the virtue that protects you from
hypocrisy because what you're doing is
you're you're being true to the
principles that you hold to be most true
but sometimes authenticity also means
this other thing this sort of romantic
notion of being true to your true self
and it's unclear what that is and
there's so I want to put that aside I
have some criticisms of that notion many
people do these days within sort of
philosophical circles so let's put that
aside we're not talking about
authenticity we're not completely
separate from the virtue of integrity
but what I want to do is I want to go it
from thinking of it just as this virtue
to what we need which are principles of
practice training principles or as it's
put in the traditions that I was taught
we want training precepts precepts to
tell us how to properly train so what is
it we're training and what is this
notion of integrity well let's turn it
into instead of the virtue of integrity
let's talk about the process of
integration and we've been we've been
practicing this from the beginning at
the end of every sit I say slowly come
out of you sit or your practice
trying as best you can to integrate what
you've cultivated in your practice with
your everyday consciousness and
cognition and that your sitting is not a
vacation it's an education for
transforming your life so that process
of integrating what you're doing in the
practice with the patterns of your life
that's the integrity that we're focusing
in on here we want the patterns in our
life and the patterns in our practice to
the friend each other we don't want to
be trying to call it a one set of
practices one set of patterns and
principles and there are practice and
then live different principles and
patterns in our lives because then they
will actually be undermining and in
conflict with each other so the first
part of this is of the integration is to
extend this notion of befriending
oneself so that what we're cultivating
in our practice and what we're
practicing in our life are in a
reciprocal opening a reciprocal
reinforcing the reciprocal affording
relationship they're preventing each
other that's the first part of what
we're trying to do what is meant by
integration and then if we zero in on
that a more specific meaning is what
we're trying to do with the training
precepts is we're trying to afford
moments of application and transfer
we're building a bridge and so the point
of the precepts is to call out it's to
call out like oh oh oh moments where we
notice where we notice that's a
mindfulness well that we can apply our
practice to our life it's like oh here's
where I could step back and look at
here's where I could come into centric
Ness and rootedness here is where I
could try and get into a more flowing
relationship with all the dynamics of
what's happening in this situation so
what and what we're trying to do is
we're not only trying to get harmony and
that's important like that that
residents but we're also trying to
expand it we're trying to increase the
opportunity
teas for where we will apply what we've
trained in our practice to our life we
will also thereby do the do the reverse
we will more and more flag moments of
our life as things that we get that get
taken into our practice that remind us
of the Buddha the Dharma and the same so
I want to present the five training
precepts Buddhist love numbered list the
five training precepts and what I want
to really refocus them and even
reformulate their wording to give
emphasis to there's not being just sort
of a vague moral set of commands for
getting this sort of not too clear
notion of moral integrity instead we
want very clear three clear and concrete
way of trying to afford the harmony and
trying to afford opportunity so I'll
present the traditional version of the
precept and then how I recommend we
formulate we how we reformulate it and
really zero in on the practice of
integration so the first one is do not
kill so the problem that is its command
and then we tend to hear it in terms of
obedience to the command there's an
external rule and it leaves out a lot of
what I was trying to put an emphasis on
so instead of instead of acquiescing or
obeying a command instead I propose you
reformulate it as a pump as a promise or
a vow that you're making to yourself
because this is the way of creating that
befriended and then also the problem
with these these the traditional version
of these precepts is they're all
negatively formulated they only limit
what you shouldn't do they don't
actually make you seek opportunity so
I would propose the following instead of
do not kill this I promise not to harm
but to mindfully enhance and enrich life
so what we can note right is we can try
and throw our day because what are we
doing what are we doing in the practice
well we're trying to heal and we're
trying to transform and we're trying to
grow but if we're out in our life and
we're harming and we're limiting and
we're restricting growth and we're
restricting transformation right then
these things are dissonant with each
other also moments where you could write
actually help somebody and of course you
have to do this mindfully well you could
act in such a way as to enhance and
enrich life our moments of opportunity
for the application of what you've been
doing in your mindfulness practice I'm
not going to tell you the particular
energies of how to do this or even the
particular ethical framework you might
want to bring to bear on that that is
not my I do not have that place or that
role for you I'm trying to get you to
see how you could extend and integrate
what you're cultivating your practice
into your life so I promise not to harm
but to mindfully enhance and enrich life
so the next one is you know do not steal
and again you know you know you know you
may even be able to go through an entire
day especially now without stealing even
minor stealing very very minor stealing
so again is is that going to be that
effective I think we've all been
socialized to a significant degree work
at a moral level where that's largely
something we're probably satisfying but
let's turn it around
let's turn let's think about how our
relationship to possessions and material
objects is something in which Co
identification
and automatic and reactive behavior is
very prevalent so our relationship to
our possessions and to material things
is actually a fertile field in which we
can plant the seeds of mindfulness so
how about instead of don't steal as I
promised not to use or perhaps relate
I'll like relate better some people like
use better I promise not to relate to
material things mindlessly but mindfully
and wisely so notice the way in which
objects are projections of your identity
notice way of ways in which material
things perhaps are giving you a sense of
stability or solidity and you might want
to reflect on that you might want to
note it you might want to say you know
why does this why do I want this object
near me all the time
why do I want to control that and so
what you're seeing here of course I hope
is that one of the things we can do in
the mindfulness is we can periodically
and remember neither one of these modes
is good or bad but we can periodically
shift from having mode towards material
things into a being mode towards
material things okay not only material
things I'm in academia and so doing
we're doing this with ideas especially
other people's ideas is very important
so for example I try to be very
stringent about giving people credit for
their ideas and how they've influenced
on me and try to make it very clear how
much other people write anything that I
produce has always been produced in
concert with other people so those are
the first two will put ascription of all
of these also in the notes for this
video so we've got I promise not to harm
but to mindfully enhance enrich life I
promise not to use or relate to material
things mindlessly but mindfully and
wisely the next is what I'm doing which
is speech language so in traditional
form it's don't don't lie and that's the
you know that's a challenge to to not
try to lie throughout an entire day even
one or light and so that and of itself I
think is valuable but I think there's
something missing from it again there's
a golden opportunity because there is
nothing that is so deeply interwoven
with our sense of our humanity and our
personhood as language I mean the
greatest philosophers of the previous
century like Vic and Shania and
Heidegger independently zeroed in on
this idea that it's it's our ability to
use language that most distinguishes us
as persons from the other organisms on
this planet and then of course how we
particularly use language is how we how
we spin and weave the autobiography of
our own individual person so and this
did this has also something that I've
seen from the philosophical tradition
especially coming home of Socrates and
Plato one of the most fundamental ways
in which we can care for ourselves care
for each other and care for our humanity
is being careful in our speech taking
care of it caring about it and that
doesn't mean caring that people agree
with us it means paying attention to
what's at work in our speech that sloppy
and careless speech of course becomes
sloppy and careless thought which
becomes sloppy and careless action which
then becomes a sloppy and careless life
now I'm being a little overdramatic here
because I'm sure I'm not showing
inevitability but I'm showing a very
distinct possibility
progression so in some traditions you're
not allowed to even engage in idle talk
right I'm not I'm not so sure that that
might be too strict I understand that
there's important social function of
pleasantries right we're we're just
trying to say we're all in this together
or we're sharing a society and we're
just signaling that but I think it's
fair to say that our culture has been
especially awash in the abuse of speech
and language and this is a very
pertinent and powerful place where we
could all bring mindfulness to bear so I
promise not to speak mindlessly but
mindfully wisely so another thing that's
precious coin is of course our sexuality
the fourth precept is don't commit
adultery it's not clear that that's even
a relevant thing for us because our
notions of relationship and marriage and
sex have not are not bound together at
the way they were in the traditional
culture in which that hard-ass both so
instead I again they're if they're think
about how deeply your sexuality weds
right the sort of the highest levels of
your personhood who and what you are to
sort of the the deepest levels of your
embodiment of your biology Nietzsche
famously said you know that the depths
of my sexuality reach up to the height
of my spirituality there's a whole
tradition both within Hinduism and
Buddhism it's an area where they overlap
called Tantra in which the whole point
is to realize the tremendous integrative
and also therefore this integrative
power of sexuality are you practicing
your sexuality in a way that enhances
integration that is a place where you're
bringing in mindfulness
where you're bringing in how this deeply
tops into areas of your brain that you
are you are they're up you otherwise do
not have access to or are you practicing
your sexuality in a way that
disintegrates you disintegrates your
connections to others disintegrates your
connection to the world so a lot of what
pornography does of course is it severus
connection its severs learning because
it goes for instant gratification and it
goes for the salience of the stimulus as
opposed to the meaning of the relation
and so again I'm not I'm not a prude I'm
not telling you what to do the point of
this precept and like I said there's
this whole tradition is this is a place
in which we should be bringing the
principles of our practice to bear it
also means if we if we befriend our
sexuality with mindfulness our sexual
issues and all of us have unresolved
issues Thank You Freud right can be
addressed potentially within the
meditative setting now of course I'm not
saying that that's a panacea therapy
might be needed other things might be
needed but when we bring up this bridge
this is how we can start addressing
these issues so I promise not to
practice sex mindlessly but mindfully I
think again about can you come into the
be in mode and make love as opposed to
just having sex
the last one is tricky for our culture
and it's also tricky in another was in
sort of cross-cultural ways so the the
original form of this is don't use
intoxicants don't use intoxicants so
some Buddhists take this very seriously
they won't even take like an aspirin
right and there's a problem with that
because a culture is kind of unclear
about what we think of intoxication
itself we of course think we have moral
criticisms of immoral acts or illegal
acts committed because of intoxication
but what we're unsure as a culture of
intoxication itself what is it a good
thing is it a bad thing
now for those of you are interested I
have videos on both within the series my
my channel about altered states of
consciousness okay and so I'm not going
to try and give my argument about what I
think is a good way of framing them here
but I do want to say what does the
training precept lead us to well the
training precept leads us to this idea
you can see in organisms that have high
intelligence that they seek out altered
states of consciousness and in fact you
have an altered state of consciousness
every night you're dreaming and dreaming
seems to be correlated with how complex
the cognitive machinery of an organism
is also how much social the the
complexity of its social networking so
dreaming altered states of consciousness
and this seems to be the case for many
altered states of consciousness seem to
be conducive to the way in which higher
cognition expands and enriches itself
that's why you'll see you know
Caledonian crows will tumble down a
rooftop to make themselves dizzy because
they just want to be dizzy or elephants
will eat fermenting food to get stoned
right or goats will leave you know the
coffee beans and get kind of right so
intelligent organisms pursue altered
states of consciousness it's natural to
us and there's increasing evidence that
they're highly functional now precisely
because they're highly functional they
shouldn't be abused
although
all of these things that we're talking
about are really important right places
low sigh in which your humanity is in
question and how you act they're steers
it very very deeply and so the idea here
is how are you pursuing altered states
of consciousness because you will you
will you'll either do it default
automatically or you'll do it work from
work deliberately but that deliberately
might still be in a very risky or
ultimately maladaptive way so think
about this what you're doing right here
in this practice is pursuing an altered
state of consciousness so we need to
understand this so the idea here is
again this is precious coin you're
seeking of altered states of
consciousness so when you're seeking an
altered state of consciousness here's
the thing to ask yourself what's the
principle in mindfulness I'm seeking an
altered state of consciousness because
I'm not seeking to escape I'm seeking to
educate I'm seeking to transform myself
so that I can be more present more
insightful and act more wisely or
centered and rooted when you're pursuing
your altered state of consciousness are
you pursuing escape or are you pursuing
education and transformation so I
promise not to views altered state of
altered states of consciousness but
cultivate them mindfully no pun intended
and wisely
let's review okay I promise not to harm
but the mindfully enhance and enrich
life I promise to relate to material
objects not might not mindlessly but
mindfully I promise not to use speech
mindlessly but mindfully I promise not
to practice my sexuality mindlessly but
mindfully I promise not to abuse altered
states of consciousness let seek out
those which educate and transform me or
I promise to practice or
the states of consciousness mindful how
do we do the precepts two ways all right
and now we'll start incorporating this
into all of our sets so when I say today
at the end of our set slowly come out of
your practice trying as best you can to
integrate what you've cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition there will
be a gap
I will not immediately start answering
the questions because in that time now
you're in a state of deep mindfulness
you in a deep state of presence and
receptivity what you want to do there in
order to come out of the practice in
order to create that bridging is to
recite to yourself mindfully the
precepts may be just one of them may be
all five of them okay so just to give
you the reminders first ones about your
material possessions
sorry the first ones about life second
one's about material possessions third
ones is about speech fourth one is
sexuality and fifth one is altered
states of consciousness so that's what
you do and then throughout the day you
take it up to try and practice the
precepts as a way of harmonizing and
bridging between your practice in your
life and creating affording
opportunities where you can grow by
applying the principles to your life
okay that's a long lesson but it's an
important lesson so let's sit we're only
going to sit for 12 minutes today
because again we had a longer lesson a
reminder when I I won't immediately
start addressing the questions when we
come out of this practice because that's
an opportunity for you to mindfully make
these promises to yourself deep
offending there deep practice of
integration the deep cultivation of
integrity all right so make sure you you
you turn off your phones and do not
disturb
get ready posture will begin when I say
begin
you get
you
you
slowly begin to come out of your
practice trying as best she can to
integrate with your cultivated in your
practice purity consciousness and
cognition
perhaps by reciting the five precepts
promises to yourself right now
so I open your eyes
see if that sense of the commitment to
practicing integration and carry into
the rest of your day as much as possible
we're having a bit of a technical
problem that Jason and Omar are doing
their best to solve for us right now so
I'm going to try and answer some
questions got one here of course I don't
know who it's from
because of the technical glitch I'll
just answer the question I apologize I
can't address you directly after a few
years of mindless meditation I begun to
use it as a thought free zone to
kickstart and I asked myself do you have
something to tell me do you have more
inquiry ideas trying to define the
intent of this question after a few
years of mindless meditation I've begun
to use it as I thought free zone to
kickstart can I ask myself - you have
something to tell me do you have more
inquiry ideas oh I see you want to bring
in the inquiring mindfulness into how
your practice has got you into sort of
just being thought free so so so will
the practice so I'll teach on next
Monday the pressure practice should help
oh sorry first the deepening of the past
no should help that and then the
following the project of practice should
help address that questions so you need
to much more you need to first for it
much more often think about how you are
throughout your day I'm trying to pick
up on another befriending it and as you
build these bridges your life can also
inform try to pick up on throughout the
day how you're moving around your world
and learning and noticing even though
you're not running any
of at least sentences or words or images
through your mind you might you're just
sort of noticing and seeing and then
when you do the meditative questing and
you ask what more can I see what more
can I learn of course that might just
trigger imagery that might just trigger
thoughts but it might because of your
practice you just get that you get that
sort of very pregnant emptiness and then
what you want to do is you want to bring
the five hunters and Corrine mindfulness
into that pregnant emptiness your mind
is if it even though it's empty of
thought it's not empty of being it's not
empty of processed in its unfolding
there's it's still a temperature to it a
texture a tempo and so you want to get
in more into more the the felt aspects
and notice them the way you notice your
room
and explore them as if you were looking
for a lost object bringing those kinds
of skills to bear upon it oh so the last
question that was actually Korea's
question so I hope that was helpful
answer for you at Rima so here's another
question when I'm meditating it feels
like there's an imaginary layer of
sensations on the front side of my body
and I have a hard time distinguishing it
from physical sensations which should
what should I do
imaginary there is on the front side of
my body so don't worry about
distinguishing it right now unless it's
causing you some sort of emotional
distress because what's actually
happening is you now have sort of some
pretty good cognitive science about this
that imagination and perception aren't
two separate things like we used to
think that imagination is actually an
important part of perception that's why
will often use imagination here to try
to Train perception and so what's
happening is the imaginative part of
your processing of your sensory motor
awareness your interoceptive awareness
as well is coming right into prominence
at the same
time is the more perceptible part and
those two are not talking to each other
in a probably a novel fashion so like I
said if it is a constant you sort of
deep distress don't worry about
distinguishing them just get them
together as ways in which you are
enhancing your interoceptive awareness
of your body now if you start just those
other sensations start to spin you off
and displace you into you know thinking
and imagining other situations and
places then that's monkey mind and judge
just then just return to your breath so
it looks like Amara and Jason have
solved the technical problem I can give
people there tell people those names
that previous question was from shaky so
chimera I believe yes next is from Sandy
Alexander I misty League should I do a
marathon to catch up or just jump in I
don't know if you need to do a marathon
of all the sets but I would recommend
going to the lessons you've missed at
least two or three sits for each one of
those lessons throughout this week and
then towards the end of this week
perhaps start bringing in what I talked
today agile Olaf doll would you consider
serotonin enhancing medication as toxic
and escape if you are taking it for
therapeutic reasons I would not consider
a toxic an escape because if you're
taking it for therapeutic reasons for
example if you're using it for treating
depression under somebody's professional
care then you shouldn't remove that
that's not a toxic that's not a toxin
because again think about the principles
if I remove something and then it puts
me into a state where I can't learn and
all I'm doing it all I'm doing is
enduring the suffering of the loss of my
agency or something like that then it's
not a toxin if you're just monkeying
around with things because you want to
sort of make some unpleasant feelings go
away or you want to sort of dull your
awareness
or skew it in particular ways then
perhaps you should consider the fact
that you're using in our toxic manner
the question to ask yourself is is your
use actually affording you the capacity
to learn and to transform and become
more mindful and wiser or is your use
actually preventing them and that's the
way that you decide you decide these
issues functionally there isn't sort of
an absolute answer to a particular
substance itself for example you know
there's indigenous cultures that within
their spiritual practices make important
use of psychedelics I think that's very
much a soppy antral practice of practice
for cultivating wisdom and enhancing
mindfulness enhancing insight improving
their ability to connect to each other
but that's very different than people
who take you know a psychedelic and then
go to a rave so very very different so
and Rafer
I'm having problems with saying the
promises precisely is it okay to make
them into short two-word prominent
pinpoints and meditate on those yes yes
please please never treat any sort of
things I give you as in any way
literally sacrosanct or anything like
that if you can the intent to
integration is all that matters if you
have a formulation of this that it
cultivates help you cultivate on
integration that by all means use that
Josh cells are good to see you again
Josh how can we practice integrating
method does it make sense to recite the
mantra when those feelings arise during
my day
identifying Co identifying there and
then remembering it well tonight yes
well it's meditating yes so try and
throughout the day pick up on like try
don't remember sautee the being mode try
to remember the process of Co
identification try to remember what's
going on there and as Josh says you can
you can practice the met event try to
practice the reciprocal opening
remembering the being mode then in there
you can also take a particularly
challenging or difficult situation are
like the in which you came to that
awareness into a meditative process when
you're doing
you met up with in your city exactly
that's exactly a great way of doing the
integration Josh on Matthew McCready
when we fail to live up to the prom
promises we made to ourselves when we
integrate how do we find the balance of
forgiving ourselves and say I'm
disciplined okay this is a very
important question I hope you're all
like still here that's what I wanted to
say Matthews question is excellent when
you when you violate a promise you're
not so the tradition says tree of
failure with what's called intelligent
regret rather than with guilt
so guilt in the psychological sense not
in the moral sense of taking
responsibility we shouldn't conflate
those together we mix them up when we
get confused I'm not talking about the
moral sense of guilt of taking
responsibility I'm talking about the
psychological sense what we try to
modify our behavior by punishing
ourselves right now that of course you
know that that that's how we got you
know the basics of our sort of our
adulthood going week you know we sort of
punished ourselves and we still
experience guilt but the idea here is
you want to befriend you yourself so if
you are correcting a good friend you you
wouldn't be punitive you wouldn't punish
them what would you do well you'd
practice try to intelligent intelligent
regret with them you try to explain and
understand and see and realize what was
going on so that the person regrets it
so they realized that there was a missed
opportunity the point is not to punish
yourself the point is to ultimately to
encourage yourself to take the practice
up again and to try again next time so
it's very much intelligent regret is
very much like when you've caught
yourself in destruction and you don't
beat yourself up you don't just let go
right you Center your attitude your
Center your attitude on how to come back
into the practice okay everyone thank
you very much for joining thank you to
my dear friend and partner major
my beloved sir Jason especially today we
had a glitch and they are working behind
the scenes tirelessly to make it happen
so please like this stream I've been
told by Martha if people like these
videos that raises the villa bill the
visibility in the YouTube algorithm so
it's much more likely that other people
will come across these videos and take
up this practice which would be I hope
very helpful to them and of course in
consonant with that please share with
other people this meditation practice
these videos especially these troubled
times I'm trying to do this to help
people and you can help me help as many
people as possible please subscribe to
the channel to be notified in the next
video and as I mentioned today you'll
find all kinds of videos on the topics
we are discussing in this class and some
of the night so that I only mentioned
and I can't do at length like altered
states of consciousness right things
about wisdom etc so you can find a lot
there to enrich to both this practice
and enrich and enhance the way in which
you can apply to your life more
comprehensively and transformative Lee
please remember we are doing this every
weekday mornings 9:30 est Mondays for
Dharma days Tuesday through Friday or
six days there are question and answer
periods at the end and every third
Friday we need to do a more general
question and answer live stream so
everyone please try to keep up with your
practice continuity is more important
than quantity that is the Buddha said
there is no enemy worse than your own
mind but there is no ally greater than
your own life take care everyone thank
you see you tomorrow