[Music]
the cognitive complexity of issues that
the world faces is more than a single
person can process single brain that
can't actually hold that cognitive
complexity so it requires collective
intelligence and collective sense we're
probably not going to solve the complex
we give existential problems we face
with individual horsepower of thing
rival wrist games we're probably going
to need to get together and be able to
create a higher form of collective
intelligence and sense making now what
and how so the answer now what is
decentralized collective intelligence
great how how do we do that so this is
film it's an intro to a new series about
collective intelligence and it's also
quite a significant moment I think
because it's about the trajectory of the
channel up until now rounding off part
of that journey of discovery and also
talking about where we're going next and
that also brings in some live events and
we're releasing two films one both of
which I'm really excited about but one
in particular the trial log between
Jamie wheel Jordan green hall and Daniel
SHM Acton burger that was recorded about
three or four months ago members would
have seen it and now we're releasing it
to to everyone and I think it's the it's
the most complete version of what we
this sort of inquiry into collective
intelligence that we've been been not
and that wasn't one where the channels
Sparta but it's where the channels ended
up coherence is this ephemeral
emergent property the best never named
they're never subject to reality
captured reality tunnel capture like
it's that thing then how the hell do
scale it cuz we're storytelling monkeys
and at some point we need recipes to
help the thing propagate so this could
enlist everybody's job Yodas then why
does it always break down mm-hmm why
don't why every time we try to scout us
a breakdown one of the reasons is
because as our friend Lao Tzu discovered
by the way also a friend Buddha
discovered and her friend Jesus
discovered every time the storytelling
monkeys try to turn to a story to tell
they it up
so let's be mindful of that and
recognize that the storytelling piece of
it definitely isn't the answer
and I think this is sort of we're going
to talk about where we're going to go
next but we're also going to summarize
or going to kind of frame it in a way
explain how we think the pieces fit
together and play some clips from some
of those films and some of the other
films we put out on the channel there's
a theme to all of this which is truth so
it's a theme that's been running through
the channel from the very beginning when
you went out to interview Jordan
Peterson - then we covered the
intellectual darkweb phenomena and that
was really about people sitting down and
against the backdrop of an incredibly
chaotic polarized culture where truth
has become hyper relative you know some
people call that post truth world it's
always been a some kind of inquiry and
some kind of quest to say how do we
arrive at truth together so I think the
intellectual dark web those long-form
conversations was a great first step in
that but we've been saying since that
era as well since maybe this time last
year there's a deeper resolution to it
there's a deeper way for us to come into
contact with each other and arrive at
something that feels like it wants to
emerge into the culture so that's kind
of moving into an edge and a novelty
that we haven't quite arrived at yet and
that's very exciting mmm yeah and it's
something that I said in the
conversation with guys hang stock so the
other piece that we're putting out
putting out the trial log and also a
conversation with guys saying stock you
invented circling and we'll talk a bit
more about what that and why we think
that's relevant in a minute but we
talked about how Jordan Pederson and
John Devaki as well had this quality of
there's something in the way they they
talk certainly when they're at their
best where they're they're not they're
going on an exploration and there's a
sense of an emergent journey that
they're going on and you're going with
them that that they kind of that they're
there they're really tapped into an
inquiry it's not just I telling you what
they know they're thinking in real time
I think when people talk about
what they like about Jordan Peterson
they like the experience of hear of
listening to him because both John and
and Jordan you're right they have this
quality of that to understand what
they're saying you must actually think
the thought that they're thinking and
and because they're right at the at onna
just at the her they're just always like
trying to speak what's just beyond the
horizon right and you almost have to
allow yourself to be changed by it yes
yes yes what I love about this piece
that we were going to deliver now in
this whole subject is that it brings
together the big picture the sort of
philosophy the systems change the the
really deep inquiries that some of the
the guests on our Channel have gone into
into the sort of the more interpersonal
interrelated so circling is a form of
inquiry so it's a it's a modality that I
think guy said he came up with it about
20 years ago and came up with it
spontaneously and it took awhile to
actually give it a name but it was a
form of conversation that felt really
alive like how can we have these
conversations that feel really alive
we've all had conversations where we've
come into the conversation one way and
something about the dialogue right maybe
was super personal maybe was
philosophical but there's something
about the meeting such that you walked
away and you are different somehow
you could say is a yoga of those kinds
of conversations it's about whatever
those asanas those postures and
communication it's fundamentally
stretching strengthening that muscle
that is both available and generative of
those kinds of unexpected life-changing
conversations I really enjoyed that
conversation there's an amazing
conversation as well that you have with
John Bob a key that will put the link in
because that was really fascinating and
they both went into this real space of
inquiry together and you can just tell
there's something about that kind of a
live conversation that just registers on
some really deep level whether we're in
it or whether we're watching it and
there's sort of this thirst for that and
it's a it's a difficult thing to do
especially if you're if you have some
kind of public profile and it's
happening in the media where you're
around complicated subject difficult
subjects where people get very triggered
and get very defensive very quickly
which incidentally links back to the
films that we've put out about the kind
of neuroscience of difficult
conversation call it the De Niro science
of polarization but that's incredibly
relevant as well and the need for
psychological safety to have these
conversations slight digression back to
the conversation with Guy there was a
yeah I mean he's an amazing listener
and asked really good questions but I
also found myself entering into a space
of emergence in the conversation just I
was sort of thoughts that I was dimly
aware all the things I hadn't quite put
together were actually being put
together in real time and I was
listening to myself talk and that was a
really that was a really fascinating
process and there's something about
being witnessed in that that allows that
to happen if you're with someone who's
just waiting for their turn to talk or
is kind of automatically filtering what
you're saying into their kind of
pre-existing structure then it's
difficult for that emergence to come
about and we actually teach something in
our workshops called inquiry an inquiry
comes from a slightly different
background it's a little bit older it
comes from the ridwan school or the
diamondettes work and it's kind of like
a talking
so the idea and the way we introduced it
in the workshops is we we say don't tell
a story so even even if you're saying
kind of why you're here and what you're
hoping to get from this experience
don't tell a story try and tap into that
space of where you're surprising
yourself by what you're saying as you're
saying it and I imagine that there might
be people watching who are asking right
now a pretty valid question which is why
bother having a conversation like that
when we could just talk about ideas you
know which is often the way we try and
tackle challenging or complex problems
generally so you might have a debate
around it or we might bash you know bash
the ideas together and I disagree and
you just cream we kind of we might come
to some kind of synthesis it becomes
much easier to connect ideas and for
something new to synthesize in the
conversation because neither of us are
necessarily taking a position and we
know from you know research into
mindfulness and research into similar
practices that there's a pretty
significant brain changes that happen
when we do that especially when we do it
together so there's a lot of evidence
out there for it but I think the most
important thing is testing it out and
noticing qualitatively where is the
difference between when I have I'm in a
position you're in a position to when we
loosen that relax the grip on it and
come with less attachment and more
curiosity and see okay what you know
what's really happening right now as we
talk yeah and it's about whether a
conversation has the capacity to go into
new territory and and that was the
initial promise of the the concept of
the intellectual dark web when it first
arrived there was this sense of it's a
conversation where people could change
their minds I haven't seen a lot of that
I haven't seen a lot of people changing
their minds I haven't seen and my great
hope at the beginning was also this
sense of maybe there could be a
synthesis so the synthesis at the that
could we could see these public events
and then there could be this sort of
synthesis and we'd be able to say okay
we're holding different parts of the
puzzle but but it's coming in the same
direction from evolutionary biology
through to psychology through too many
different lenses that hasn't happened
what was also really interesting with
guy is that he was aware of the channel
and has also kind of looked
the the trajectory that we've been going
on and there's kind of recognized that
we are talking about the same thing
we're talking about that same emergent
quality a lot of the the people on our
channel are talking about that same
emerging quality as well just the fact
that you're listening for the emergent
conversation just just the fact that
that's what you're doing is in itself
impressive to me and also watching how
the people that you're dialoguing with
are in some way coach shaping your
channel and watching the channel evolve
and in such a way where it almost feels
that the very thing that you have your
eye on is is making is making what's
emerging a kind of a self-awareness so
it's almost like rebel wisdom in a
certain sense is this way in which that
which is emerging in the culture is
saying eye to itself and asking itself
questions and stuff so I've just
appreciated the multi dimensions of what
kind of comes through in all the things
that you're doing it really appreciate
it a lot which is the other part of this
synthesis which is the sense that the
the the people who thought I'm most
compelled by and most intrigued by are
also kind of independently I'm sure
they've influenced each other quite a
bit but they're also independently
coming to this position of realizing
that the the real question is is more
about how we come to sense making at all
and how we come to sense making together
how we come to collective sense making
okay so why can't we trust any of the
things that normally look like sense
making well there's a bunch of reasons
but basically we learn how to do
signaling for intentional game theoretic
purposes and so rather than just share
signal that is true and representative
we share signal that will advantage some
rivalries agenda so most signal ends up
being that and one of the things that
you were just saying is a consequence of
it is that there's an ethic
 up the information ecology right
like in the same way that we say don't
pollute and most people get pretty
comfortable that don't throw your
cigarette butt on the ground don't
actually dissin form anybody else for
your own getting ahead or withhold
information where you can avoid doing so
because you're actually disempowering
the sense making of others in the
process and to really be tuned into
though as I'm seeking to make sense I
want to increase other people's
sovereignty in their capacity to make
sense so I want to increase the
intactness of the information ecology
they're exposed to rather than decrease
it but glue together what daniel said
and when you just added to what I was
saying to the degree which I'm playing
this game with complete strangers out in
InfoSpace well never meet I'm probably
gonna lose I don't haven't how much info
info playing which game the game of will
Omega the game of information ecology
cuz multipolar shops someone's gonna be
a dick to agree shouldn't playing with
my wife I'm probably gonna have a better
life that's the idea it is if you're
playing it trying to say okay hold on
I'm trying to solve the game theoretic
problem with complete strangers by
telling the truth anybody who had
interests chance how to do came through
he's gonna say oh you're the one who's
actually the dupe we found this on don't
be Ned stuck
don't pinhead Stark unless you're
actually in Winterfell with your family
then be Ned Stark that's the idea right
don't the key is don't go to King's
Landing yeah
full stop that's the key there's
something john vivek he said when we
interviewed him that comes up for me and
i wonder i'm curious how it maps on to
to what we're talking about right now
because it was the word trans jack which
i think is a fantastic word because i
mean it's it's this sense of normally we
have okay my subjective experience
here's how i feel about this or that and
then we have some attempts between us to
reach an agreement around the around
objective reality so you know but
instead of those two being split off and
completely separated from one another
the idea of a trans Jaken
there's a synthesis between the two and
they're playing off each other
and therefore we in the process of
having the conversation we start to move
towards an objective truth which is
which is also in part subjective so
there's it's a paradox in a sense it's
got the kind of one I'm thinking of or
kind of trying to feel into right now
but I think there are a lot of there's a
difficulty with explaining this kind of
way of having a conversation because
there there are a lot of paradoxes it
seems but the experience of it clicks
it's more of a flow state than a regular
conversation and so things just flow and
make sense and build and grow but it's
really difficult to then condense that
down into talking about it so even what
we're doing now there's there's a
paradoxical quality to it I'm going to
play a little clip from Jordan green
Hall now who links it really nicely so
this is another sort of link I'm sure
people who've been watching the channel
for a while will be aware of this idea
of broadcast and digital where broadcast
is the underlying structure of how we've
run society for millennia since World
War two through a system he calls the
blue church the blue church emerge from
the context of having to figure out how
to navigate all of these changes in
generate coherence how do we get all of
these people with these new capacities
to be able to make sense of the world in
some fashion that is able to then make
choices together and to act effectively
right that's the question and the blue
church developed to be the answer to
that question answer developed the
ability to save for example use the
education system to establish an
embodied sense of vertical meritocratic
hierarchy it's very important that first
part that there's a relationship between
authority and receptor that has a
broadcast modality so the blue church is
very broadcast across its entire mode
there's very good reasons to believe
that the blue church is done meaning
that it's in the senescence stage and
senescence has a characteristic where
when you move into the senescence stage
you tend to go downhill pretty quickly
now what and how so the answer now what
is decentralized collective intelligence
there's a developmental curve this idea
of rate and state is pretty good here so
blue church state of sense making choice
making an actuation high rate down it's
getting less effective over time
decentralized collective intelligence
state low rate high so there's going to
be a crossover point what we see is on
occasion we'll see a breakthrough where
this new thing has reached a point of
criticality where it's capacities are
now good enough to show this actually
effective in the visceral world visa vie
the fading legacy and I think now it's
actually becoming rope to the
commonplace if you kind of see the the
struggle between blue church normative
good opinion and new structures of sense
making and new structures of meaning
making a new tough structures of how
those are beginning to try to cohere
into actually sovereign collective
intelligences that are able to do the
whole the whole thing but we're a bit of
the way is there for sure it'll take
certainly single-digit years and
possibly double-digit years for the
whole thing to come together to a point
where it's transitioned formally almost
going to play a little clip from Jamie
Weil who in quite a few interviews we've
done talks about how this kind of
emergent coherence or emerging
collective intelligence seems like it
keeps breaking down what I've been
seeing lately paying attention to this
space is it's starting to bubble up but
it feels like a wildly unstable element
and it's breaking my heart / freaking me
out
/ concerning me that we are efforts to
create group coherence seemed to be
going so badly so far and so I'm deeply
committed to figuring out what are the
rate limiters / Achilles heels missing
links that can help us at least stop you
know failing forward making you better
different mistakes because it feels like
our efforts right now are actually just
the last half century red ducks with
very
or go forward learning happenings means
various reasons for that it's sort of
any kind of ideological certainty walnut
caused it to break down which in a lot
of these environments because they're
probably quite liberal in sort of spiral
dynamics terms quite green often that
kind of ideological certainty shows up
as identity politics sort of a trauma
based identity which then often will
hijack that the kind of the collective
agency of the project he's talked about
that a few times and I've actually had
several recent somewhat you know
puzzling saddening frustrating
experiences in groups of rarefied air
you know these are down to you know
Caribbean islands with famous
billionaires to solve ocean conservation
or gatherings of you know wealth holders
and wisdom keepers so indigenous elders
plus high net-worth families and family
offices with you know everybody with
incredibly good intentions and saw one
hijacked in a heartbeat around gender
and sort of me two issues which was not
the topic of conversation and another
one about ocean conservation hijacked
around race and you're like we're here
to try and save the oceans this isn't
even a human dynamic and someone would
the tiniest propagation got triggered
into a personal trauma response and then
into a socio-political ideological
trauma response and just kicked the
entire house of cards down and you
realize oh we have to figure that
part out and and if and my sense is is
you know Ben Franklin you know when they
sign the Declaration of Independence he
said alright gentlemen and I said yes he
said a republic if you can keep it let
that bit that everybody knows but he
also said we must all hang together or
we shall assuredly hang separately
and so that's where we are right now and
so identity politics which are it which
is fundamentally a group
of collectively traumatized folks
forming an identity around that trauma
right identity politics of all stripes
and this doesn't matter left or right
they can be in cells outright 4chan wack
nuts or it could be social justice
warriors right and and and that entire
community
I would I would advocate that community
on the progressive left is right they
absolutely all those folks all those
dispossessed out groups have been
subject to abuses of long term
entrenched power over time they're just
not being effective at all and in fact
there are the only people they're the
only people that they are harming is the
center left for well-intentioned
progressives who do have access to the
instruments of patriarchy post colonial
oppression money markets platform and
those are the only popes they're even
subject give a about their critique
center-right is saying oh no that's way
too extreme from my value sets my
position my experience so I'm actually
getting pushed away and alright is
gleefully trolling the libs and watching
this circular firing squad on the Left
go down and weaponizing all the tools of
postmodern classical academia whether
that's freedom of speech or help help
I'm being oppressed or my voice must be
heard too and they're actually just
turning and weaponizing the tools of the
progressive left against themselves so
it is a stock rating show all
around and the key is is if I go back
into my trauma and even my in groups the
shared experience of trauma and the
stories around that and I set any it's a
little bit like kids playing you know
sort of all day monopoly games back in
the day you know when we couldn't you
run out of bank notes and then you'd
start having to write IOU it's like I
owe you 1 million extra dollars for
landing on board or gourmet fare or
whatever it would be right at some point
we have to come to the conclusion that
my io u--'s what's owed me to fill the
hole I believe I have from those
traumatic experiences is dwarfed by the
potential pain and suffering we're all
staring at coming down the pike if we
don't get our together and learn to
hang together so identity politics are a
structural roadblock right now in from
anything resembling group coherence on a
collective mobilized scale and I think
the only way through it and people
experience this as well because there
were in that wisdom keepers wealth
holders retreat that I was invited to
attend and speak at there were Lakota
and DNA elders so from the Navajo
community and Lakota Sioux communities
and there and actually also someone from
Guyana so so the experiencing you know
all sorts of kind of birth African
Diaspora into you know South American
colonial expression and their effect was
fundamentally different than the San
Francisco's social justice warrior crowd
fundamentally different they had a and
arguably had been experiencing far more
egregious oppression and trauma for many
for even more generations but they had
come out on the other side of love and
they had come out on the other side of
open embrace and it wasn't squishy
it wasn't new agey it was fierce and it
was unapologetically in that stand but
it was integrated you could absolutely
tell integrated humans from wounded
activists and the integrated humans is
what Martin Luther King called soul
force okay and they were sourcing from
soul force and it was palpable I mean
Here I am two months later still talking
about that experience that three or four
days with those people and how much it's
impacted just my thinking and feeling
about these subjects so the question is
is can we create catharsis right the
extent the metabolizing of our trauma
the digesting of our grief such that I'm
no longer separate in my pain body and
my narrative that wraps me around that
so it's interesting because in Jamie's
book stealing fire he explores and maps
out the groups who are doing this really
well so whether it's the Navy SEALs or
you know high-performing sports teams
one of the things he points out is that
when it's done well when you really get
a group of people together who are in
that coherence you have to be ruthless
in it you have to be ruthlessly
selective and get rid of I think what he
calls the gray man is the phrase that
comes out which is that person who isn't
quite there and when push comes to shove
when the bullets are flying or when
you're two points down that's the person
who ends up breaking everyone else's
flow so I kind of had that in my mind
right now because we're on the cusp of
launching our own experiment in this
area the the rebel wisdom collective
intelligence lab and that's you know
we've we've that's an open question I
know that gets us Jamie's inquiry and it
becomes very relevant actually thinking
of ok how how does one go about building
an experiment around this because it's
simultaneously I think has to be has to
have that selection in it to see ok what
group of people can together you know
how can we all go somewhere new so
there's a certain element of being
ruthless about it but then of course
there's the element of wanting to create
a container and experience that allows
people to relax also means not being too
ruthless so that's a that's a tension I
suppose I think that there's two memes
at work at the moment there's the meme
of collapse
and there's the meme of phase-shift and
I think that it's certainly there's a
lot of sense of collapse out there and
that's a that's a big thing that's
certainly among the intellectual circles
that we're connected to and then there's
a sense of what if that is actually a
phase shift what is that that that's
sort of what the piece that gangwish
Mettenberger in particular is bringing
I'm saying we need an epoch shift it is
not the continuation of the current
curve that is a discrete nonlinear phase
shift and that if we think about it as
just continuation of current curves okay
these things are getting better with
tech let's just hope they keep getting
better it doesn't work and so but if we
say what are the necessary and
sufficient criteria of a civilization
that doesn't self germinate in the
presence of the emerging power we can
actually identify what those criteria
are and they're actually things that we
can do then that becomes the only mo
that makes sentences working to bring
that about so in the conversation that
guy sang stock had with John de Bakey
that was really yeah it's a beautiful
sort of emergent conversation between
the two of them there was one piece was
a couple of things that they said that
just felt like real gems and one of it
was that circling is about being alive
to what wants to emerge and being an
inquiry around what wants to emerge and
that's very much
I think where we've tried to orient the
channel in terms of the kind of subjects
that we're covering and I want to talk a
little bit about that cuz it feels
certainly glitching the matrix was
really about a moment of kind of making
sense of the Trump and brexit reaction
the Jordan Pederson Kathy Newman
interviewers Allen's to say look there's
two worldviews here and this one the
mainstream media in particular has got a
low-resolution version of the of the
truth that is no longer fit for purpose
and that was that was really then we've
done a lot of interviews around sort of
pushing back against that sort of the
holes in the liberal worldview and I
think that that's still a valuable
perspective but I think it's also a dead
end of just being and I think a lot of
people are stuck there I sort of look at
the comments threads sometimes and
there's an awful lot of people that are
still in that space and there is a
partial truth there but it's only a
partial truth and I feel personally less
and less we can also talk about who in
the IDW the intellectual dark web has
become stuck in that as well but there's
a lot of people that just just want to
kind of hear that and you can always
find enough evidence that the left has
gone crazy and as someone who certainly
feels politically homeless there is a
sense that the left has gone crazy in a
lot of ways but there's craziness on
both sides and if you're only seeing one
side of the picture then you're almost
certainly likely to be ideologically
captured on the other side I've started
noticing certainly over the last six
months at least that people I know input
in fairly progressive circles they know
how damaging identity politics is and it
doesn't feel like it's a sort of
something that I'm I feel an urgent need
to make people aware of most sensible
people in progressive circles who I know
are
recognize him and there's a problem and
so banging the drum continues to be like
doesn't seem particularly productive
this is exactly yeah just after I'd
finished saying those last things that
was exactly the missing piece that I
realized that conversation I think we've
seen so many people from Jamie wheel
onwards who said he had his kind of
awakening moment a couple of years ago
where he's like whoa I got taken down by
vitriol and hate from the left that I
never expected to be there and I've seen
that
likewise time and time again so I don't
feel the need to keep pushing at that at
that door I'm interested in where are
the possibilities for synthesis with
those people who started to notice the
toxicity on on their side and both sides
to be honest because it those kind of
perhaps psychology and damaged people
exists on all sides of the of the
spectrum I think there is a danger of
getting stuck in there because it
becomes its own ideology and it also has
the detrimental effect of encouraging us
to see the other as their ideology or
their belief system rather than a much
more complex human which is what exactly
what the kind of conversations that
we're talking about help us to do and it
becomes less important what the
ideological leaning is because that
that's quite surface level and once we
get down to the level of values and then
even further into the individual story
and that all of those things mix
together much of the conflict in my
experience much of the conflict kind of
drops away doesn't mean we agree on
everything but it means that we have
some kind of we can even disagree and
have you know this kind of back and
forth with that but we're disagreeing is
to human beings not to projections of
different belief systems so we've been
talking about a lot recently in planning
a lot for the autumn is how do we do
this practically or how do we start
experimenting with doing this
practically one really useful practical
tool that we have Daniel Spartanburg
Jordan Hall Jamie we're talking about is
something called ruler mega but actually
was feeling into and wanted to speak to
the kind of topology you were noticing
because there's a something that I
noticed about they
is actually really nice so we could ask
is it because Jamie was sitting in the
corner and it's literally just the
physicality of it there's probably a
number of factors but it makes heaps of
sense it you and I have actually got to
have more conversations on these topics
more recently than we have there's kind
of an assumed knowing we didn't all get
to jam before on this or prepare this
this is real-time extemporaneous and I
don't know if you've ever even expressed
Rule Omega to Jamie but he's just doing
it yeah and he's kind of openly
inquiring into the questions that are
really alive and it's a little bit
easier for us to riff off with each
other saying because we've got some
recently shared language on these things
and but the rule Omega is actually a
really simple practical thing that I
towards coherence that I would like
everybody here to get is if if Jordan
are talking or if you and I are talking
like we we have this and I think we
naturally have it it's worth making
explicit is if you say something that
sounds ridiculous to me or batshit crazy
or wrong I actually give the benefit of
the doubt that you might have a reason
that I didn't understand first so rather
than just default into you're probably
wrong I'll ask more questions and and
that giving the benefit of the doubt
that you actually might have something
useful to say increases my making sure
that I understand you before I'm
responding and that actually and the
disagreeing was something that you
weren't even saying because I didn't
seek to understand well enough creates
very turbulent flow rather than laminar
flow breaks down coherence right if
people could just do that towards
coherence if they could just give the
benefit of the doubt that each other
that everyone has some signal even if
it's on a very different part of reality
than the court they're focused on and
even if there's noise involved and
they're listening for the signal first
that would change everything that's a
starting place
so Daniel expresses something and let's
see he's trying to express something is
hard which by the way the rule make is
designed for that kind of a thing like
I'm not interested in having
conversations that aren't actually
trying to break new ground so okay do it
dude
so you expressing something hard and in
the expression ninety-eight percent is
noise and two percent is signal like the
jazz riff but what happens is that my
job is to actually do two things one
hold all of it not just say it that
was that wasn't a hundred percent right
so I'm just gonna nuke it hold all of it
then in myself
discernment to what degree can i express
something back that gets rid of the
fifty fifty percent that is noise so now
I've got six percent signal express it
back and of course if he can then do
that and now you three is even better a
more profound instrument because you're
gonna be bringing a different
perspective perhaps you can take it and
actually zoom in on it down to the poem
we're actually 50% signal that's the
idea right and so one it's an invitation
say hey we're trying to do something's
hard let's all try to do something
that's hard to be willing to take the
risk of not speaking elegantly and on
the premise that everyone else is doing
their absolute level best to hear
that which is trying to speak itself
through you and listening in is in
themselves like oh there it is tone got
it there's something beautiful and clear
there here's what I heard and that's
real Omega and there's a psychological
safety that's created to be able to try
out new stuff knowing that we know we're
trying out new stuff we're giving the
benefit of the doubt so it actually does
become more explorative and that's where
you get more novelty and then I imagine
I don't know if this is true for Daniel
I imagine it's true for you but
certainly if it's true for me is that
I'm also noticing in myself like this
constant you know when you're meditating
you feel this this constant chatter and
flow of like all the things that are
going on internally that are either like
certain ideas are popping up or
emotional responses some of them are
like social emotional responses some of
them are like just like I got a P and
like being able to actually notice all
that chatter internally
and do the discernment interior and say
okay ball that chatter which have a
heart that's actually signal oh but
listen to all of it you have to have you
we're gonna make it goes in and out
right I'm listening to myself fully and
I'm listening to the to the others fully
and trying to use discernment to
continuously allow that process to turn
that into gold now there's a really
important distinction that we're saying
something that is different than the way
that some people think about multi
perspectivism
which is we're not saying I'm not saying
all perspectives are equally valid and
I'm also not saying that there is no way
to integrate them into higher order
understanding I'm saying all
perspectives have some signal generally
have some noise and that perspective is
itself a reduction of information on the
reality being perceived and that's
actually quantum foam live at all from
just the definition actually of observer
observing observed I can't take myself
out of reality to observe it in a
unitary way and if I'm observing you now
versus in a different state I'm gonna
observe different things right someone
else at a different time if I'm
observing the west side of the house
versus the east side of the house versus
the aerial view versus inside the house
they all give me some signal some truth
about the nature of the house none of
them give me the whole truth of the
nature of the house because it's a 3d
object with interior already in depth
and I can't collapse it perfectly into a
2d picture right so perspective itself
is a reduction on information complexity
so the first part I give rule Omega to
myself that my perspective has some
signal but I'm also positive it's
incomplete
I think it's necessary to kind of put a
little flag in there and say that you
can't do this sort of thing with
everyone if people are showing up not
able to or not wanting to enter into
that kind of dialogue I don't think you
can
think you can I think you have to both
parties or more than one party have to
be willing and able and attempting to
enter into the kind of inter subjective
conversation but I'm really struck by
some of the images and analogies that
are used and that's the idea of the jazz
riff and I'm noticing that as a player
in the jazz band that feeling of not
being subordinated to the whole but
actually somehow being supported in
achieving a higher level of
individuation is felt and it feels like
there also needs to be a tolerance for
ambiguity and a willingness to get messy
so back to the jazz guys I mean
consistently the most righteous jams
come out of kind of going you down into
the mud as a band you know someone's
often doodling exploring a theme or you
know and it's not actually danceable
it's not anything and it's even to the
point of just unspooling entirely and
then some Quicksilver starlight comes
out of that and you know and then it all
gels and it's that patience to your
point about timing Jordan you know it's
the patience to let it all come undone
in order to come back together in some
new emergent form that seems almost
essential and I don't know that when you
were described cuz I mean as soon as you
described organisms organs and that I
was like oh yeah okay so social media
digital narcissism scraping
everybody else's Jam biting people's
rhymes poaching people's Dhamma feels
like the cancerous impulse that we're
experiencing right now and when we come
when we glimpse this emergence or of
coherence it's sort of like oh you're
you know your life's work and special
like the thing you're uniquely designed
to do you know what in a traditional
sense might be called Dhamma you know
fits perfectly with the thing I'm
uniquely here to do and holy I was
carrying this thing it was lonely it was
hard it was scary it was heavy but now I
think that actually these pieces lay
down beside each other and now we're
actually beginning to see a picture that
none of us held and none of
can see and that to me is like I think
how this happens but on the other hand
we're also having people be like oh
that's a pretty damn picture let me just
scribble it and snap a selfie and
post it so the implicit morals as well
which actually reminds me of there's a
there's a camu phrase where you said
well I know most certainly about
morality
io2 football which was beautiful and
it's sort of we we know these implicit
rules like these implicit rules in
football is for example if you give the
ball away there's an incentive on you to
get to get it back there's you always
stick up for your for your buddies
there's there's yeah there's an ethic of
fair play that you're playing within
that you're all implicitly aware of and
I think the jazz riff is a really
beautiful thing because if you play
music you know kind of what that means
it's like as soon as you bring into this
egoic space of I'm gonna shine anyone
elses expense or you're not kind of
picking up your own weight then we
understand what that feels like
I love the jazz metaphor it's very kind
of alive for me and also what I think is
useful about it is it's really worth
keeping in mind I think with this whole
idea or this whole experiment of
building collective intelligence is that
there is a flow and a kind of messiness
and fun to it as well as well as doing
as kind of all coming together and you
know perhaps talking about ideas that
are very important there is a there's a
fluidity to it and there's a joy to it
ideally no there's a kind of yeah there
should be some element I think or is
some element of messiness to it where
we're feeling into things and we're
making mistakes and we're fixing them
and we're we're kind of together forming
something so that that aliveness I think
is really important to highlight and
bring out I guess if people are
convinced like okay this is possible
it's it's possible to do in certain
environments and maybe one on one with
with your partner for example to create
intimacy in small groups of people
collect creating this sort of more than
the sum of its parts that's there's a
big difference or there's a big gap
still from how do you take something
that might be possible in small group
and a whole shift of society what the
green Hall Shmack to burger talk about
game a versus game be game a being sort
of rivalry zero-sum game theoretic
dynamics to something else and I really
loved an analogy that Jordan used in the
trial log about a supersaturated
solution I'm gonna play the clip now
we're all familiar that issue that how a
supersaturated solution does a phase
transition into crystallization that I
think is the answer if you actually do
this thing where what your your field
effect which is to say your open source
broadcast is bringing more and more
people into a poised state where their
ability to move into coherence is
becoming easier and easier and easier
then when as up happening is that a
small amount that actually does drop
into coherence creates a crystallization
phase transition that could actually
scale extremely rapidly so I guess the
analogy there is that by disseminating
this and I guess mainstreaming the
practices well I don't think there's a
shortcut to getting there it's it's
something you can't talk your way to we
have to do the the work of tuning the
instrument so it kind of continued that
the jazz metaphor and that that involves
dealing with all of the individual
things that we have that will bring us
out of the ability to be incoherent to
other people that defensiveness or that
our own personal stuff and it's a tool
to develop I mean we've been doing we've
trained as counselors using this method
done quite a lot of inquiry I I'm still
definitely learning this experience and
it's it's it's something that we get
better and better I guess it's like
learning to meditate or something like
that it's something that very very very
few people are actually you would say
like good at it able to kind of achieve
really transformational states but to be
able to start doing that kind of work
and and to learn to tune the instrument
into what's feeling alive what's feeling
emergent in the moment is is the work to
be done but there's only so much that
can be done by too
talking about it and so yeah I would say
it is work but it's also play it they're
they're kind of combined there's a
fluidity to it and it's a much more it's
a wonderful skill I think like you said
it's a skill that I think we're we're
forever learning so what we're doing is
we've planned three sessions of what
we're calling the rebel wisdom
collective intelligence lab and they're
going to take place in London so it's
three evenings in October and we're
selecting a group of what we're hoping
to kind of all experiment together with
different practices so different
modalities so from so you know we
already mentioned circling meditation
breath we're still developing what's
actually gonna happen in those evenings
and from that I think we'll all get a
sense of okay what really worked what
really allowed us to have a conversation
that went somewhere deeper and so we're
going to combine the conversation with
the practices and the conversation might
be around a topic that that's quite you
know culturally punchy or difficult to
discuss so that we can actually see what
actually made it easier for us to go
there with each other even if we know
disagree on it could we get some kind of
synthesis together what practice was it
we don't know yet you know we have some
I have some ideas about what might work
but I'm also quite excited to be proven
completely wrong and discover something
completely new yeah and for me that's
why this feels like a kind of
punctuation point in the evolution of
the project because it's all of these
techniques and all of this collective
intelligence work only works when it's
pointed in a certain direction but
there's there are things that we that we
will need to be discussing so the
conversations around hot-button
political or cultural topics with this
as the sort of operating system is is
the content so this is more about the
form and I think that the the the
journey of the channel has been
increasingly sort of getting down to the
the foundations it's like what are the
foundations what is required okay I
think this is the foundation these are
the foundations and the only way to do
that is to to go into it is to each of
do the work of finding out how we're
closed down and reopening to curiosity
to openness to kind of evolutionary the
evolutionary current pull onto the
better work and and trying to avoid
framing it in any language that sounds
too loaded in whatever way but also
realizing that most modalities most
languages have some signal
so it's extracting what is really useful
from those from those frames and I think
from this particular sort of counseling
personal growth frame there's some
incredibly useful stuff that I think
needs to become part of the conversation
because the reason why these
conversations are breaking down is
because of a neglect and I miss on and
and a lack of understanding of exactly
that so if anyone's interested in that
we'll put the link below this video to
express your interest on our website
yeah I guess there's also the
possibility and the hope that if we
create something that kind of works as a
protocol we can then roll it out
there's we're always being contacted by
people around the world saying we do
events in our cities or and perhaps if
we come up with a rebel wisdom protocol
that's something that we can roll out
and open source that kind of information
open source that that structure which
leads me on to a little kind of direct
appeal if you're not a subscriber or
supporter of us please do consider being
a supporter it basically is how we are
funding how we're able to keep going we
are a sense making enterprise and we're
really looking to expand in all the
different ways that we can we're looking
to make more films we're looking to run
more events we're looking to employ more
people if we can and of course if you do
become a supporter there's lots of
benefits to that there's a lot of
exclusive films on the website and we
also do regular group calls or for all
of our high-value supporters where for
this latest one we've got John Vevey key
coming in and asking questions answering
questions sorry and also this sense of a
sort of building community of
who are asking very similar questions
which I know it's been of a lot of value
to the supporters who've already done it
and it's real value to us as well
because we get to connect with you and
hear from you sort of take the
temperature of where this sort of
sense-making Enterprise is going and to
be honest the relationships with the
supporters is really really valuable for
that it's a sense making check and
they're constantly coming up with ideas
coming up with questions and part of
directing the evolution of the channel
in many different ways if you resonate
with what we're doing helping us do more
of it and knowing that we'll be keeping
going and doing more of this stuff
whatever it is
you