[Music]
Tarson great to see you again yeah it's
good to see you again David so just a
little bit of backstory we've been
putting out a few pieces recently with
Brett Weinstein a lot to do with his
discussion with Richard Dawkins in
Chicago where he I think the consensus
is that he certainly challenged Dawkins
pretty solidly on his sort of new
atheist dismissal of religion a lot of
people seem to have been persuaded by
that and then another couple of pieces
as well where he was reflecting on the
sam harris and jordan peterson debates i
am really interested so often after that
you got in touch with me to say let's
catch up because i know we both think
that this conversation is really really
important and why did you get in touch
what what what did you feel sort of
watching those brett those interviews
with brett well I think that the I think
it's very anyway I'm very happy that
that discussion with Dawkins happened
but I think I'm left kind of a bit I
would say not frustrated or feeling like
this isn't going far enough and the
sense that I get from Brett because I
listened to the interviews that you did
with him is the same impression that I
got when I had a discussion with him in
Vancouver about was a year and a half
ago now um is that he views religion
let's say as a series of heuristic
formulations that you could call the
rules that if you follow them then you
have a better chance to survive let's
say but I think what's missing is to
understand just how deep religion what
religion is addressing is not so much a
bunch of rules but is rather structural
that is it is it is representing the
very structure of reality in the manner
in which consciousness engages with
reality and so it's a far deeper issue
that's we're dealing with and so when I
hear Rhett saying things like you know
we can't rely on these old texts because
you know they're all dated and they're
talking about things that aren't
relevant it's because he's looking at
the surface rules he's looking at the
surface details but he's not looking at
the patterns of behavior and the
patterns
in the stories and in the rituals which
are there to rather do things like
establish space establish time establish
hierarchy establish our relationships to
others within a unity and so all of that
is really what religion is dealing with
I guess you'd you'd agree that he's
going further than someone like Sam
Harris was for example I think so I
think that Brett is able to see at least
the utility of religion or at least a
utility that religion religion has had
in the past and so that's kind of
something that he wants to offer up to
religious people hoping in a way that
then religious people will feel less
offended by evolutionary theory so I
think that in a way he's kind of lending
a hand out but there's something in the
way that he lends his hand out that's
also kind of condescending because he's
saying you know religion is this but
people who have thought deeply about and
some people do think that it's true if
you meet some common person on the
street they might think some those types
of things about religion just like if
you ask them about evolution
they'll have silly ideas about evolution
the problem is that religion isn't isn't
democratic there's something that is
kind of the patterns in them although
they can be discussed they're rather
stable um and so I always get the
feeling like no you're not you're not
dealing with what it's really about
which is this more structural element of
human consciousness because what's
really interesting is you posted on
Facebook a clip from Jordan Peterson he
was on the Dave Rubin show quite
recently with Ben Shapiro
and it was a brilliant clip and I'm
gonna play it in a second and it was
about five minutes or so where he talks
about it's as if there's a structure
underlying being and it's a brilliant
enunciation of sort of a religious
understanding of the world and you
posted it and I think you said something
like wow he goes deeper than he's ever
gone before or something like that and I
sent it to Brett because I talked to
Brett quite a lot about these questions
on an off-camera in Portland and said
what do you make of this and Brett's
pretty much said yeah I completely agree
Jordan is pretty much
supporting my position on this and so
this is really fascinating you both had
such a strong reaction or a different
reaction to the exactly the same piece
let's play it now and then we'll pick up
off the back of that well so here's
here's the idea and it bears on your
question although I don't exactly know
how it's as if there's a spirit at the
bottom of things that is that is
involved in the in the in the bringing
to being of everything so like so for
example people talk about evolution as a
random process but that's not true it's
not true the mutations are random but
there's also a lot of sources other
sources of genetic variant variation but
the selection mechanisms are not random
so now then the question is what are the
selection mechanisms so I'm going to
have to go a bunch of well here's one
selection mechanism it's like so human
females are very sexually selective
that's why you have twice as many female
ancestors as male ancestors so the male
failure rate for reproduction is twice
that of the females okay so the question
is well how is it that males succeed
differentially and the first answer is
well females reject if human females
reject but then the question might be
well they reject on the basis of what
and the answer is well it's something
like competence and then the question is
well how is competence defined and then
the answer to that is well men put
themselves in hierarchies and they vote
on each other's competence and it's
really counterintuitive in some sense
from a evolutionary perspective because
you'd have to ask yourself why would men
put themselves in positions where they
elevate some men in status and then give
them a huge rep reductive advantage
given that that's to their reproductive
disadvantage in some sense ok and there
are reasons part of that might be let's
say you decide to follow the best leader
in a battle well then you don't die like
he might get all the women but you don't
die so at least you're still in the game
and it might be the same if you're
following the greatest hunter and the
greatest hunter wouldn't be the person
who was best at bringing down the game
it would be the person who is best at
bringing down the game and sharing it
and organizing the next hunt
all of that right and so men will
organize themselves into groups and
privilege certain men and that puts them
ahead in the reproductive hierarchy and
so what that means to some degree is
that there's a spirit of masculinity
that's shaping the entire structure of
human evolutionary history that's what
that means and then I think okay well
that might just be a biological epic
phenomenon and so it would be a spirit
that it's the spirit of positive
masculinity that manifests itself across
epochal ages millions of years perhaps
and it actually has shaped our
consciousness actually and so you can
think about that as a figure and it
would be the figure that emerges it's
like it's like the it's like this it's
like the essential spirit of all the
great men who defined what greatness
constituted that's a spirit okay now
that's a purely biological explanation
you could say well that's gone for all
intents and purposes you might have an
image of that built right into you even
the sense that you can experience
something divine and paternal might be
merely a reflection of that evolutionary
process so that would be a biologically
reductive argument for the existence of
what we experience as God but then
there's another possibility too which is
that that's actually reflective of a
deeper metaphysical reality that has to
do with the nature of consciousness
itself and I would say that I think
that's true is I believe the biological
case and I believe the biologically
reductive case but I don't think that
exhausts it I think that there's a
metaphysical layer underneath that that
the bile or that the biology is a
genuine reflection of and that's the
sort of the macrocosm above and the
microcosm below that we that we are
really reflective including in our
consciousness of something about the
structure of reality itself and that
might involve whatever whatever it is
that God is I think that in the
discussion that's been a that's been
going along with Jordan and the new
atheist and Jordan you know based on
discussions that I have it privately
with him I felt like this is something
that he had never really said in public
which he had enunciated in private think
that he was tyent trying to deal with
which is that he's been able to build
this bottom up case for let's say the
structures of religion or the idea of
deities or the or the notion
of the the Heavenly Father let's say
he's been able to build it up and
explain quite well how you know certain
biological processes will lead to this
this formulation or to these images but
what he hasn't done so much when he was
doing that there is to say the reason
why those patterns brought about these
images in the first place is because
they necessarily have to be a
representation of reality itself or at
the reality to the extent that we can
engage with it and so the notion is that
the reason why this images pops up and
comes up bottom-up is because it is
participating ended up the structure of
reality itself and so the image of of
deities of deities or of God or of the
transcendent they are capturing
something about the manner in which
reality works itself so that's why when
we engage in those patterns in those
structures that's why they then become a
a way to make the dates for Humanity to
thrive or for the human species to to
continue I know if that makes sense well
I mean the question that comes up I
guess is that that may be true and I
think I think in that he also says that
the danger here is that you're
explaining religion versus explaining
religion away and I think Jordan in that
clip says something about you can
explain it this way it is a pattern of
being that doesn't exhaust the
possibility that there's a metaphysical
structural there's a metaphysical aspect
to it as well and I guess but the idea
is that why is there this pattern of
being that's what we got kind of come
back to is that why does reality lay
itself out this way why does and and he
hits the nail right at the right place
which is he talks about how it's
basically the structure of consciousness
so this hierarchy that this higher key
that he sets up is the structure of
consciousness and so that's why there
are analogies that say between the
hierarchy sets up in terms of this idea
of the spirit of the Father which kind
of rises up and manifests itself as this
transcendent father
and also it's an it's analogous to the
idea of space which is you know you
create a center of space and then you
lay out a space around it the notion of
a center of time around which a cycle
will will then proceed and so all these
are at the center of a community in
terms of a chief or in terms of an ideal
that everybody gathers around and
creates unity around this this thing
that is above them and so that this idea
is that the reason why this is is
because it's the shape of consciousness
and consciousness becomes the analogy to
the structure of the cosmos sets up
where this are the way in which we
interact with what causes the universe
to exist if the idea is that the pattern
is not arbitrary it has it's not it
could not have been in another way it
that's the pattern of reality but I mean
I guess I can follow you up to a point
my what I am wondering about is why is
that specifically Christian in in that
sense what do you are it's not
specifically Christian it's not
receiving Christian it all I think that
all religions are addressing this
mystery are dealing with this mystery in
a way that's why there are so many
analogies in in all the different
religions that's why you know for
example this idea of centered space this
notion of centered time the idea of
rituals of establishment are there in in
all religions I think that in terms of
Christianity would it let's say what it
has offered is the let's say them this
point or this this bringing it all
together in the you know in the person
of Christ but doing that in a manner
which also brings it back into us which
you know st. Paul talks about Christ in
us that that's that that Christ has
revealed to us the mystery hidden from
the beginning of time which is Christ in
you and so Christ also brings it into
the the person and and so you have this
possibility of participating in the life
of God and so the idea most let's say
even at the early stages of Christianity
you know people like Justin Martyr
talked about how Socrates how Plato were
Christians before Christ in the sense
that they they participated in the life
of the low
and so it's not a strange thing for
Christians to believe that Christianity
is kind of the is is is a combination of
this story and so it's all religions
somehow participate in that story hmm
and you you've said before just before
we started recording you think this is
where this conversation needs to go I
mean I've got a sense of there's a
there's either an expansion of the word
atheist to to say okay
atheism doesn't mean believing in a God
outside of space and time creating
something but it could mean an imminent
and in an imminent creative principle
that that doesn't need to have a sort of
religious substructure or do you not
think that's possible well I think that
the first thing that needs to happen is
I think that atheism needs to grapple
with classical theism needs to grapple
not with kind of modern visions of kind
of modern evangelical and modern
fundamentalist thinking but needs to
grapple with a more profound mystical
vision of theism which is that it's not
so much that we understand God as this
being that's outside of the world who
created it and almost like he's just
this very very big invisible being who
creates the world that is not what what
traditional Christians believe they they
believe that God is transcends all of
creation because he's the source of all
manifestation he's the he's the source
of everything that happens but he's also
within he's also the root let's say the
ground of being you would say he's the
root of all things that as they appear
and then he's also hidden in each aspect
of manifestation and so the logos is the
purpose of things or the logos of things
is hidden in all all manifestation
without a center without a purpose
without a logos the world doesn't exist
and that's where we get into this idea
of attention and the notion of you know
this notion of salience and and this new
kind of consciousness science which
which notice is how in order for us to
perceive something
there needs to be kind of this coming
together and just you know these these
uh you know like for me to perceive a
microphone there's some strange magical
thing which needs me makes me capable of
perceiving that all the parts of the
microphone somehow cohere into something
which is above all its parts that's
actually a description of something that
sank lights st. Maximus would talk about
that hidden in all manifestation that
all level is are these hidden sparks
these hidden purposes that human
consciousness engages with and the human
being becomes the laboratory into which
all of these things come together we're
kind of co-creators we participate in
the existence of the world through
through through our capacity for logos
and reason and and consciousness and in
that conception is is God identified
with the totality of everything or is it
you know God God is God has to God has
to both transcend everything but then
also underlie everything and so it's not
you the problem with talking about God
is a totality of everything is a that
it's it's kind of like this quantitative
thing it's almost like you take the
entire universe and that would be God
but then how does that also come how
does everything come into one how can
you even say everything and so above
that everything appears this infinite
non sayable unmentionable possibility
which is you know the divine essence or
you know that I always say the infinite
is the best way to talk about it and
that's the highest vision of God in a
kind of traditional theistic way in a
vision and how do you think this
conversation should move on well I think
I think that there are two things first
is exploring the place of consciousness
and I really would wish I really wished
and I think I've said this to you before
I really wish that that salmon and
Jordan when they talk could have talked
more about consciousness because the the
this notion that the world kind of that
consciousness participates in the way
the world lays itself out and that's our
primary in
your face let's say with the world
before science let's say that science
comes second the first interface we have
with the world is this phenomenological
reality of encountering the world and so
plunging into that is what's going to
help people understand what religion is
talking about and it also helped people
to demystify some of the language that
religion uses because it's taking that
point of view as being the first point
of view and so you know like I always
tell people it's like no matter what you
say the Sun still rises in the morning
and it still goes up into the into the
sky and it sets at night and that's
actually the most important part that
the Sun has for you because that's how
you settle your day that's how you your
whole life is structured around the fact
that this Sun gets up in the morning and
so that reality that phenomenological
reality is primary science actually
comes second and I think that that's and
and if you plunge into that
phenomenological reality and the way the
world lays itself out then all of a
sudden let's say rituals of centeredness
rituals of of things like communion
things like sacred spaces will start to
make sense because you'll see that
without those things start to fragment
and and and fall apart and that's what
we're seeing in society today and so I
think that that's the consciousness is
the key and then also really going past
this idea that religion is just a bunch
of things that people need to do that it
that although there it is part of
religion but to understand how it is it
is really a language and a way of being
which which participates in the
existence of reality that it's a very
ancient understanding of how it is that
things can be both multiple in one at
the same time and how that actually
happens I think I probably share with
you a sense that what's needed is is
certainly a renewal of a lot of values
that we've lost and a lot of the sacred
I have a sense that you would like to
see a renewal of Christianity would that
be be right or do you think that we need
a new some kind of new spiritual or
religious tradition that that kind of
I can't really see like a real renewal
of Christianity happening well all I can
say is I think that it's very difficult
to change the story
we're in um I think that the chore the
story will change there are some things
which are kind of you could say
providential in the sense that there are
these these historical patterns that you
can't change you can't you can't just
decide that you're going to now let's
say start a new spirituality you can do
that people have done that we've seen it
happen in the 20th century you know
millions of time then it's participated
in the fragmentation of Western society
I think that to me until until the big
change until the massive shift you know
until what Christians gonna call the the
return of Christ or this moment where
everything's going to going to change
and we don't know what that looks like
it's a it's an imagistic story about you
know the this thing that happens in the
world which changes everything
until that I think that to stay inside
the story is the best is the best bet
for us now
and in all the efforts that have been
put to to do something else have been
subversive in my opinion mm-hmm and what
does that mean studying inside the story
well that means that means staying
inside the Christian story you know for
all its for all its messiness and for
all its kind of dimming and it's kind of
approaching a sunset I don't think that
there's another story at least for
Western culture right now I think that
the two stories for Western culture have
been Christianity and Judaism and I
think that those those are there and and
they're not they're they're not they're
not going away until something massive
happens and so and I know a lot of
people might think that's odd that I
would say that but I think that that
it's when you start to understand that
things unfold in these patterns and in a
way we we have very little individual
control over how those things unfold and
we're playing out let's say the
Christian story right now in the
Christian story there is a a breaking
apart it's part of the story there is a
death it's the death of Christianity is
part of the Christian story and so we're
kind of going through that right now and
I think
it's inevitable and I respect people and
I totally respect people who would say
in the light of that that I would rather
do my own thing let's say I understand
that I respect that but I but I don't
see another another true viable path
let's say for the West
besides that hmm I might be depressing
for people to hear yeah I mean I think
that's that's a very live conversation
when a lot of people I speak to the need
for a grand narrative what is the grand
narrative is there the possibility of
resurrecting a grand narrative I I have
to say I'm skeptical that that can be
Christianity given the fact that we have
sort of seemed to have decisively left
it behind at least we're a lot less
religious I think in the UK than you
guys or you're not in the States but
they make or at least yeah but I think
that that is the key question it's like
what does the grand narrative look like
how do we recover some of these timeless
truths and can it be done within a
context that looks different from how
it's been done in the past but it will
have a lot in common with it I mean it
will have to have a lot in common with
it but then again I also come back to
the fact that Christianity has accreted
this immense depth and wisdom over such
a long period of time that the idea that
we can sort of come up with something
off the caf seems pretty unrealistic at
the same time yeah I mean I think that
that's why I talk about kind of
Providence you won't understand what I
mean by that but in the sense that
something has to happen it's it's not
it's not just like it's really not just
that we can decide to change the story
there there is something there's a deep
shift that needs to to occur for the
story to change and it's something that
we as individuals just as individual we
can participate in that ship but as
individuals we don't have that much
power to actually affect you know this
this story that's it's going on so
that's kind of how I see it and I think
what's going to happen I think that if I
want to come back to the to the problem
of a Brett and the problem of where the
discussion needs to go one of the one of
the
difficulties that the reason why I also
wanted to go back to consciousness is
because there is I think in the way that
Brett talks about it and this is what I
brought up in our discussion the first
time we talked is is that he takes for
granted the position like he takes for
granted his moral landscape he he thinks
it's obvious that we should act in
certain ways and and he doesn't have he
doesn't have a he just takes it for
granted we don't know what the source of
that is we don't know what the source of
his direction is he says he's a liberal
he's obviously left-leaning and so it
seems to come from that side let's say
but there's another side right there's
another side which is the the the right
wing and those right may people also
have their there um let's say their
priorities and so to think that it's
just obvious it's not if it was obvious
there wouldn't be this clash and there
wouldn't be this discussion it isn't
obvious and so unless we do find a
common narrative then those two
opposites like I've been saying forever
are just going to manifest themselves
again and we're going to have the same
clash we had you know at the beginning
of the modern age you know right now
we're just surfing we're just surfing
let's say the it's horrible to say that
we're cut we're kind of surfing the
Holocaust like the Holocaust was such a
shock you know that we're kind of we're
still in awe from that and we're just
we're just kind of surfing the end of
that wave and we're reaching the end of
what that it's a shock could could
afford us and now we're once again
seeing the same same story happen again
and and unless unless people find a
grounding and the grounding isn't just a
bunch of morality like I said but he's
really is is rediscovering the notion of
what makes a center what makes what
makes something exist what is you know
how does time work how does
consciousness engage with the world I
asked before where you think this
conversation goes I was kind of thinking
about the sense that Sam Harris and
Jordan Peterson had these very public
events that went some distance but
didn't
as far as some people hoped in terms of
coming to a bit of a conclusion or
pushing the debate forward enough who do
you think are the right people to be
having those kind of debates to push it
forward well I think that I think that
the discussion that Jordan had with Ben
I think that those are the discussions
that are going to attract a lot of
attention because they're diving into
the the crux of the matter in terms of
how do we find a coherent set of values
and how do we establish you know how do
we establish something which is coherent
like how do we bring things together so
I think that that's why that that
conversation attracted a lot of
attention and I think that that's the
the future I think that the fact that
you're talking you know on your channel
that you're talking to like Zen masters
and you're talking to people that are
both in the let's say in the secular
world but are also engaged in religious
traditions I think that that's the best
way to go about there's a there's a fear
that I have in terms of this
intellectual dark web phenomena is that
it's kind of catalyzing itself where you
basically have all kind of secular
atheist types and then you have bench
Pierrot who's kind of like the the
exception so so I think that if we
broaden the discussion to involve more
more people like Dave Rubin is talking
to Bishop Baron from California who's a
who's an excellent person who really
understands kind of Christian ontology
and the metaphysics of Christianity
those types of discussion I think
widening it out so that so that there is
more of this discussion between the more
rationalists and the scientists and kind
of spiritual tradition I think I think
that that's the key to to coming to
something that has more more depth let's
say because I guess that's the point I
was I was thinking about is that I mean
even with with Ben Shapiro and Jordan
Peterson they're both coming from
religious tradition so it's not like I
guess what I'm saying is where's the
open-minded religious person and the
open-minded atheist that can come
together and and one could potentially
change the other's mind and come to some
kind of synthesis that maybe Jordan
peanuts and Sam
is one table to come to I think you'd be
surprised I think that I think that
they're quite people like Paul van der
clay for example is someone who there
are some things that he won't budge on
let's say some some basic tenets that he
won't I don't think he would budge on
but you know like even myself I came
into this discussion with Jordan you
know several years ago thinking that
science was not let's say not and not
particularly appreciating the way that
science was totalizing the discourse and
and feeling like like they were missing
out on on you know the highest thing and
so then in my discussion through Jordan
I've discovered the science of
consciousness I discovered you know how
evolutionary psychology can talk about
these things and different with
different angles and so I felt like my
position has changed quite a bit in
appreciating let's say the role that
scientific inquiry can play right now
and so I think that there's quite a
people quite a few people that actually
would be able to have these discussions
the the question is also one of the
problems with it the intellectual dark
web right now is that it's also a high
profile game where it's only people who
have a certain let's say visibility that
are able to have the high level
discussions and it's not always the case
that those who have the highest
visibility are the ones who are the most
interesting and the most let's say
proficient in what they're supposed in
what they're talking about so let's say
well should our audience for checking
out well I think that people who want to
at least understand Christianity I think
that Bishop Baron is someone who is
definitely interesting there's a writer
his name is David Bentley Hart I think
that a lot of he's a bit he's a bit
abrasive because he doesn't like New
Atheists but he does talk about he wrote
a book recently called experiencing God
which talks about the relationship
between consciousness and our experience
of the divine and how the those two are
structured alike and so there are
writers like that David Lee Hart is
definitely someone I would encourage
people to look into great jónasson been
a real pleasure again speaking to you
until next time thanks till next time
[Music]
you
[Music]