welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
okay check-ins and 5% nervous and it's
probably due to the fact that I had like
three coffees today but there's like a
calmness like a deep calmness associated
with it so welcome to the stoah i am
peter lindbergh the Stewart of the stoah
and the Stowe is a place for us to go
here and dialogue about what matters
most at the knife's edge of this moment
and today we are very lucky to have my
friends or I'll sorry you for oh here
today and sir you is that he's waving
right now so in case you don't know who
he is and he's the head teacher at the
monastic Academy and this is from his
website he has a decade of intensive
monastic training a degree in economics
from Williams College an extensive
experience in social and environmental
justice as a child Forel saw deep
suffering in the world and he knew that
he must do something
amen so I reached out to saw you a week
or so ago because I was going through
this crazy spiritual crisis and I was
really called to chat with him and I
felt a great kinship immediately we had
a great chat and I'm like I have to get
so you in this space somehow and janna
made that happen and so I'm very glad
that she did so that being said in a
moment I'll hand it over to you and he's
gonna just share his thoughts about
whatever he wants to share his thoughts
on and we might have a little back and
forth a dialogue and while here and I
are talking just write your questions in
the chat box and if you're if you've
been here before you know the drill I'll
call and you unmute yourself and ask
soryu your questions so that being said
sorry you feel free to unmute yourself
and I'll hand it over to you there we
are
now can you give me a thumbs up if you
can hear me okay oh wow ah so this is
interesting I haven't been using
technology as much as I think most
people have I live in a community and we
connect very with great physical
proximity let's say intimately in terms
of our our lifestyle and so I haven't at
this time move very much onto the
internet and kinda net less then I was a
few months ago and so this is the first
call like this that I have ever been on
in my life so I'm happy to be on it with
you hello
and Peter asked me to talk a little bit
to start and then we'll open it up lots
of questions of different types and the
main thing that that I'm talking about
it right now the main subject that I'm
attempting to the c-stick then pressing
is that the most important thing we can
do is create trust create legitimate
trust and that means helping people to
know what is trustworthy to have the
courage to trust it and beyond that to
actually become dress worthy trainings
that allow us to find that in ourselves
which is trustworthy and then live by
the way that serves the world and this
is
[Music]
perhaps so obvious that it's difficult
to notice it but I'd say that trust
legitimate trust is the most precious
resource in a society and many of you
may know that in the Analects of
Confucius it's reported that he was
asked what are the absolutely essential
resources what are the things that are
absolutely needed for a society to
function in peace and he said the
essentials come down to three things the
military military or a police force is
needed food people have to be able to
eat and trust and so at that point his
disciples said well what would happen if
you had to let go which is not enough
though if you couldn't half of all free
medical there's one which would it be
and he said well of course that would be
very difficult but under those
circumstances one would have to dispense
with the military with the police force
the the forces that that maintain order
and so then another courageous disciple
asked okay so now we have trust in food
what if you had to lose one of those
which one would you drop if you couldn't
have both of those
and he said well of course it's very
difficult but under those circumstances
you'd have to dispense with food and
only have trust there's nothing more
important than trust and even if your
society was starving to death and was
then killed by invading forces that
would be better than having society
without trust
[Music]
and when I look at the world right now
I see many crises and one of them we
sometimes referred to as a meaning
crisis which might be considered to be
the most basic crisis so we have the
climate crisis we have the nuclear
crisis which continues even though
sometimes we forget about it we have the
technology crisis I just click with
event is an artificial intelligence and
other new technologies and we have to
look at those very carefully but another
crisis the best energy would say it even
more basic than those as a meeting
crisis a lot of us have trouble knowing
what to consider meaningful how to find
meaning in our lives and and this is
actually very severe when I when I work
with people here at the monastic Academy
a lot of people come here to live for
days or weeks or months or years and in
working with them this this meaning
crisis is debilitating there is an
awareness that there are problems but
it's quite difficult for people nowadays
to know how to understand these problems
how to understand the potential
solutions and
and so I the main thing the main subject
that I teach the main subject that we
study is what in Buddhism is called
right view how do we
how do we experience meaning partially
that is what do we consider meaningful
but a lot of it is how do we experience
meaning how is meaning how is
significance experienced how does that
happen and in diving into that diving
into this meaning crisis I found that
one of the even more fundamental
creddies
and perhaps woman faith in something and
terms of Buddhism we stated a there's a
pattern methods for us suffering the
suffering that we experience in its
various forms conscious unconscious
gross subtle the suffering that we
experience in various forms for most of
us most of the time tends to drive us
insane
it tends towards insanity
it tends toward ignorant it tends
towards avoidance avoidance of
experience and in fact avoidance of
meaning there's a tendency for most of
us that is not at all required it's not
inherent at all but there's a fangy for
most of us to suffer and then that
suffering becomes ignorant or you could
say insanity which results in even more
suffering the basic shift in the
spiritual life is when suffering results
in faith when the shift comes from
suffering moving toward ignorant the
suffering moving toward faith we can ask
faith in what and that's a good question
but actually I think it's a secondary
question the primary question is does
our suffering result in faith result in
trust and then if we want to take that
far enough we can say that the purpose
of Buddhism is to know how to train such
that we have the ability to trust
everything ah
[Music]
to have complete faith in everything
you
this of course is a spiritual journey
and and in the sentences that I've been
laying out one by one
[Music]
we have moved from what we might say is
relatively mundane you know we're
talking about the military and food and
such to the transcendent in which there
wouldn't be any military or food at all
ah a transcendence of of the world of of
the world in which there is eating and
surviving and killing and conflict uh
[Music]
but it's very important to see that
first of all when people take it this
far they become extremely valuable
resources in the world and all over to
spawn the situations in ways that we
cannot respond if we don't have that
highly trustworthy population of
population people who have taken a lot
of time to work on ethics and then have
used those ethics to achieve spiritual
states and then have used those states
to transcend all states to become
completely free and then to return to
the world virtue the world of ethics the
world of service the world of compassion
and be of benefit people who have gone
through that process are of enormous a
benefit to the world and have a kind of
power that one can't have without that
training and so I emphasize the supreme
importance of that training but even
more exciting for most of us than that
is that one doesn't have to take it that
far one can do a little bit of training
and so if a lot of people do a little
training that vastly increases the
trustworthiness of a society if a few
people do a lot of training that also
vastly increases the trustworthiness of
its society and when you have both
happening together then you have the
opportunity for a society to respond in
ways that it just can't it just cannot
not if people haven't moved through that
process
[Music]
and so you know we we look at the world
as it is now we have a number of options
before us and two that have been
fighting it out for quite a while now
about a hundred years now is the
possibility of cultivation of the
population the other is the possibility
of say fascism and it would just take
control over the population and in our
responses to the various crises that we
see now a lot of what we see is this
command and control direction of problem
solving and what's difficult about it is
it even the population is choosing it
the population is in fact demanding
control over over us and
[Music]
it seems that we have lost track of
something that for a good portion of
human history and during the Golden Age
of stoicism we saw this one of in fact
one of the best examples in in human
history of a situation which there was a
system that allowed people to be more
trustworthy that allowed people to as
you might say live in harmony with
nature
uh to which which would allow us to
actually really understand it - not
being untrustworthy now that's actually
enough we saw that we saw slaves
famously and Emperor's famously embrace
use stoicism and the good news is that
it was actually quite effective the bad
news is that stoicism if you don't mind
my saying it did a lot of things really
well and did something so well that it
ended up being a problem one of the
things in my understanding of the
tradition historically is this ISM was
so good at being accurate that it forgot
the importance of being inaccurate so
what does that mean that means that
sources of allowed people to cultivate
themselves without
a compelling narrative
which is brilliant because the human
mind seems to function in terms of
narrative but narrative is somewhat
delusional narratives have beginnings
and middles and ends and if you look at
the world you don't find these things
it's just one example of the imaginary
effect the made-up aspect and even the
delusional aspect of narrative and so
sysm just wasn't all that good at
narrative and so what happened next well
you had this amazing tradition that was
incredibly effective and if you you know
in the first century what we call the
first century of what we call the Common
Era
if you if you looked around you'd see
these various philosophical systems and
schools and stoicism was really doing
great
and increasing in its power and breadth
and depth and uh you see an emperor take
it up and live brilliantly and on and on
you see these incredible changes amazing
teachings and then you see this little
group of slaves who are getting eaten by
lions because they makes any sense and
they're a threat to the kingdom and you
asked is it at all possible that this
little group of people is going to take
over this huge Empire obviously it's
impossible well it happened and it
happened quickly it happened in a matter
of generations and if you ask me what
happened well the thing that happened
was they told a better story the
Christians told a very good story it was
a brilliant story they took aspects of
stories from the Jewish tradition of
course very importantly aspects of the
greco-roman tradition like that like a
hero
you know Jesus is a hero half god and
half human a god and a human had a baby
so it had special powers like Hercules
and such and so there was this feast and
there was and then he died for your sins
is amazing brilliant story taking from
the various traditions of the time a
better story than anyone else told and
that it that was the end doses of
forgotten for a very long time
Christianity took over the Western world
and I fail this because one of the
highest goals that it's that we have in
a meaning crisis at a time like this
when every went when if you look around
what I see is a very is a very
consistent tendency for various groups
to just criticize to just demonstrate
the untrustworthy nature of the other
groups so in this country Democrats
Republicans in general conservatives
liberals uh various people looking at
the environment in different ways
various people looking at human
development in different ways there's a
there's a strong tendency to demonstrate
why the other side is untrustworthy is
wrong or evil uh but it's very hard for
us right now to come up with a story
with a narrative with an explanation
with meaning that is both accurate and
effective at bringing people together
this is extremely hard and so it's
actually the one of the main you might
even say the main goal that we have here
we wanted to create people who have done
the personal works so that they can work
together as a community to tell a better
story
because right now there is a meaning
vacuum and there is a trust vacuum and
if there were ever a time when we needed
trustworthy leadership and it put faith
in so that we could find meaning in
collective action it is now on this
planet I've been terrified of the
existential threats facing the planet
since I was a kid and well by the time I
was eight I understood these issues
global warming and nuclear terminal
nuclear war and an eight-year-old can
understand these things it's not
complicated and yet we cannot bring
ourselves to function as a group
effectively in the way that we have
around this other thing so you know the
but this virus where the world has come
together and been on nurse sauce uh it's
been very hard for us and I am
attempting to rule people together so
that we can tell a story that people can
respond to that that is because they are
made up stories are made up but that
will guide us to that which is not made
up so that we can live in harmony with
it you might call it nature or you could
call it any number of other things the
Dharma or something but that we can find
that and then learn how to tell a story
that brings people into harmony with
that on a vast scale that's what we're
working on and as far as I can tell
there's nothing more effective at
solving the problems of the world than
that and so we throw our lives into it
so that was about 25 minutes yes is this
perfect timing and so do you think Peter
that there's anything you might say that
would clarify some of that or yeah yeah
I got some stuff for you well I mean so
you have a little vertical dance just
right there your questions in the chat
boxing will call on you and when you
were talking about stoicism I was sort
of playfully trash-talking you in the
chat and what am I really yes so I've
read you one I said I love this guy
comes to the store and takes shots at
the Stoics so I have a few questions one
of them is do you think yeah I know I
know I would say too good of a job the
Buddhism was the same way both both I
think
we're so accurate that then it became
very hard to be delusional but actually
that's the planning is that there's a
certain compassion in being delusional
if you have the ability to not be
delusional hmm so the question is kind
of life for me is do you think it's good
do you think it could ever be wise to
tell a bad story but it everybody no
buzzer I think so yes sadly but yes and
I guess the follow-up question is that
do you think a bad story could set up a
good story yeah exactly what do you
think yes see yeah I think I think you
want to tell us the goal is to tell a
story at the edge the very edge so as as
good of a story as possible we'll say
we're good enough
all right a good enough story yeah they
talk about good enough parents right
it's sort of like that you want to tell
it good enough story and I think you
have to give yourself that leeway or
else you're not going to allow yourself
to make mistakes and and that's a very
dangerous place to put oneself in so
that's the end of my questions I could
ask you more of course but there's a lot
smarter people in the room right now
that could ask better questions so I'm
gonna take in Benito Roy I think
you have my question Anita Wow hi where
are you I don't see you anywhere maybe
maybe she didn't have a question she's
so a couple questions but the first one
when you were talking is like you know I
teach I
I teach a lot of people and quite often
like what comes up is that once we get
down to the brass tacks of things like
my cohort will say or divulge or reveal
that there that actually proud to be
humans you know really because we're
destroying everything yeah and that
seems to be a partial truth to me
yeah although when you get into the
depths of it it seems to be the whole
truth so how do you speak to that person
no just a sense of like like how can you
trust that the humans like what are
people for like how can you trust that
people have an intimate participation
with reality
you know I know right in the face of all
this evidence that's not true so where
does that come from and how does that
express itself I know a big question but
big question but you know me well enough
okay so I guess I'll just answer how
about that
good cuz I don't know well I mean I get
into Burma of my life uh
so as I think you know as a child I
asked this question and concluded that
people are just not trustworthy and so
there's only one ethical loving
compassionate thing to do with one's
life are you familiar with this oh we
haven't talked about this um so for
those of you know Bonilla and I have
been together a few times and we've
vented together and in communication and
it's a great privilege for me to see you
present and to connect with you so often
I feel very grateful
I guess they haven't talked about this
so as a kid I thought about this and
concluded that the only rational and
compassionate act that I could take was
to kill all the humans there's really
nothing better to do with one's life
then kill the people
and so I because because that's where
most of the evil on the planet comes
from and so it's best if we make the
world a better place I want to make the
world a better place and so I decide to
kill the people and I
done that for a number of years actually
and pen next you know disease is
actually a pretty good option seemed I
had the sense I was twelve thirteen
fourteen at the sense that there was
that probably as technology improved
there might be ways of developing such a
sickness it's very difficult actually to
develop any sickness that wipes out an
entire species the the incidences of
this and all of my history actually
extremely rare but I thought perhaps we
could and so I I researched that
extensively along with other methods as
well and yet the question that you asked
kept finding me it kept I couldn't quite
wasn't absolutely certain that killing
everyone was the right thing to do there
soon very likely but it wasn't certain
and so partially because of that and
partially because of big technical
barriers to actually pulling this off
because I had to do it alone that was
actually the main issue I didn't trust
humans enough to work with them and so
it was it was there's a lonely journey
and it became difficult to do enough on
my own I didn't know how to make an
organization for this it was very very
difficult and how to pull it off so um I
decided to find someone with whom I
could actually speak about this
ultimately important topic and I had
tried to talk with a number of people
and they just weren't mature enough to
do it I talked to them and I could see
in their eyes that they were afraid of
dying and they're afraid of me killing
their children or something like that
and and to be honest I was not
sympathetic
I was I found that to be quite immature
of them but but I did see that they were
considering you know calling the
authorities so I couldn't talk to me
about it so I needed to talk to someone
it was a lonely teenaged period for me
when I was 19 or 18 actually I I told my
parents I got it I got a leaf I need to
do something else and so I left school
and I went to Japan I had traveled quite
a bit and eventually was in Japan and I
met someone with whom I could discuss
this topic I had no there was nothing in
his eyes or his voice indicated that he
was afraid of dying and actually it
seemed that if I could just convince him
that it was right to kill everyone then
he would you just be perfectly happy to
help uh so he just want to talk it
through and I want to talk it through
once the phone I had someone to connect
with and and ultimately and so that so
that was the Zen master at the Zen
monastery in a Buddhist monastery in
Japan and after a few conversations he
said something just perfect he said when
you were young you realized that if you
can't liberate people then you must kill
them
and that is exactly right that's exactly
what I realized and I conclude but then
America I concluded something I
concluded you can't liberate people and
so if that is true if you can't liberate
people then yes the right thing is to
kill the human beings but if you can
that changes everything
and especially if you see how that's
done and you see that actually we it
isn't just that we isn't it really
question whether we can be in harmony
it's the question of how long can we be
out apartment it's very difficult for a
section to turn away from our own nature
and then ultimately impossible so uh so
it's because of that it's because of our
ability to the extent that we can
directly see and directly engage with
what you might call our true nature then
to that extent we have we can and must
that is trust and then the challenge is
only how do you bring that out and the
benefit the great benefit of this to me
was in finally understanding what I
really meant when I said we have to kill
everyone we have to kill the identity
part of everyone have to kill the
everyone that everyone thinks they are
and what does that basically mean well
one of the things it basically means is
killing destroying eliminating ending a
starving kicking no ground to stand on
for the aspect of us that honestly
believes that we are human it actually
really identifies with being a human
being because for me I I trained and and
let go of that identity that identity
and saw that it was artificial and
morose melancholy SAP and and not true
and so and so that sense of self that
does have to go
and that isn't only human beings who
have that we human beings are in a
special case in a in a certain way
because we have a found a way to empower
that sense of stuff with very few
limitations we and in the training that
we do here one of the most significant
things is in showing people that that
the non empowerment of our sense of self
is our own empowerment that's very
difficult to see it's a the empowerment
of our self so you know to do what I
think I should do to do what I feel I
should do this is not freedom this is
slavery this is not power this is giving
away our power and then things like
humanism and then you have individualism
and then you have capitalism and then
you have consumerism these various
levels of views are based on but also
reify and reinforce and re empower the
delusional sense of self and so we here
in the training people have to face this
it is so difficult it is it feels so
threatening to let go of those ways of
looking things and of those addictions
to things like thinking and feeling and
it's so difficult to have faith that
there could be anything beyond that any
and in particular I think which brings
us to your question and then to my
exploration as a child the question of
well what is our true nature is are we
really just so far away that it can't
that we can't there's nothing that can
be done about it and and so it's very
difficult to have faith to trust that if
we let and put all of our minds and our
bodies of our thoughts and our feelings
of our identities or a sense of stuff
that could be any kind of intelligence
beyond that and so the answer is on the
one hand help a person to see that the
sense of self and in particular the
sense of being human is delusional and
beyond that to see that any attachment
to mind and body to the kind of
intelligence you get from your mind your
thoughts your conceptions your views or
your body which is to say the five
senses and then you can
any any sort of vadhana as we say in
Buddhism these sensitive the feelings in
your body with all of that is a useful
tool but not something to be identified
with it is not you to break free of that
then confirms that those things aren't
are aren't are stuff aren't me or mine
and with that everything she is we start
to to to find that that the the downhill
direct that we clip in a toward
liberation rather than slavery does that
help at all thank you so much yeah did
remain relevant and yeah it was a big
question it was a big answer
[Music]
definite let it let it work through me
thank you
thank to talk to you again there's
definitely a juicy question that led to
a juice again sir so I quite enjoyed it
no um if you can unmute yourself and ask
your question sure um so this relates
actually to a few other things which
I'll maybe leave alone for the time
being but if people so you do you expect
that people would to eliminate or to a
great extent simply drop the sense of
self and instances of narratives other
than a narrative that could be recreated
that would actually do what you would
want it to do or do you like given that
most people will not be able to do that
and will still have at least investments
if not attachments in older narratives
some of which are competing not
compatible wouldn't it's a more more of
a meta-narrative more of a fluid kind of
sense of self and humanity that there is
the boundaries of
humanity and of species and yeah all
those things aren't necessarily set in
stone but you're not to think of it not
existing oh yeah
don't think I did not existing that
would be weird yeah definitely and that
would be weird
mm-hmm so I don't know what your
thoughts are on my compound or not in
question here yes so the question is
just to be sure I understand it
question is so first of all there's the
assumption that most people won't make
this kind of shift right not the extreme
become a monk for five years and really
see where how things are yeah few people
we're assuming a few people would live
the way I do
for example we live the way we do that's
probably not gonna happen
too much right okay
and given that what kind of narrative
would be most helpful in the world and
yeah fluid a more fluid one than say
Jesus say say save you by being
crucified right more fluid than that but
also more fluid than then oneness and
and black and no self I mean I don't
understand no cell phone yeah yeah
really
yeah no self doesn't mean that there
isn't itself right it also does but it
is very clear that that all things are
without self everything everything
everything is without itself but it is a
claim it isn't a view on self it's very
difficult to approach non-self and I
think they've all gotten very excited
about non-self
I had to approach it so yeah so what is
a better narrative that is somewhat
fluid right that's the question that can
accommodate what people seem to get out
of narratives that because they're not
able to drop narratives entirely they're
not going to be able yeah definitely
okay this is great so this again is a
big question and I'd like to give a a
very long answer but I'm not I'll have
to make that answer a little bit shorter
and that means that I'll give two
answers so I give two short answers so
so first of all in my experience so the
first thing I want to do in the first
answer is is just work with the the
basic assumption that people aren't
going to change how we live and I'd like
to identify that as a narrative and it's
a very powerful narrative and so yes
because that narrative is so powerful it
may be true but that's why it may be
true people come here and and live here
for years and continue it amazes me
continue to refer to the ordinary world
as the real world it astonishes me
because the world that most liebe live
in is the most artificial and fragile
thing in the universe I mean the things
that you would think the characteristics
of that which is quote real are least
applicable to this thing we call modern
civilization it's extremely complicated
it's fragile
it's
it's fabricated it's imaginary it's
based on layers of imagination and
everyone involved in it has to believe
in all of that together just to keep it
running and beyond that it's not going
to work so to go out the real world is
amazing and yet people keep doing it and
it's hard to break free of the sense
that well really you have to live that
way but but that is is partially because
yes because we have a diction essential
pleasure to existence and to to end to
the desire to survive and also the
desire to do be destroyed
we we have those addictions but but
nonetheless if you go back in history
just a little just a hundred years there
were many more options in the world than
neoliberalism just a hundred years and
that's brief you can go back less than
that if you want but there were real
functional terms if you go back ten
thousand years then there was an
enormous an astonishing variety of
culture of various forms of economy
around the world and I think that in
modern times we've just forgotten that
there are options and and this one has
has made us believe that it's real but
actually there are other options and
this here is one of them and ended well
yes I shouldn't say that I think I'll be
diplomatic about this I think it's
better if your people live if you are
happier because there are the problems
of the world we have huge problems in
this way of life solve them people
aren't lonely or depressed or anxious
and beyond that we're not contributing
everyone could live at this level we
wouldn't have the problems of football
and so-so
oh so it's it's a real viable option and
I and one of the main thing to do is
simply tell the story that there are
other options I'm not saying everyone
should live this way or that everyone
should be Buddhists or something like
that not at all I'm saying that there
have been in there have been communities
based around adjusting your entire life
so that you can hold each other
accountable to spiritual truth there
have been those are the communities for
all of human history and and that's an
option it's a real option for all of us
and unfortunately Buddhism now now kick
Buddhism around for a while okay Peter
what did you say but what is the verb to
use tres huh trash talk let's try to
talk through to them that's Sophie
Buddhism is very good at being adaptable
I think it's one of its most interesting
qualities but one of the weaknesses of
that is that it it has a way of just
being weak of just falling into
meaninglessness and one of the things
that is done in coming to the modern
world is it says good news you can get
enlightened cheaper and quicker and
easier than ever before all those old
stupid Asian people didn't know what
they were doing they were you know stuck
in their ways and they weren't even
white so they obviously didn't know the
time about so we good news can do it
better and we're going to do it better
and we're going to give you a little you
know device or pill or new technique so
that it's quicker and easier because we
can do it better
and that has meant that Buddhism says
you don't have to give up you have to
change your life in order to get
enlightened
on the contrary getting lightened
doesn't change how you live your
you can just be happier and healthier
and all that without changing how you
live but it but because of this
adaptability you lose a soul of it and
the soul of it is realizing that the
goal of life is to give up your life
that's the point of life that is if that
enlightenment doesn't come and you still
have a life you lose that you give it
away you're gonna lose it anyway but the
difference is when you're enlightened
you could give it away that's that's the
debt the point is it good news I'm in
line so I can keep it you 18 is
suffering having my life that I protect
and maintain and delude myself about
that's not happiness you know it's it's
backward it turned everything upside
down so - so to retell the story so that
we want to give away our like you want
to change how we live that's an
extremely important first step okay
so that's that and nonetheless I agree
it's in all likelihood it's not going to
happen but I have to respond to the
statement anyway today okay yep okay yep
I continue on to actually answering a
question sure okay
what kind of a story would work well
Buddhism if we're gonna talk about
Buddhism Buddhism has worked on this and
there in Buddhism there's something
called right view have you heard of they
fold path that all by any chance maybe
not yeah yes okay so I need fold path is
Buddhism and the beginning and end of it
is right
do you don't even want to say right view
should I explain that Peter I'd like to
hear it okay so right view means okay
I'm back back up a little bit religions
such as Christianity such as if you
don't mind my calling and religion
stoicism such as humanism such as
materialism which runs a lot of science
[Music]
they have two things that depend on each
other and feed into each other in
Buddhism we have a term called Sunnis
Cara but very very interesting term and
it's in reference to the way it is that
see how it is that things that have no
self existence can create each other
thereby creating themselves thereby
giving the sense that they have
existence
and there are two things in a you know
in a way of in a story that that depend
on each other but have to also reinforce
each other in order for that tradition
to be maintained given the limitations
of this little mind so one is what we
would call it is and the other one might
call the alt it isn't the alt and so
there is means how do you think things
really are what's your take on how
things are how do you look at things and
what do you then do you then see okay
this is totally clear I'm asking you
know yeah yes clear it's clear enough to
for me to follow great
then there's be ought then there's the
prescription so the description the
priests group now given that that how
things are
you should behave in these ways you this
is what you should do about it okay so
in terms of Buddhism the first two part
of the Eightfold Path are the is and he
ought so there's right the right way to
see things this is how things are and
and and that's what we call right view
then there's some Noxon culpa which is
hard to translate but i think a good
translation is actually right off right
intention or right it's something like
you know this this thing that we call
the American dream you know what I mean
when I say the American Dream not that
you don't have to know what what the
American Dream means in that phrase yes
that's actually what the word Sun Kulpa
means so it's the right idea of how a
good life could be made that make sense
yeah yeah so so in Buddhism you have you
have right view and then you have right
sankalpa right ought you then go through
the whole path until you come to right
view again the right view that you
start with is that there are
consequences to your actions what you do
matters it makes a difference you can't
stop it from making a difference if you
do something with the intention to make
a difference it will make a difference
if you do something with the intention
of not making a difference it will make
a difference it will make
perhaps a different difference but it
will still have an impact so what you do
matters beyond that you can't escape it
you you may die soon but you still have
to face the consequences of your actions
and so rebirth is part of it beyond that
you can understand how it works you can
deeply understand how this works so
enlightenment is a part of it beyond
that you can teach others how about
perks and so the way is part of it the
path is part of it so all of these
together make up what we call mundane
right view and a lot of world traditions
hold mundane right view this it's
extremely important what you do matters
and if and again as I was saying before
when we look at this meaning crisis and
I'm and I'm working with two dozen
people living here right now working on
myself obviously as well one of the most
significant obstacles for us is a deep
sense that what you do doesn't actually
make any difference there's a deep sense
if I haven't changed billions of lives
than I might as well not have lived at
all ah but then you have people who have
billions of lives and they feel like
well but I even do the right thing I
don't know so maybe I shouldn't have
lived either I know someone has changed
billions of lives and he stopped doing
that thing because he felt like he
wasn't making a difference he changed
his whole career so
Oh
it's very hard for us to accept this
quote this meaning that everything you
do has an impact and you can't escape it
everything you do that is done in a
selfish hateful ignorant way will cause
suffering and you will experience that
suffer everything you do that's done
from a compassionate place a loving
place a wise place will cause happiness
bliss resolution of suffering and you
will experience that happiness that
bliss that resolution of suffering you
can't avoid it this is how it is this is
the appropriate way and it's also
accurate for a person who is not let go
of self to see the world you then go
through the whole path to get to the
point of letting go of self and directly
experience non-self and with the direct
experience of non-self then it isn't so
much that mundane right view isn't true
it's just not applicable it isn't
relevant because you have a completely
different motivation for being of taking
action in the world which you could say
in no intentional or USA is purely
compassionate but in any case it's
unimaginable and so for those people I
think that's the group of people who
you're referring to the very few people
who may do it everyone else then to me
the best way to look at it is that our
actions make a difference and they make
a difference to us and it's inescapable
and everything you do everything every
thought you have every word you say
every action you take every breath has
an impact and must be accepted as the
miraculous we must be creative as
holding this miraculous power so that we
begin to feel more and more empowered as
each day passes does that help or not
was it all relative
it is and in a way they didn't expect
and
thank you I don't know that the
meta-narrative or not right it's it
seems like like the way I see it is it's
a it's a condition for a meta-narrative
that would work and would have the I
guess accountability responsibility sort
of function for it yeah and then and
also this law of cotton effect mm-hmm
it's just a law that you can't avoid and
then what would it meta-narrative be you
might based on that so I'm in a
narrative could I mean the
meta-narrative could be like narrative
that's like not not immediate like the
history of humanity and the earth it
could there's many many ways you can go
with it but that ties it together if
different people have different
narratives what can tie it together
would be something like this cause and
effect would be part of what ties it
together
Wow so you're saying that it could be
you could look at it from a scientific
perspective that's geological time you
could look at it from an economic
perspective you could look at it from a
personal perspective is that what you're
saying yeah you could look at a personal
perspective and just interaction between
different groups of people like people
who continue to hold identities of
groups or of humanity or whatever how
that all relates to each other how to
live together
yeah really interesting yeah I feel like
I've been very very lucky to live in
places with very different narratives my
life I trained at a Zen master in Japan
under the embed car monastery in India
at another Buddhist master in China I
also have done Native American
reservations here on this continent and
along with you know growing up in this
in this culture this you know I went to
public school and learned about that
stuff so I feel very fortunate and grew
up Chris
grew up in a Christian tradition so so I
feel really fortunate to have
experienced all that and uh and so it
makes your question very significant for
me because then one of the things that I
needed to work on from what becoming
capable of entering each of those
narratives fully to the point that it
benefited me when I would go to one of
the measures that I would use for myself
is that if I enter a certain group or
culture or tradition
then I'll commit to that at least until
the day when I when it has changed who I
am and I'm grateful for its impact on me
and then I'm feel like okay now I'm free
to decide how long I'll stay with this
but until I have until I will always
speak with gratitude about its existence
I am NOT allowed to leave and what that
means is that you have to be able to
really go for it you cannot stay outside
and have a change or you or have a day
in your life you have to surrender and
and and so then you have so I think a
meta-narrative is kind of like well what
is the what is that all about how what's
the story about the surrender to all
these narratives and so yeah a very
important part of that is that what we
do matters that there is that there are
consequences but I think also it's it's
a faith that of the same is the first
question of faith that there is a truth
and a beauty here that is
beyond my ability to judge and it's and
and a faith in that with each person and
each culture each tradition each life we
have the faith that there's something in
this it's true and beautiful and I am
grateful that I have been given the
chance to perceive it may may I perceive
it yeah it's really hard here because we
have so much shame around this kind of
thing shame is so this is a big deal for
us here remember there was I was talking
with a monk in India about this and he
was just he was telling me that one of
the most important solutions to any
problem is the ability to say I am NOT
mature enough to to know how to deal
with this any difficulty I have will
help me at least to be humble so that I
can see that I'm not mature enough and
he said once you are humble enough and
have accepted that enough then it will
come very naturally to you and I've
tried to tell people it's very hard
though Allah we have such shame that it
doesn't turn into humility turns into
shame I think that that's a that this
sense of it's very important that we
also apply that to ourselves that we
ourselves in fact that I myself am just
one of these people one of these
traditions that needs to be huge
that I should approach with a sense of
humility and hope that I'll find that
the astonishing miraculous beauty in
this in this Sun SCARA that is myself
that is this mind in this body in this
life sir you I just want to flag that we
ten minutes over the scheduled time oh
sorry I I'm not in any rush I'd love for
you to stay later if you have time I
just want to be respectful of your time
right now just to check in oh yeah sure
I don't know why I was assuming that it
would end at 8:30 and right now for me
it's 8:10 that's a great assumption is
that all wrong with that assumption and
everyone else if you have to go feel
free to vote but if if you still like to
stay and riff feel free to just drop
your questions in chat box
could I be faster with my answers I
don't think so I think they're kind of
delicious but again I can give much
faster and as if that's helpful it's
just that a lot of people asking
questions so we owe them if you want
yeah I'm no rush okay let me find a good
one Nikolas can be yourself everyone
thank you Peter
I saw you hi
mine's a very simple question if I want
to wake up tomorrow and decide to climb
Mount Everest without any prior training
right so what should I do if I want to
join the monastic Academy Oh interesting
if you want to join this place it seems
it isn't as big of a task as Mount
Everest
because we have a lot we here we have
two groups of people we have the people
who come to as we put a heal and the
people who come who come in order to as
we put it die and you enter the the
healing group first and then ultimately
when you're when you see that when you
have both healed in in the very
important ways that we should
emotionally socially psychologically
when we've worked through the some of
that then we can face that there is an
important way in which we will never
heal and so in that way we we die and
see that good knows we never needed to
heal because we were never broken
from there we go back into the healing
group and from that
perspective we again work on our
personal lives work on cultivating for
you and dealing with our pasts from us
so here because you should do that if
you're going to be a leader a lot of the
problems for spiritual teachers because
they don't do that that side of the
train station they use precise as ways
of ah and it is possible to do this you
have some kind of insight but you can
actually use it to to maintain what the
Buddha called wrong liberation you do
what you you just say well I'm
enlightened so I can do it I want and so
that that second time is very very
important but because of that system I
don't know that there's a lot of
preparation fill out the quick
application form and consider it deeply
then we'll send you another one and you
fill up a long application form if you
need help with that as I
[Music]
uh-uh I stay so reading you know not
everyone reads so good knows we can do
it even without that we can we have a
lot of ways of working with people so
you can call us we can do the whole
thing over the phone for example and and
in other ways too we can we can work
with everyone and and through those
forms will come to the conclusion about
whether it's a good fit the one so the
so the only thing I'd say to do training
in is pay attention to and give your
life over to
your your deepest aspirations your
highest aspirations your most
uncompromising desperation desperate to
live to be sure that at least for one
day before you die you'll live
completely truly and if of course if
you're already doing that then no need
to come here unless you want to teach
and if you find any sense that there's
more to be done there then give yourself
over to that sense to want to realize
the unrealized see what hasn't been seen
and the more
[Music]
ah profound the desperation you have to
achieve your highest aspirations the
easier then because of that work because
you've actually done it then yes the
training is quicker and easier it's
great you know how in some stores they
have I've noticed sometimes they say
something like um oh I don't remember
now oh it's so sad I had it I had this
but it's sort of like why don't you pay
enough we'll give you this free
you know what I mean does anyone know
what I'm talking about sometimes the the
stores have this kind of thing you pay
in this way in that way and then we'll
give you something free it's sort of
like well if you pay for it then it's
free oh that's drover spirituality if
you you pay it's free so yeah you pay
with surrendering your life over to your
highest aspiration and and and you you
know that that's happening because of a
desperation inside of you grows and
grows does it make sense
well other than that I think it's just
the application forms I should let you
know that given the current social
situation our applications have
increased dramatically and I don't think
we have room for many months I think
that that what's happened recently there
have been many negatives about what's
been happening but we're seeing some of
the positives as well does that make
sense yeah and I expected that thank you
oh you did expect that oh really oh wow
you're smart Sarah can you mute yourself
I didn't expect it just so you know so
so good job not particularly qualified
to frame this question in the most
accurate way maybe Jared or someone can
jump in but I've been wondering how
maple relates to Buddhist paths Sutra
Tantra is a bit perhaps you're
developing an new jana of some kind a
new jana yeah well one of our supporters
lines is to create the Hana
haha Ghana is the fun pass the laughing
vehicle the haha Jana so I don't I'm not
good at that
that's not my my skill set so I tend to
say that we I don't think we're creating
a new Jana actually I think that there
was in a way a fourth turning of the
wheel that started in Asia in particular
in India which is the sense of quote
socially engaged Buddhism and you might
call that a new Jana they call it the
Noah Jana this there's is just Sanskrit
for new Jana her new vehicle but I don't
I don't really think that that is I
don't think it's all that different from
a lot of what we've seen in the Mahayana
or you might even say bojay Jana Peters
did I clarify what all these other
Sanskrit means or not I have no idea so
I know I said so to you Andy are you
curious or should I just let it go yeah
I think there's curiosity in the room
okay great good so a lot of the time
when we talked about Buddhism we talked
about well sometimes we talk about one
vehicle sometimes you talk about two
sometimes you talk about three and as
you've heard sometimes you talk about
nowadays recent decades sometimes you
talk about four and the one vehicle is
is simply that everyone is moving toward
enlightenment and so all of put ism is
the same thing the two vehicles are a
distinction between those who are
striving for their own enlightenment and
those who are striving for the
enlightenment of all beings or at least
all Society now it's important to know
that that for most of its history the
two these two vehicles haven't
interacted that much but in in early
times when when the Mahayana those who
are interested in helping many people
many beings all beings and those who are
interested in their own personal path
when when they were starting to develop
there wasn't antagonism between them
because there was a lot of communication
between them and they were both taken to
be legitimate approaches nowadays
there's there's some antagonism but I
actually would suggest that there isn't
antagonism that each one is just saying
if you're going to practice this then
you have to practice this and that's a
very important general principle and
spirituality as far as I can tell it
isn't it usually a good idea to take up
a certain path but not practice it the
way it was taught because you're wanting
to practice another pass at the same
time and so I think I think a lot of the
quote antagonism can be explained by
them not so much saying those people are
bad but if you're going to practice this
then practicing that is that if you're
going to do it this way you have to do
it this way or else it won't work so if
that's the true of those well then it's
really true of what came later which is
the Vajrayana and the budgie on up uses
everything as a vehicle for
enlightenment
absolutely everything and it is for that
reason extremely effective and also
extremely dangerous because you're using
parts of life that are in which were
very delusional and selfish and so the
Reggiana often does a lot of damage but
it also does a lot of good it's
extremely effective and quite dangerous
so kind of like a car you know if you
walk somewhere you probably you might
trip but that won't kill you but in a
car if you make a mistake in my typical
you or someone else
so so these are the very these are this
is a very quick way of talking about the
the vehicles what was your name Sarah do
you think that was a good did I
basically discuss what you were
referring to I guess I have a more I can
provide a more useful context for the
question which is oh no I didn't think I
was answering your question generally I
wasn't in that I was just giving a
background of the question to the group
okay you feel free to ask it again but I
I didn't think I had just standard oh
okay I do think the context might help
people connect with it which is having
seen in some conversations over the past
year with Daniel sourcing okay and
written on Twitter I think unique was in
one trade also they were like people are
you know doing this deep emotional work
and kind of uncertain whether that was
coming in the kind of sometimes
associated more with Tantra in Buddhist
traditions and wondering how that fit in
with the more renunciate part of some of
the practices it made for yeah so so I
think the the most important thing to
say as a very brief answer is that we
are extremely eclectic in our approach
and we are trying to be true to what I
already said
which is that if you're going to
practice something you should practice
it according to its tradition and also
being aware because we're we're based
primarily on chins and young a very
interesting teacher who was ordained in
the Vajrayana tradition but has
ultimately become more or less a
Kasana a more sort of a terawatt and
style teacher having trained for a long
time in zen as well which is part of the
mahayana so
so he is extremely eclectic in his
approach and he he thinks it's very
important and useful to give people the
chance to practice different approaches
as we say while you're pricing that
approach as you practice that approach
correctly but you don't have to stay
with it forever and for some people they
stay with something for a long time
other people not such a long time
and so in that way yes we do a lot of
emotional processing but there is the
option of a more renunciate approach as
well there's the possibility of striving
for one's own liberation and the
possibility of striving for all beings
we attempt we do our best to offer those
various paths to the group here and and
sort of discover as we do it and as we
use more modern methods for that such as
say circling and other or emotional
processing how it is that those newer
technologies fit into don't fit into
create something new maybe detract from
the the more traditional methods so one
of the main things that we struggle with
is in discovering how to bring all these
various approaches into one community
even though they're not brought usually
brought together into each member of
that community does that answer your
question I think so I mean it does sound
like a challenge to have all those under
one roof at the same time with multiple
paths yeah very very challenging
extremely challenging so we're almost at
the 90 minute mark shall we end it here
oh sorry or feel the few more questions
with what you're saying we're gonna end
it here I could answer the questions
extremely fast
I don't know uh you can always come back
next week okay there's gonna be more
questions then so maybe with that did he
have any kind of closing thoughts for
for us here at this level
[Music]
thank you doing this for making that
happen it's very exciting to me that
that not only did you make this happen
and manage it but that some Stewart it
as you say but that there is such
interest such excitement and said I feel
gratitude for that because I do so
deeply believe that each of us each of
you matters that what you choose to do
with your life has profound impact and
the your life your mind is precious
precious beyond anyone's understanding
and so I'm very grateful and a part of
this and please please please live
according to that please live according
to your - how precious how important you
are that's what the world needs do not
take these small insidious steps toward
inauthenticity please it's extremely
important and I'm grateful for a chance
to participate in this way that was
really well said and it landed really
well and so thank you for taking the
time to come to the stove today I was
gonna say like I have it as
I was gonna say it's a selfish desire
but it's feeling into it doesn't feel
selfish but I have a desire for you to
be at the store as much as you want
so maybe via email we can find another
time for you to come come back because
there's lots of good questions here how
do I see you there's like a chat box but
there's so much people yeah I can send
you send you some just don't scroll up
because then you'll see my trash talking
I want you to see that so I'll close out
right now just to make a announcements
for upcoming events so we have a stacked
lineup of people coming in we have a
tomas Bjorkman the meta modern whisperer
coming in tomorrow 10 a.m. Eastern Time
it's gonna be towards the meadow modern
world really excited about that and we
have Michael Brooks from the Michael
Brooks show against the web talking
about the kind of the ultra-right scene
or the intellectual dark web critique on
it and that's tomorrow as well 2 p.m.
you can check out the other events there
stoas based off a gift economy if you're
inspired to give a gift to the stoah you
can just go to this website right here
dov'è that's see a slash gift that being
sets are you thank you so much everyone
thank you so much for coming today
greatly appreciated