[Music]
heart
[Music]
so hello there my name is Andrew Sweeney
welcome to my podcast this is the second
in a series of talks I'm doing about
Jordan Peterson and his conversation
partners and this episode is about
Russell Brand
I don't hate Russell Brand even though
it is rather fashionable to do so if you
are an intellectual hipster in fact I
like him a lot I'm impressed by the way
he has taken his rather noxious earlier
self the celebrity new-age druggie and
cleaned up his room in Peter Sony and
lingo in other words he has transformed
into an engaged few civ an intelligent
person a kind of working-class hero
brand has taken stand-up comedy into the
political realm where it is needed
politics requires comedy to counter
hubris Divine Comedy redeems worldly
politics on a deeper level
the comedian can go where the rest of us
don't dare to deep into the pit of the
collective madness
comedians objectify our inner idiot and
therefore by making the idiot visible
free us from him I was encouraged to see
that brand had invited Peterson on his
podcast that the so called burgeois
leftist is finally talking with the so
called all try provocateur but these are
silly reductions and anyone who listens
to this podcast can see through the
nonsense that Peterson has anything to
do with right-wing ideology or that he
hates marginal people or that he is
indifferent to the wealth distribution
problem to name a few of the numerous
ways he isn't a fascist Peterson was
warm and compassionate in the interview
contrary to his firebrand image and
brand was not the bimbo he is described
as by haters the conversation went well
Peterson seemed in his element and was
less combative than one would expect
there was much common ground touched on
I'm interested in common ground between
Peterson and the leftists for a couple
of reasons firstly Peterson's frontal
attack on post-modernism and Marxism has
meant that a lot of leftist
missing out on him they have been duped
into believing that Peterson is a sort
of intellectual version of Trump a
dangerous reactionary or conservative
the thing is Peterson is not tribal he
simply disturbs people because they
don't know what box to put him in
sometimes he sounds like a conservative
and at other times a centrist sometimes
he has left his concerns at other times
he is an evil capitalist in his own
words and because he is has a far
ranging and nuanced view of humanity he
is able to converse with all types this
is one of the things that makes him so
valuable he has a genuine peacemaker can
he actually help the left to go beyond
postmodern identity politics just as he
has helped right-wingers move away from
the extremes Peterson has said the
proper concern of the left is to provide
a political voice for the working class
these are not exactly the words of a
typical right-wing Republican today if
you are unclassifiable you might get
pilloried by the authoritarian leftists
even if you have the usual leftist
concerns such as distribution of wealth
health care exploitation of resources
racism etc you might get called a
reactionary a transphobic a vampire
squid patriarchy to name a few of the
polite er labels if you go off the rails
that is you might even be attacked if
you suggest that for instance there are
some biological and psychological
differences between men and women which
should be a truism and even celebrated
if one cares about diversity that is and
Peterson's case there isn't actually any
evidence for the nasty labels he is
branded with so as critics are grasping
for straws the haters need somebody to
hate and so the best they can do is call
him the angry white man with the implied
racist epitaph forgetting that he is an
actual member of an indigenous tribe
from British Columbia
Alice allergy is my Kawakawa name
tweeted Peterson this summer what kind
of racist transphobes
has a sweat lodge in his attic you might
ask
with the press soon accuse Peterson
cultural appropriation or is that going
too far even for the mandarins of the
Canadian media we all love our
categories according to the lying media
who inspired me to capriciously use
Donald Trump's phrase bran will always
be a burgeois leftist and Peterson and
all tried provocateur never mind what
they actually say people will peddle
their caricatures and box-like
representations constantly and their
fashion alittle bubbles of political
correctness where they can safely hate
cartoon characters of their own
imagination it seems to me that they
don't even know why they hate Peterson
something is happening and you don't
know what it is do you mr. Jones I want
to sing to these Canadian journalists
who are like the devouring mother and
nobody has been more nasty to Peterson
than the emissaries of his own culture
but what if we use this nice catchphrase
to orient these confused journalists to
make them more happy or more than likely
unhappy what if we call Peterson and
brand as well working class heroes there
might be good reason to Peterson has
worked as a dishwasher and on the
railways in northern Alberta bran was a
street kid and a sexual abuse survivor
who left home at the age of 16 bran
comes from a London suburb and Peterson
from a suburb of hell ie northern
Alberta both are outsiders who have
found a way into the public eye they
have worked their way up the competence
hierarchies to use Peterson's phrase
while not losing their souls no easy
task
they have both hit bottom with drugs and
alcohol and depression issues but then
decided at a certain point in their
lives to be of service to others instead
of letting their demons get the best of
them brand and Peterson have worked
tirelessly on behalf of people both the
privileged and the deplorable --zz
Peterson in his clinical practice and
brand in his activism Bryon for instance
has done fearless documentaries about
Nazi skinheads he has even kissed a
notorious homophobe from the Westboro
Baptist Church
Peterson claims his lectures have
brought thousands of people back from
the abyss of the alt-right or white
identity politics both Peterson and
brand have been willing to take great
personal risks and to dive into dark
places in the service of humanity and
yet the two men are obviously very
different but in what way
let me put forward a seemingly crazy
metaphysical idea
Peterson embodies the male archetype and
brand the female archetype bear with me
for a moment let's just accept the fact
that male and female characteristics
actually exist in gay-straight and yes
even transgender people and are not
merely a social construction that each
person is a combination of those traits
whether they be male or female let us
talk about sexual traits even at the
risk of being called biological
essentialists another nasty way to say
that biology is an illusion let's
suspend our political agendas just for a
moment
obviously brand is much more feminine in
style and attitude and Peterson is much
more masculine brand looks like a 70s
rock star he could easily wear heels and
makeup
Peterson reminds me of Jimmy Stewart the
gentleman archetype of the 1950's
I'm not saying brand is not manly only
that he is a gender bender to complicate
the issue Peterson also has feminine
characteristics a motherly compassion
for young men for instance but that is
another matter gender is not a simple
subject Peterson's insistence on logos
or truth speech and brave sacrifice make
a much more prototypically Apollonian
brand is fluid in frenetic he can never
stop moving or talking he is a Dionysian
seducer shifting between male and female
Peterson is all about verticality
judgment clarity brand is about cosmic
consciousness and inclusivity the topics
they discussed on the recent podcast
also illustrates this male-female
dynamic while brand Wok's is on about
motherly compassion for different tribes
Peterson insists
judgment and discrimination Peterson has
pointed out that you can't have an ideal
without judging yourself against it
brand is all about empathy and
universality to put it another way
Peterson is vertically oriented he
speaks about hierarchy brand is
horizontal he speaks about universality
the to make very good dance partners
energetically speaking they complement
each other it is more than interesting
that Peterson has become popular in part
through his intellectual dance with
tricksters comedians and gender benders
is there another irony here to explore
how great it would be if more of such
opposite types would have such civil
conversations with each other to
conclude the people who really change
the world often come not from the center
but from the edge and yet they meet in
the center as John Lennon put it in his
classic song a working class hero is
something to be