[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
do you have a sense of within you know
you've mentioned you want to be taking
the emerg podcast towards and looking at
personal development perhaps or do you
have a sense of like anywhere that is
particularly fruitful any directions
that like you you really want to go in
well so I've mentioned this earlier I
have been using this for facet model
from Interpol which we could explore to
at least start the orientation of many
of these conversations that I'm having
and I'm trying to not have too many
assumptions as I go into the
conversations that I'm having you know
where I would like it to go is to feel
confident in producing an ecology of
practices with an Associated ethos that
can actually do what we're talking about
right like take somebody from a kind of
trapped liberal humanist human to
liberated servant of life and how to do
that I have some suspicions but I don't
yet know I don't think that I don't
think that anybody yet knows I think
that we're all figuring this out
together because the context is quite
different now than it than it once was
when a lot of these practices were
originally developed and so they have to
kind of evolve or adjust I think given
that new context that new culture that
new and that new that new challenge of
uninstalling liberal humanism which is
one of the most powerful and pervasive
ideologies or metaphysics of the world
has ever seen
yeah constant and is constantly being
rewoven into our psyches through all of
the systems that we participate in
is there a mirror an echoing of them
yeah
do you think it's possible to do that
rewiring without some significant period
and say the darkness or confusion I mean
I just I wonder I mean I guess so I I
I think from my own life part of why
I've wound up here where we are having
these conversations is because I grew up
and from about the age I started
thinking about things I could sense that
something was off but I think that was
what worked because my parents were
deeply unhappy with one another and I
could see my sense of the adult world
was like well that looks like it really
sucks but they constantly told me that
you got to go to school and get a good
degree so you can get a good job and
then you can have a good out of life and
I was like well if that's the part look
she took me down such a big complex
painful rabbit hole and I finally feel
like I'd found my way out the other side
but I'm not mental actually hmm there is
a world of people who are thinking
beyond that liberal humanist capitalist
world of status and wealth declaration
hmm but to go back to my original
question it's like if if there is a
sense that unplugging from that is what
is needed
question is like how do we facilitate
that in the most stress-free way that's
not the right Matt hmm yeah I'm cured
I'm curious like what's underneath that
question like why why why why are we do
it in a stress-free way er I'm not
disagreeing with you I'm just curious
maybe because because part of me is
still averse to pain and it's like I
don't want other people to go through
pain and maybe that's actually just
reflection more of me than it is of the
process well I I mean I I don't think
it's not just you that's a big pain you
know it's like it's very I love so I
love people who are trying to make this
path if we call it this path knowing
that it's not one path it's probably
maybe at many different paths but like
let's say human transformation more
available efficacious safe ease full you
know I am somebody who's work I'm quite
familiar with if this teacher Shinzon
young and if you're familiar with shins
and yeah I know the name but I don't
really know you yeah he's really cool
cool do it he's done a lot of work to
sort of bring science and deep
contemplative practice together alright
so he's created a whole pedagogy of
contemplative practice it's like very
clear very rigorous with like very
strict definitions and it works really
well and now he's working on a low
frequency ultrasound device which if I'm
remembering correctly it targets the
basal ganglia which they think is kind
of connected to a cluster of networks
which are which deactivate upon
awakening upon enlightenment and so in
one things we've discovered over the
past 15 years or something like that is
that awakening is more about the
deactivation of regions of the brain
rather than like something new coming
online and so using the device that you
attach to your head you kind of ping
this part of your brain with ultrasound
waves and it can turn off and people
report being bumped into just through
this process like long periods of
non-dual experience right where the
world appears completely new to them
like the shedding of the personal self
and so on you know classical mystical
experiences not so
different than psychedelics and things
like that and so you know does it have
to be hard I think it probably should be
hard I think it probably there's a
degree to which it ought to be hard I
think that builds like a degree of like
character and willingness to do the hard
thing I think that's one of the things
that I am most grateful for what the
monastic Academy has given me is like
this kind of quality of being where I
will just do what needs to be done
regardless of how I feel right in one of
the I think assumptions or Consequences
of liberal humanism is this sense that
how I feel matters and perhaps it
matters like it's a most like that
that's the most important thing I don't
want to be trapped in that way and in
order to escape that there is a degree I
think of discomfort required you have to
be able to go beyond feeling good and I
appreciate that and I suspect that might
be one of the core components of the
pedagogy that kind of can really take
people towards a robust freedom and
capacity to serve but also like we
should let Ivan my opinion we should
leverage psychedelics we should leverage
contemplatively we should leverage
whatever we can to accelerate this stuff
and make it more available and less
painful because man taking I mean I feel
like I'm just getting started and I've
been on this path for like 12 years and
you know since like thousands of hours
of silent practice and a lot of that has
been deeply fundamentally unpleasant you
know it's just like we can't that can't
be the way it is for everybody mmm we
don't have time for that well that
brings me to something I was thinking as
you were speaking which is that
if a degree of transformation is going
to be necessary to bring us forwards but
and this is a big but but it may happen
if we go through some kind of seriously
shitty social breakdowns at the same
time we end up with this like fork it's
like does the collapse push more people
in what perhaps into this what we might
call that like liminal dark night of the
soul type space from which they can grow
or will it just put us back into every
man for is valve style tribal survival
and then there's what that needs to be
done just to build back to that baseline
that we have now which is a kind of
perhaps existential discomfort but
material comfort that allows us to
explore existential discomfort yeah and
end for me
uh and this is some emma2 a workshop
with this person this amazing person Joe
Brewer you did a workshop on planetary
collapse so he's been studying you know
well what what happened when systems
collapsed and how do we understand this
well I mean he's very cheap firm you
know we are in the midst of a planetary
collapse and that unraveling of the
system you know it doesn't look like we
expect it to when we see movies about
how goes down right it's like this
little fraying of the various fabrics
that hold everything together punctuated
by crisis and his sense is that one of
the reasons we train is so that when
something does something very
fundamental does break there are those
of us who are available to step into
those crises in a way that does shift us
towards a greater sense of coherence and
togetherness I guess when hits the
fan that we get that there's an
opportunity there right that's when
heroes come forth right and so I think
that can also be an accelerant right
like that could that could be a time
when people burst forth out of the kind
of confusion and we might say
sleepwalking of the dominant paradigm as
long as there are actors agents
available to kind of be present to not
completely lose their to be
emotionally available and like skillful
and mature and and willing to do that
and I mean that's a lot of the reason or
you know that possible future is a lot
of the reason that I do my training is
so that I can come you know to be quite
personal like I'm here at my mom's house
in upstate New York right now I'm not at
the monastery but I see one possible
future I imagine a possible future where
social structures do start to break down
and that I could come back to my
hometown and play a role of kind of
consciousness and wisdom and clarity and
energy and kindness
and support people in navigating this
transition in a way that makes
everything work better for everybody
then it could have if I wasn't here like
that's very I feels really good like
that possibility not that I want to
go down but to play that role if it does
like I love that at Ross Warner house
before yeah that's what am I thinking
now well I'm actually wondering about
something that that came up when we last
spoke in London and I'm wondering if we
can tie this in a little bit so just the
idea came up actually around this idea
of the spiritual class system which I
found very interesting and we didn't get
to unpack it really I mean I guess
perhaps the shorthand that perhaps you
outlined to me was that like you know
you've got the elite who have access to
the the top tiered gurus and personal
development coaches and actually have
like a real deep integrated embodied
spirituality and then you perhaps have
the spiritual middle-class you read
Eckhart Tolle a and a couple of those
are those kind of bestseller spiritual
geezers and then you've got what you
might call astrology stones crystals
down I'll stay down at the bottom
but what I'm thinking is that does seem
to suggest that that if in a time of
crisis people did stand up and all of a
sudden there were more people to follow
then there actually might be a degree to
which
that there's gonna say a market for it
but that just shows again being trapped
within hmm I'm not a market for what I
don't know verb form or on-the-ground
spiritual guidance hmm you know I think
there is a degree to which
we're still caught within like people
will be happy having a personal
spirituality as long as they do it
themselves and maybe read a few books on
it but don't have that much integration
with like a community yes any thoughts
you know I think for me part of how I
imagine the work that I'm doing at the
monastic Academy is as an attempt to was
with the equivalent like kind of
restructure the distribution of these
very powerful and elite teachings to
make them more available for all as
whoever can you know bring themselves to
come to a place like that right his
you're right it's like very hard there's
many different reasons why we might not
counter the really good good stuff and
there's really really good good stuff
you know out there and yeah I think
there is a deep hunger for this and
there's a tremendous amount of noise in
the information ecology around the whole
genre of things we might call
self-development or wisdom teachings
that make it extremely difficult to
navigate unless you dedicate your unless
you get really lucky and you know
somebody who has already navigated it or
you dedicate a tremendous amount of time
and are also typically quite well
educated but you also need all that free
time right to navigate it and so it's
quite broken right now and partly it's
because of the incentive structures of
capitalism that kind of distort the way
that these flows of information happen
but yeah I'm very passionate about
repackaging and redistributing these
teachings in a way that is clearly
trustworthy and you know that's a
passion of mine I'm not sure I do a very
good job or have done a very good job
but it's something I would love to see
more of is
funny like we live in a world that tends
towards I think decentralization and
distribution of more or less everything
which has its perks but also its
drawbacks some of the drawbacks being
the fact that I think to take one
example say yoga so anyone can do yoga
for three years and then become a yoga
teacher and then pronounce that they're
a yogi and have students and on the one
hand I mean perhaps yeah and if they're
teaching physical movement in a way that
gives people love it ruins people's
physical health and it it's great but
yeah there's a degree to which like it
like I could easily go to ten sessions
with someone who's done three years of
yoga and then walk around saying like
now I'm a yogi and oh sure I understand
or not like even say I understand but
even don't even have a conception of
that there is a depth to the tradition
yeah so true yeah and it's it's the kind
of there's the tricky thing about the
decentralization of culture is that loss
of the access to the depth and the real
wisdom that can only accrue over time
yeah
I feel bad very strongly is something as
well that I kind of realized through
hanging out with with Alexander in his
nose it's like this idea that because we
live in a world where so much is
instantly available online through
Wikipedia there's an ability to get it
into your head that everything is
available online mmm
which is total yep and that was
on this moment there's like a light bulb
moment I'm like I've been lied to and
actually that there is there are
increasingly groups of people with
knowledge er like no this isn't going
public and I suppose that's always been
the case with business perhaps because
business is still competing but even
with things like like traditions like
I've heard Alexander speaking about like
he's Austrian networks and they don't
want to popularize or Astron ISM to the
public right but it might be the same
route that certain strands of Buddhism
have gone in the way which is as we've
said has become the kind of hegemony
hegemonic ideology is that now we don't
want that for us hmm
there's something there's something
valuable about it being behind closed
doors and only accessible to to those
who are actually driven by something
more than a desire for a spiritual
paracetamol by summoning mmhmm yeah yeah
I love what you're saying I think I yeah
I mean it
it took me years of daily relating with
somebody at the teacher at the monastery
who is actually deep who had actually
done the work who'd actually transformed
himself in a radical way for me to like
actually admit to myself how deep this
stuff goes right and there is this as
you say it's kind of debasing of the
currency of depth that's happening in
our culture right now and in the
spiritual culture of France
it's very alarming it's very alarming to
me and because I it's kind of like there
it's similar to when we monoculture a
forest or something like that we don't
actually even know what we're losing and
part of me is quite scared that in a
generation
we could lose so much of the depth of
the teachings that has perhaps survived
through human to human lineage and
transmission for thousands and thousands
of years because it you know again if we
think about the incentives like it's
hard to get to that realization of
you've had it's there's so much working
against us to see that to kind of admit
our own arrogance and open up to kind of
the kind of humility I feel that you're
pointing to and why would we do that
when there's a ten week course that
promises that 80% of people who take it
get enlightened or why would we do that
when you know talk is cheap and that's
something I don't know it's scary to me
but when you're in it when you're in an
actual when you're in a when you're with
somebody when you're with somebody who's
really different you you know you know
they're different yeah you feel it you
hear you admit it to yourself you're
like hmm they're not like that yoga
teacher that I take yoga from what's
going down here like what's actually
happening here you know there's that
kind of like you can follow your nose
there's something there and I hope that
that's enough you know I hope that
people could we collectively have enough
integrity to follow that and acknowledge
that and admit that to keep this stuff
get Bali yeah there's a very that's a
very real fear for me glad that you have
made
it's nice that you brought up that idea
of humility and what I'm thinking in
connection with that is is the fact that
I think we the system structure that we
now live on is is actually set up for
the complete opposite of that really
from a young age it's like tests and
test scores and this is me thinking Zach
Stein's work again now but it's like
everyone has a badge to their name
signifying their their competencies with
a view to putting you supposedly in the
position where you will be able to do
the maximum amount of good based on what
you're qualified to do and then there's
also within that the incentive structure
for schools to show off about how
high-performing their kids are for
universities to do the same from
companies to want to show everybody that
we've got the most high performing this
team we've got the best new CEO we've
got I mean LinkedIn especially I don't
spend much time on LinkedIn that social
network I think it's like oh all the
most all the social networks I find it
the most gross
[Music]
yeah and I think it's so wired into
wanting to to Telegraph our successes
and I still I still have to work on this
every day I do it all the time I'm still
thinking like oh how am I better how am
i one level up from that person mm-hmm
rather than thinking there's a real
shift what can I learn from this
situation what can be learned from the
humblest of situations and yeah yeah
really resonate that a
I have been on like kind of like a ten
year journey it's still ongoing of just
over and over again realizing how
arrogant I am I'm just like oh good I'm
finally finally i freed myself from this
arrogance and I'm like oh wait oh wait
there's more and I yeah I'm so again so
grateful that there I've been able to
associate with folks who are patient
enough and to put up with my arrogance
and my stubbornness and let me slowly
unwind it because as you say like oh my
god it's so much better to be living in
a world where everybody has something to
teach you
then in a world in which you're have
something to teach everybody like to
have the curiosity of a child and to
have not that just ossified expert being
the one who leads your life oh yeah I
feel you man it's it's it's and it's
it's true I mean we can omit and like
for me I like I'm at a point where I
don't take it so personally like you say
it's it's there's a way in which the
incentive structure of our larger system
sort of Consulate's that in us like
there's so much of a drive to that and I
think social media kind of hyper
intensifies that tendency and normalizes
it right because you have to find your
your Miche you have to find your product
market fit and when you think about that
ethos along with like personal branding
it's like got to find your knee should
defend it it's not very humble is not a
very humble move that's not a humble
orientation it's yeah it's so much of
what is needed is antithetical
the deep design of the what the world is
inviting from us and yeah I feel you
do you very strongly in that funny I'm
thinking of a conversation that was
happening with someone two days ago is
someone I'd met when I was out in the
pub and she was talking about how she
had a job a she's working in consulting
but she wanted to go into the
not-for-profit sector mmm saying well
I'm staying where I am for now because I
wanted to make sure that I can turn
myself into an asset so when I go into
that sector I can do good work there and
I was like okay I get your point
but it's interesting the language you've
used there mm-hmm and I pulled her up on
it and I think it freaked her out a bit
because I mean she is what she said like
I'm not used to thinking that bad things
from this what would you call it and I
guess like philosophical inquiry
perspective cuz to me I was thinking
well that just did that betrays this
this fact that we're trained to think of
ourselves as like a commodity yes
I'm an asset to this room and she's like
I'm something that can be tapped on with
a certain degree of absque ills and
be able to do something that's
completely true but it's just partial
okay thank you I think I mean I say to
people like if you feel like you want to
go and do something like working in
they're not prefer profits then go and
do it and then sit here thinking when
I'm not gonna do it yet I'm gonna wait
because again there and just start
learning anyway yeah yeah that is I mean
I think that's probably in something
young was just throw yourself in and
start doing yeah totally yeah yeah I
mean that's I think it's hard to say but
like one of the one of the most
important trainings at the monastic
Academy is just that right it's like and
and I think this might be actually why
the discomfort is so necessary right
because I know for me a lot of the
reasons why I in the past wouldn't do
the thing that my heart was calling me
to do the reason I wouldn't do them was
because I was afraid of what life would
be like if I did like that I would lose
some of what I have come to value and
depend on whether it's like my apartment
or my particular relationships or access
to what I consider to be healthy food or
whatever and once we live in a place and
we subject ourselves to enough
discomforts and I think that it's the
Stoics also have practices like this
when they defend periods of time just
like wearing a hair shirt and like not
you know doing anything for fun like I
think there's like the what are the
dopamine fasts are now very popular in
Silicon Valley but that you sort of like
realize that you're fine like you can
eat what you think is not great food you
can like have a worse apartment you can
figure it out if you're actually
listening to this conversation that
we're having right now you are in the
scope of the planet one of the most
privileged people alive right and like
you the wiggle room like how or maybe
another way to put it is like if you're
making an assessment and deciding what
to do and you have on the one hand the
possibility of discomfort or that I
might hurt how I see myself and my
identity and myself you and the other
hand you have that which you your heart
knows it needs to do that what you
like most called to do when your most
honest with yourself like how do you
increase the weight of that like make
that be but have a much more powerful
pull on you and decrease the weight that
your self view and your desires for
comfort have on you and that seems like
an endlessly good you know choice to
make is anything that makes that have
urine the other lighter and yeah it's
it's easy it's easy to be fooled into
thinking that we ought to wait and then
our life becomes waiting this is cool I
think I can loop us back down to where
we started now to bring systems because
I think well I think one of the insights
of studying systems is systems sometimes
have a tendency towards just homeostasis
and staying in the same way of doing
things not because it's necessarily the
best way of doing it because it's
because it's the most energetically
efficient way of doing things
and that seems to be exactly what
happens when you're in that position of
knowing you want to go over here but
you're here and it's comfortable here
because going over here means as you
said maybe it means sacrificing the
appointment or the friendship groups or
the relationship or the job with the
Christie salary any number of things and
although that sacrifice will actually
open up something up here and I think
that can be felt there's also just so
much that just goes yeah but not it's
exactly the same thing that plays out on
the global scale when we say see global
warming it's like well if we could just
cut down total them yes like wouldn't
solve everything but if we could
actually all just pay lip service to the
things that we think we should do
everyone
just like I don't know stop buying
plastic because they could or at least
massively cut down on plastic minutes
convenient and that's the thing there's
some times where I get a bit wound up
with say the protest movement around
their stuff because you can go and shout
about it and then go back into just the
same the same cycle of life but the
thing is it's not even individuals fault
because the systems themselves are again
they're set up that way the systems are
hard to change you have to go to work
which means you have to get to work
which means you have to consume energy
to get to work and the most efficient
way to do that is probably to use it
petrol guzzling machine hmm but again I
guess this is personal transformation
right why I think it can be so key for
this system level change because if on
that micro level you can break the
system and go there then that is that is
presumably a skill that can be learned
and the next time you want to break out
there and go there it's 2% easier yes
and I mean now I'm starting to think of
this reminds me of Jordan green Hall
right among me I don't know if he's
spoken about it he must have done
explicitly that's why I'm thinking about
it but like learning to learn or
learning to get better at learning
learning that cycle yes yeah yeah yeah
yeah I mean that that I think we're
hitting upon one of the fundamental ways
of looking at what this possible form of
Education that I want to create should
do right where it dampens and uninstalls
that which keeps us in this homeostatic
relationship with the larger system and
amplifies increases the the courage the
call of the world and our heart to
become that which we must be in order to
step forth as heroes of our time right
and so whatever we can do
simplify that and down regulate the
other like that seems like a simple
version of what I'm I'm wanting and I
remember when I had my first
conversation with the teacher at the
monastic Academy his name is sore you
for all and I talked to me about what
the vision for the organization was and
part of it was that we could create a
mutually reinforcing feedback loop
between wisdom love and power right and
so the idea here would be that somehow
those who are wise and loving would also
get power in a world that in our system
and part of that is a part of power is
gathering resources right getting
resources and specifically in our world
today that means mostly money money and
attention money and so you know part of
the ideal is like okay what how do like
what's the business model of such a
place like how do we gather resources
and I said to him I remember on a first
call I said well like what if there's no
way to get resources without
compromising your integrity and he said
if the world is not willing if if the
world is not willing to give me what I
need to live my vow then I'll just sit
down and die right that kind of
uncompromising integrity like totally
dedicated to what he knew was right
totally unwilling to just like give it
an inch and then perhaps give it a mile
later that was I don't know if it's
always pragmatically like always the
best way of looking at things but it
really called to my my heart and really
like inspired me and I just so
appreciate that capacity and it just
seems like from where I'm sitting that
that that capacity whatever that is it
was courage integrity that's what we
need more of and in this world going for
I think there's something really
beautiful about the idea of holding your
ground on something and actually like
digging in and saying no this is my line
I think you know I wonder if it speaks
to trust as men in particular like
warriors who once upon a time would have
been called to fight and to defend
territory and now I think it's a good
thing that we don't have these wars
because we had big scale Wars now we'd
just annihilate ourselves but that that
exists within us still that will to to
defend and to to be willing to sacrifice
for something and it doesn't just have
to beat men really I don't have to
exclude women from this but I just
wonder if because men historically have
been the Warriors to fighters maybe
because I feel it really speaking when
you're speaking now is like yes I like
it
mmm I mean maybe there'll be chicks
listening to this and they'll say yeah I
want to dig in and yet dig in like we
don't have to be exclusive the point is
on that yeah
digging it fine
not thing that's worth holding to as
well yes yeah well that's thick that's
the key right because you could date
people dig in all the time could they
dig in to protect that which ought not
be protected yeah difference yeah it
sure is it's like what how do we find
what is worth fighting over
yes what is worth fighting for was worth
dying for
right what is worth dying for what would
you be willing to stake your life on
and that for me is such like I can even
feel as I say that question like my body
kind of like resonates like I can feel
some kind of attunements kind of
residents there I think for me there's
such a deep desire to give myself to
something more than me
and the problem is that so many so much
of the world that is asking us to give
ourselves to kind of sacrifice ourselves
it's for totally bankrupt and moral
reasons you know give yourself for the
good of the company no you shouldn't do
that you shouldn't do that it's a bad
trade but there are such things that are
worth giving your life to we know that
and like it is worth doing whatever it
takes to find that and then give
yourself completely to it at least
that's how I with my life and it strikes
me that that itself can be a spiritual
part of the spiritual discipline I think
yeah Thomas Merton there's a great line
is that he is like a something he I
think he opens his meditation with his
places that none of me belongs to anyone
but you
he's talking to God in this case he's
gone there's something in that this
willingness to give it all away that's
such a shift from thinking that I belong
to me and my purpose is to satisfy those
whom is the pertain and pop up yeah I
know like we bill
to that which is beyond and a simple way
to just check in with that and really
make it obvious I think it's just to
remind yourself that all the little bits
of matter in our bodies but the hair
before either of us came into being as
consciousnesses and will be there after
we die and we kind of on loan from the
universe mm-hmm yeah did yeah yeah and
you know I love that there's yes and it
seems from where I'm sitting that it
takes a hell of a lot of work to embody
that what you just said to really embody
that as because of all the things we
were just talking about right there's
like it seems like again from where I'm
sitting and that the whole of the world
the whole of the human world were
participating in more or less is
attempting to affirm the opposite of
that and I think it's important that
we'd be clear about the almost like
Herculean task of totally leaving that
and giving it away as very not that is
not easy to fool ourselves is very easy
to fool ourselves hey I was going to say
this again I have fooled myself over and
over and over again I'm a servant of
peace and God now yeah by the way
tweeted about it or I posted on my
facebook you know it's like yeah I think
I've seen a lot of Facebook posts like
that from people I know in spiritual
communities and this there's something
sweet about it but also something just
like I don't think you'd have to make a
post about it yeah well again you know
whenever you're posting something you're
participating in the information ecology
of the world and you gotta be I think
for me I consider all these things to be
very very sacred very very important and
so I attempt to be very thoughtful and
well
the rules that I have for myself is that
I will never say anything in a public
forum that is not my actual experience
and I try to stay true to that I don't
know if other people have that same
principle in terms of how they speak
about these things and that's something
that again the teachers or you this
drills into us he's like do not be a
hypocrite do not be a hypocrite
the spiritual like these are the one
things that you really should not be a
hypocrite because that's how we'd to
base the the kind of currency of debt
everybody's saying oh yes everything's
perfect I'm a servant of God
oh yes really the only thing I tack on
to that is what if like you're trying
out ideas yeah is because I think like
often when I'm engaging on Twitter for
example there's a kind of speculation a
kind of playful creativity to it mm-hmm
but I think well I guess what has to
come along with that like I'm where were
like I trying to engage as authentically
as possible as I can on Twitter but be
like if I'm saying something and some
wants to criticize it and let's have a
conversation about it rather than being
wedded to something so purely that it
can't be
go of mm-hmm yeah I want to come up with
like I thought about this before like
some kind of like acronym or meme that
essentially means do you see I yet
before you say something it and it means
like this is a provisional frame or way
of seeing that I am playing with and
then you say what you say he is then
yeah as you say like you don't we don't
want to foreclose on that kind of
playfulness too but I also want to like
be us take a stand for like speaking
that which is actually true for us and
not muddying the waters around that good
I want both
they sure Daniel join a wrap up here
yeah I'm starting to really need the
toilet and I think yeah me too I really
appreciate this this conversation has
been fun to explore
[Music]
[Music]