good morning welcome to day 12 of
possibility in the pandemic today we are
going to try a coaching session so I'm
just gonna go over to Twitter right now
and post a link to where you can be
coached in the comments of this post on
Twitter though first open some have that
option and on YouTube it is in the
comments in the description so if you
would like to try coaching then follow
the links and I can coach you for a bit
otherwise I'm gonna do one for myself if
nobody joins us a couple minutes I did
coaching training I think in 2010 if not
it was before that in like 2009 and it's
funny because I went into it in order to
really tell people what to do wait to be
like I am I enjoy sitting with someone
who's having crisis is from the wrong
word but having a dilemma and helping
them figure out which which option to
choose so I sought out which coaching
was gonna be the best for that and I
came in contact with coaching and
leadership international I really like
their techniques that they use and it
turns out it was nothing like what I was
looking for because the role of the
coach is really just to facilitate the
participant in accessing their own inner
tuition into your own inner intuition in
figuring out what your subconscious is
trying to tell you about any goal or
issue and then helping them to code it
so it's very little offering from
besides facilitation except at the very
end where I asked for permission to give
my what came up for me well well you're
doing a session so like I said I can do
my own which I won't do if nobody shows
up on in the to be able to participate
there is a link in the description on
YouTube and there is a link on Twitter
if you fall into some periscope I'm at
crowd democracy sleeve that's still my
name even though I changed the name
names Jubilee and so when I was looking
through because I again
to this training over a decade ago and
when I was looking through the material
there's a lot that don't you can't
really do in an hour-long session online
with people there's this little book
upside down this little book that I
could do five or six people within an
hour because they're like 10 15 minute
coaching sessions but there was also I
knew there was one about your life's
purpose and there's one about your
relationship with others and one about
your relationship with self which is
three of the four question he's like oh
so I want to try and I took and didn't
actually really do any group coaching
sessions and so I want to dust that off
and look at whether or not I can do
group coaching sessions around your life
purpose a relationship with others in
our relationship with self because
that's three of the four questions
that's who am i who are my people
what is my purpose and then of course
what I need varies depending on how you
try to fulfill who you are you people
out of you purposes we all have have
different different very needs that we
have but I like that it didn't resonate
before I opened the coach maybe that's
the whole reason I was supposed to do
this session and so if I can do group
coaching then I can work with five or
six people every week not necessarily
live on YouTube I think we'd move over
to zoom and then there's just something
percolate it was like five minutes
before I turned this odd that I was like
oh weird that those tools exist that I I
knew two of them did and the third one
didn't quite resonate I was like oh we
can only figure out I think it was the
perfect personal one I wasn't quite with
and it would be relationship and purpose
one was there
and so if yeah anyway so I'm gonna sit
with working through that with with the
group and then if anyone's interested
but I'm gonna keep doing this anyway
until there's more people that show up
then who want to participate there's
more people who show up then I can
accommodate in an hour then moving it
over to zoom and doing group coaching is
the solution to that because group
coaching although not
Sara Lee more powerful than one-on-one
like somatic therapy where you actually
benefit more from having more people in
the group but there's still something
about group coaching where when one
person brings up an issue it resonates
with everyone else if one person's
talking about a relationship no one else
has relationships it's still dealing
with that one person it will bring into
it people's like finances and emotions
and everything else right if you work on
one area of your life and ends up impact
you all the areas so since we've been on
for five minutes and no one has joined
I'm going to do my own coaching session
she'll be a little less than ideal for
that but let's let's see so I'm gonna
talk to myself like I'm a client and
because no I have done for self coaching
sessions before but normally I'm not to
eat them on camera so no and I talk to
myself all the time so we're just doing
we're just merging those two together
remove judging myself daily materialist
I got that five water coaching kit in a
pen I do I do in fact I'm not gonna pick
a values card there's a lot of things
ten being focused how president focused
am I for my session today I would say an
eight let's take a moment get hard
center and so it's more to attend have
to walk someone else through this
process but for me I can I need to say
no luck alright say okay so there are
several ways to get focus no favorite
place underneath that part okay II yeah
to the G okay turn the last sessions
notes no that was like eight years ago
yes recall mid-nineteen nothing exists
then what did I have no ask so how am I
doing with my plan for my last session
to save the world I think I'm on track
I'm good I'm good so is my fun
secrets okay tuck turn to the next clean
page what stressor challenge or goal
would you like to work on today oh it's
funny I was like I have not prepared
anything and in the moment I was like
how I don't even remember what we're
using
with the tool I picked to use today I
need to make it into a goal anyway so
there's no point in starting with a
stressor then change it into a goal
so what stress or challenger goal what
goal would I like to work on today and
that's to figure out figure out some
word that I don't want to use what do I
want to do I want to make these
hour-long sessions powerful for myself
and the participant so that that's
viewers or people to stay on camera so
what's unique hmm
that isn't even really what I want to do
how - how do I interesting it starting
out with one end up another okay so my
goal is is that a goal smart it's a
specific measurable attainable realistic
or time-based no no it is that that's
right
how do i is that a goal if not I'll be
to change it into one but I feel like
when I start working then I'll figure it
up it's a goal but it's kind of a
question of yeah how do I have the
biggest impact what can I do that's
gonna have the biggest impact of world
no is it possible to be a little more
specific
is it because it's always fossil-free to
be more specific
do I ever get excited oh cool a chef I
thought they were working on a painting
well doing this I'd love to see the
painting at the end I don't realize it
you're not gonna be done the painter
ever but real issue real goal so it's
possible to be a little more specific so
I struggle with being able to find the
balance in doing what I should do which
I know never really resonates Inc if he
gives me the biggest impact first is
what I can and shed would
you can't like what I what is something
that that I can do within my limitations
that is gonna resonate with other people
and so sometimes when I have the goal in
mind as in like I'm like I want a
hundred people watching this I'm gonna
have a huge impact that's not really
what I mean I mean more a deeper level
impact with one person or two people
rather than a superficial level with
with a bunch of people so I want to know
am i moving in the best good I can for
me and the world is what so that's a
little more specific so what do I think
is the real issue or real goal the real
goal its to cook is to create a
hour-long broadcast now is the real goal
it's hard to do this live stay heart
centered will be a camera so much easier
when I'm just in the coaching position I
think how do I make the best use of this
hour and I don't mean this exact hour to
make the best use of these hours this
hour-long broadcasts okay I didn't
record it what results would I like to
see from this session well I would love
to have a insight into what that could
look like what yeah instead go and
that's coming up I would also love to
have an impact on anyone watching that
having someone who gets something out of
what I'm doing for their own personal
life
maybe it's joining the next session when
I do these so they can get it out of
they can get messages from their
subconscious more easily or it could be
my subconscious message giving it to
them right that if I get watching me go
through the process that's why we do
group group sessions helps everyone also
sit process so that is also my intention
is to help viewers but that's definitely
secondary like I can't con straight on
that I'm the other one okay we're done
yes t-short another PS d stands for a
personal success tool for this
particular coach Rheumatology we'll be
using we need a goal could you please
turn your issue into a real goal and
again I'm not sure there it's a goal at
the moment I was much better at this
than I was doing this regularly but we
have established that your real goal
here is to oh yeah it's a question so
it's definitely not a goal so it's the
goal wouldn't be how to make the best
use of these hours it would be to make
the best use of these floors discover
what would make the best use of these
hours what would make the best use of
these hours okay
our coaching tool ba is called PST short
there's a longer version however today
we'll be working with the short version
our intent is develop innovative
solutions which I can use in order to
achieve my goal
okay so the first question is what does
the greatest okay where are you now with
respect to achieving this goal for
example how far have you come in
accomplishing it how much have you
achieved well I mean I'm going live for
an hour every morning so my butt's in
the seat and I'm showing up which i
think is fairly good and as far as what
kind of impact I've had on other people
or how I'm making the best use of these
hours I think I'm doing pretty good I'm
allowing it to arrive as its supposed to
and it's funny cuz this of course is
coaching stuff that I trained in was all
pre me surrendering to the will of the
universe that allowing things to unfold
in their own time so making a goal and
following through with it is a little
bit of a strange thing because it's more
about like keeping that goal in mind and
trusting that whatever next best step my
taking leads there and it does so that's
where might have faith in that but I so
I feel like I'm doing pretty good just
even asking the question it was pretty
it's pretty good but I haven't achieved
it I can't check off the box that I've
made these hours into a powerful session
there is something that is lacking I
want to say and I know that it's almost
there that like having different options
and trying out different things so
that's how that respect for example how
far you come okay let's identify your
greatest roadblock to achieving your
goal well stopping you from achieving
your goal emotional and intellectual
spiritual and physical okay my greatest
roadblock is just not knowing how what
is it's just if I knew how to boot how
to have a powerful conversation for the
hour if I knew what needed to be done
during these hours I'd be doing it so
it's like the lack of so that's an
intellectual roadblock I would say I
don't know no and it's not ever a common
being in my life I did this thing called
plan mark which if you know it you know
it you don't you don't and one of the
things that came up for me is it I don't
know it's my like story that runs
throughout my entire life I don't know I
don't know it seems like a pretty that
is the biggest roadblock I don't know
what to do during these sessions to
fulfill that goal it is the greatest
robe luck and how is this a room book
how is it stopping me from achieving my
real goal again if I knew how to do it
I'd be doing it or I'd be arguing with
my guides as to why I can't do it and
maybe give me the next step so just the
lack of not knowing that and yet it's
not a roadblock because I'm just showing
up and doing it to the best of my
ability and
so how's it a stuffing for achieving my
real goal we're not quite at the state
of these hour-long sessions being
powerful and the audience and the
participants getting enough out of it
that it draws in more people and if
there are more people we can't
necessarily work on that getting the
10,000 people and finding the people who
are some I shouldn't pay FICA less darn
it okay it could be the most powerful
thing how to find people to have the
conversations new process or easy how do
we have a process that could include
10,000 people anyway so working through
the grid this is the great just you can
see what it is so oh my goodness I'm
supposed to have other charts going on
right now one second looks like it
although I love this donkey training the
graphics for everything that they do I
always just say always make me laugh
so I have to show this I think they
might have a different coaching kit now
but like what is that someone with it
with a torch right being a dolphin I
don't know b13 okay he's gonna find my
other one okay fears or like fears are
like walls stopping us from achieving
our goals what is my greatest fear
around this roadblock and there's a list
of them so I'm gonna read them out and
see which one shows everything fear
itself
a lack of confidence fear of others
maybe a little fear of God fear of a
place or a thing fear of failure fear of
claiming the gifts that God has given me
might be one because it's breaking up
some emotion even though the working of
God is hard for fear of success fear of
change or transition fear of loss fear
of the unknown
year of repeating a pattern it's also
possibly putting stars I don't want to
write it starred in the book it's so put
in about the paper beside it like that's
not gonna be any that's put 11 down
repeating a pattern and look god okay or
the gifts of God fear of surrender so
bit of most of these fear of being alone
nope
fear of remembering the past fear of
survival it's not not one fear of pain
emotional spiritual physical or
intellectual that's not mine fear of
transformation transforming self fear of
anxiety fear of prestige or other fears
okay so there were three that resonated
if we were repeating a pattern I don't
actually know what pattern that would be
so I feel like no fear of survival and
fear of claiming the gifts that God has
given me
I'm gonna go with the fear of stepping
into my full power with the gifts that
I've been given and truly being seen for
my challenges and although I feel like I
do that quite well there's always
another layer of being loving and
accepting to myself exactly as I am not
needing this to look a certain way but
knowing that if and when this takes off
if and when we have people who are like
there's there's a fear of needing to be
the person see it he didn't to be the
person that it all rests on my shoulders
and unfortunate since that is my fear
that it all rests on my shoulders it's
actually what is going to play like a
the word it's good but that's always how
words need Ian to be the person and both
that not happening and that happening
both of those things are terrifying to
me all right
now I'm going to use the feelings chart
what is the strongest feeling which
comes up for me around this roadblock
feelings chart unconstructive or
constructive I'm gonna go with it's
probably a constructive emotions around
my fear roadblock frustration that is
definitely one anger unworthiness yeah
he didn't make a list abandonment I
think that's a normal fear for all the
time but not for this in particular
resentment guilt perplexed lack of love
pain death not approved of manipulation
oh that is one I don't want to appear to
be manipulating people
addictions feeling with this view
needing to be the person aloneness
disappointment embarrassed I'm happy
bewildered not peaceful just aa
unempowered not accepting unloving not
being loved not accepted unsupportive no
freedom not strong not magical not
purposeful not joyful not self-aware
unbalanced afraid helpless annoyed hey
leave that 114 aloneness is the fear
both to be in a leadership /
hierarchical position and not have
people like you can't do that without
other people and I don't want that
actually I want a peer-to-peer
relationship I want to create this
together I want other people's input but
both fully putting that out in the
universe having nobody respond is is
lonely and isolating and also um this
idea that you need to be in a leadership
role and have it be hierarchical is
itself lonely is
that other people are the followers
means it's on you and I want it to be
more of like the knights of the round
table are all equal and so there's an
alumnus there that I do feel of like
both being in a leadership role and
getting it wrong and having people leave
and just being in the leadership role so
it's it's the aloneness there which I
don't know if I was really aware of so
what is the strongest feeling that comes
up for me around this robot is it the
strongest because I didn't really even
know it was there fear of being the
person it happened here not happening I
love how it's always simultaneous it's
just the biggest feeling the strongest
feeling I have is yes and being
abandoned there's like looking like a
crazy people and having people like well
stop talking about this stuff and that
also that actually plays out in real
life
and it's never as bad as I think it's
gonna be it's like I like to find the
roots to do it but there is that sense
of losing the community I have by
finding the community I need so
aloneness I think luminous calculates it
encapsulates it values chart what are
you learning by holding on to this
roadblock damn it I'm not learning
anything he's files let's see okay what
are the benefits of holding on to this
roadblock acceptance it's sort of a nice
balanced beauty carry and challenge I'm
so read them there's like a lot let's
not read them but like what am i gaining
getting a contentment I need to be the
person neither half gain or not and
feeling alone what am i gaining by this
what am i learning why is it keeping him
diligence enthusiasm faith faithfulness
forgiveness well that's weird
did I kept the other one grace which is
always the one when I pick it out at
random because there's a deck of cards
it looks like that's like a throwaway
one so it's weird that cuz I associate
it so much with religious grace am i
learning grace in this yeah there's
something there it's like a it's like
when I tell people who sit here in the
universe somehow they think that plays
into my ego that I'm like I know how we
can save that we're all together it's
both honoring the ridiculousness of that
and also like really wanted people to
see that it's not ego so if we trusted
beyond people who have ego which makes
it a whole hierarchical structure why is
that better wise that works but what I
mean is like that grace without it being
which is ironic because of course I put
the ego part out there I can do it I'm
gonna me to save the world you all get
to watch so it's weird that it's grace
I'm learning in that but I know that it
is like an underlining level of like
what but if I truly step into my power
then it's gonna look even more like you
though even though I know that's not
true since the whatever it's the other
part that is there that makes it look
like you go it's like the lack of
language to be able to give the true
beauty and magic of what we're gonna do
together makes it sound like it's all on
me and on the central leader as opposed
to this is something we're gonna do
together and so grace and acceptance in
like letting things unfold in the right
time and truly getting that it happens
and it's six or eight times there's
nothing more to do beyond what I'm doing
really
that's not an answer the question okay
so grace and acceptance or skills chart
which specific skills do I need in order
to overcome this roadblock
I think I have those skills somewhere I
feel like I did that that happens
all right skills possible behaviors
possible skills required there we go
planning goal setting prioritization
announced analogizing scheduling
arranging meetings finance and budget
paperwork an email delegation
communication if only University have
only presentation and facilitation
skills twelve other this is where I
don't really need any new skills I need
to accept that I have all of the perfect
skills right now that if I need to do
any of these things and I can't do them
somebody else is going to need to do
them but to truly accept that so even
though it's in no way on this chart
surrender is the skill that I constantly
need and it's what I'm constantly
supposed to which behavior could assist
you in overcoming this roadblock really
hmm interesting
I see what's happening here okay so that
is finishing the chart oh now we left it
on the trip okay
by the time the coachee has you ever
done that did that solutions release of
the emotional charge for innovative
solutions what are you really thinking
and or believing at this moment in time
around what we have discussed so far
that this was beautifully pointless the
answer to the question and I don't know
yes yeah this is tap into my actual
subconscious but is just surrender to
not know you know these hours go to the
goal guys so me answer the goal guys
talk to my guides here guys guides
sounds so similar
what are you really thinking and
believing this moment in time around
what we've discussed so far yeah
beautifully pointless maybe positive
belief did you adopt right now in order
to achieve your goal everything is
happening in its exact right timing way
everything everything is unfolding in
perfect timing
I put question marks out for that said
exhalation point really in a moment we
will do an exercise which will be put
behind you many emotional charges you
have around this real goal this will
allow your right brain to release
additional ideas and solutions for you
to consider am I ready oh no because I
have none of those on me but one second
let's see which one is gonna come for me
[Music]
there's something about the Fibonacci
let's do this you should because it says
Fibonacci okay to pop the receptors and
develop a more innovative solutions
let's do a quick exercise based on the
Fibonacci sequence Fibonacci was a 13th
century genius mathematician write down
the following numerical numbers PMI
numbers 0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 you don't
need to pause well I do it because I did
it well sooner okay when looking at
these number what positive words comes
to my order
emerging like emergent uh apparent order
merging so like magic what I refer to is
magic like the Fibonacci sequence is a a
good nature and does yes what does it
represent
what does the magic an emerging order
from chaos or chaos that is order an
order that is chaos wait this is the
only thing I'm doing I'm getting one
word I don't like this one touch it
that's it it is gonna be does this
interesting how is this representation a
logical solution for my real goal which
was to discover what would make the best
use of these hours to surrender to the
magic that is and allow it to unfold and
it's right time Wow yep just add up 0 1
1 2 this keeps adding to the last one in
the last one and it will happen in
that's right time does it need to be
pushed into planning it could just
happen really cool awesome that was
interesting
alright doing this versus now oh yes now
it's fighting time me having thoroughly
investigated this real goal and bite you
to develop a plan now and record it on
this place incorporate the solutions you
identified during the session as well as
ones you received a moment to go when
you release the final charges what could
be your first smart goal what could be
my first smart goal specific measurable
attainable realistic time-based so to
show up to these hours just show up and
participate although what I am getting
is to be to make sure at 8:30 as often
as I can that I'm truly ready in a heart
centered space to go live that might not
look different to anyone else but I know
it ups my communication and just my
presence
and would it be okay if I shared some
additional ideas with you this is where
this is the question of where I step in
and do it it's like no does anyone else
want hitting or watch this they have any
additional ideas they'd like to share
but they maybe got when I was doing it
my smart vegetable to is to keep coming
on for an hour and to let it emerge as
well as sorry to schedule a conversation
with Heather and Eric about the four
questions and this is not in any way a
smart goal but like just sitting with
the four questions and these three
coaching of tools that I rediscovered
for three of the four questions and
figure you know what is wrong let's
let's render that's not the magic people
that allow heed something to come out of
that allowing a potential zoom
conversation for weekly coaching
sessions or we do rotate between the
relationship with self friend coaching
me at the moment cuz nobody showed up I
would be coaching somebody who wants to
be coached if they if they want to do so
on camera next time we do this well I'm
done in half an hour but if you want it
you can follow the the link in your on
periscope so it actually be on Twitter
my name there is democracy the same as
it is on periscope and I'm live there
and underneath in the comments is the
link to the invite and I can also do
this and so we won't be able to do a
full one like we like I just did because
I only took 34 minutes but I already
knew a lot of these things that I'm
better at it my sub consciousness is
like popcorn in the movie constantly not
waiting until this part you're supposed
to listen to us just give it to
constantly do i smoke weed yes have I
smoked weed right now no weird
well that is strange did someone else
put that up there because it seems oh
because if I comment it goes on both of
them is that what happened because it
was it anyway yeah I see but yes anybody
wants to join on camera and we can do
we'll do one of the clicker coaching
sessions see what you get out of it
so you provided you with a quick
conversational coaching question right
the client to generate their own and
better solutions to challenges and goals
little or no mentoring require the coach
courage greater focus heads greater
results like there's a question this is
to ask yeah there we go it's basically
the one on all of us right yeah so if
anybody wants to come on and get that
done otherwise I will I don't know what
are we doing plus because that did not
take an hour usually the issue is a lot
of B M like there's a longer tool for
his personal success tool and whenever
I've done it with a client they it takes
much longer than the hour so I figured
it would take longer than the hour for
me to do it for myself which it may have
but happy why don't you do this again a
different day with the same paper
because it's otherwise well although I
can't put the real life I didn't write
the real goal at the table so I can use
it next time try thermoball out there
but said if anybody wants to comment on
what they may have gotten from when I
was doing it like any what comes up for
me as the coach when I'm doing it was
someone else is oh I will get my own
images or ideas sometimes or when
they're sometimes it's easier to see the
solution for somebody else's problem and
goal of course than it is for your own
we all deal with that on a regular basis
we will give somebody else relationship
vice that we honestly are supposed to be
giving ourselves and or financial advice
or job advice or anything and it ends up
that exactly what we see in their life
is a reflection of what is happening in
our nars right like I'll you should
really listen to your your partner
and/or you should leave your partner
but generally the advice you should be
giving yourself and so my point of that
was to drink water facilitate the
synapses I did take this coaching know
it was definitely air when I took it his
own private suss to like listen to it on
my right aside when doing coaching over
the phone I was like I can't because I'm
deaf in that ear and it supposed to be
your positive listening inside the other
ones like your negative listen you
decide I'm like good I can only listen
on my negative less the inside
I wonder I filtered into positive but I
took the coaching the dis coaching
course before I had radiation on my
brain but I think I took the group coach
either right before my radiation or I'd
like a year after and so I think I was
still able to learn new things boy
although this one stuff more than the
group coaching which is what I have to
go and revisit it for sure and see how
does this look in the group coaching
because I especially want to do the
point of doing group coaching is to do
the relationship with self the
relationship with others and the what is
my purpose tools on repeat so like let's
say we do it on Monday is on Zoom and so
bringing in a group of people and you
can participate in a multiple times it
doesn't matter but the idea is to have
people come in and be able to do it over
a three-week period get more in touch
with those things as to who am i what is
my purpose who are my people and the
more were able to answer those are the
four questions and the fourth question
mean what do I need in order to be able
to do any of that to be able to live
life to be able to like just one is
resources what do I need one is what do
I need to do is the verb what is my
purpose and then me and the people it's
like the individual in the group
sometimes you need a group sometimes you
need the individual usually you need
both groups are only made up of
individuals and so my brain would finish
one thought for certain no I don't I
don't wish that at all don't listen to
me
I wouldn't have the brain I have if it
did something which is why the universe
is
so amazed even like if i got what i
wanted instead of what I needed it would
never be the right thing like I have a
child who I absolutely love and she is
the perfect child for me and I am
somewhat the perfect parent for her but
I would not have taped off all the boxes
like before you become a parent you
think you have a lot of saying who
they're gonna be like a lot who's like
great she's gonna be a tomboy just take
up skateboarding and it's gonna be no no
I got the polar opposite raise my kid
gender-neutral oh and the perfect
reflection of all of my shadow side that
I don't accept in love my stubbornness
my silliness my like things I actually
like my silliness petting her sometimes
it triggers be it I'm like I don't cuz I
don't because when I'm being silly I
know it's when I'm ready to be silly
when I'm ready for humor when I'm ready
for it doesn't ever happen at the wrong
time whereas like I'm tired can be silly
tomorrow I'm tired stuff lame pranks on
young but it's like she is perfectly
what she is and if I got to do Gattaca
self selection and genetics and whatever
it was I might know I might have chosen
someone who was more logical and
mathematical and more like me and that's
in no way what I needed it i canti like
it's the biggest impact of who you want
to show it or you don't have to but I'm
really just working on edges or just a
small painting I'm actually this
painting edges out is it cherry blossoms
or is it legal what's an abstract it's
probably hard to see it a lot-- benin i
totally thought it was a tree when you
should go first I was like is it this
tree or this tree it's one of them you
can it could be a tree you can imagine
as a tree I really liked what you were
talking about today I love this idea of
going from with the your cognitive
thinking mind to the subconscious that's
super
cool doing them both together I I've
never heard of that I've never done any
coaching or anything but I have them
from group counseling and I do agree
that working in a group is really
beneficial and very insightful like you
open up to different things and you
would expect or on your own so that's
super cool so you're thinking about
doing this a couple times a week well
and this is where it's gonna be really
chaotic if I pick a different thing to
do every day of the week but that's kind
of my job listing like something common
in one day having Wednesday's is gonna
become probably the solution Racing
which is what I would like right is
bringing the solutions in the world but
part of that is creating the culture
right creating mannequins most of what I
see in the gaming space in a lot of
other places and this is my own shadow
side to deal with but it's like
orchestrating what I need not to look
like right what I need you to do in
order for you to step it up in your
evolution so you can match me in mine
right instead of being exactly where
you're supposed to be Who am I to say
you're not where you're supposed to be
and how do we work with you from where
you are at because I got a feel to work
with me where I am right like I'm like I
don't want and on which is why this
thing this process is weird that I've
been called somewhat beyond is the wrong
words I got a lot out of it it was like
how perfect but the coaching session
gave me exactly what I already kind of
got access to but it's at a deeper level
it's like okay no it is just surrender
it is just show up and put your button
to see and every time I've done one I
was a little disappointed because the
Fibonacci sequence that I picked doesn't
do what you know it's just one word like
what's the one word whereas other ones
there's one that's only well but I don't
think I could do it online with other
people maybe you and I could do one time
because I could always send you like to
the picture but there's towards it again
there's this image she's created that is
in call the mind about they have it
online for free a new self poking but
there's like three or four different
coaching session for you like following
it with your non-dominant hand okay all
it along and I can't even do it because
of course the backwards in your part who
I am doing okay
it's reading my brain in a hole
wow really oh wow
with the mirror anyway and it's so here
listen you're getting images pull your
tweet it you just say it about loud my
record thumb and then when you get to
the center of the heart space then you
have more kind of images and I love
those ones you end up being the perfect
subconscious that's what your
subconscious piece and is images and and
aliens and stuff so having someone bring
up what they're what those things are
and then helping them decode it I just
really love that process unless you are
goals now I'm like can we just render to
the universe and but at the same time if
you're gonna have a goal a SMART goal
works like having it be specific
measurable attainable realistic and
time-based not it's about a SMART goal
I'm going to tell who want to co-create
a solution in six months he is a SMART
goal right like that's something I could
say either we or didn't achieve and that
is I don't know it just putting it out
in the universe right I don't know how
I'm getting there yet
it's gonna get better and and and
surrendering to that process is
rendering to like not needing to be the
person but needing to be this person
right that like just following the
process is enough and I have yet to
truly get that because I constantly like
I'm not doing enough I need to be doing
more and doing more but I don't know
what that more is and so it is just
surrendering to like right now I'm kind
of getting the guidance that I'm a
little done with idea cafes that I want
to kind of pass that off to someone else
like who wants that 77 person YouTube
channel because I don't want to attend
them but it's like I'm more focused on
the solution raising and at the same
time I'm still getting something out of
participating in those conversations but
like is it mine and I can't hand it off
so no one else is gonna want to take it
or is it or maybe it's it's mine and I'm
allowed to let it go right and I just
like know it takes it on and that's mine
you know of an idea calf
they was to have it be a bunch of people
right have a hundred people get together
up into groups and have a conversation
and switch and have a conversation it's
based off of the World Cafe and although
I'm yet to really participate in one of
those and I think I would love to try
that once there's more people that the
solution raising actually generates more
people because it's a pro set like
anyone can come to an idea cafe and have
their voice heard and that's the beauty
of it but people don't really know that
and so having something tangible at the
end of the hour but it's like well we
created this together without you
needing to take any action or not
necessarily is I think more what's a
more powerful but more of a power like
they're different tools one is for like
generating the solution and the idea
Cafe is possibly a tool after that for
um okay we have a we how do we pick
which one's the best how do we which is
more than just voting because you might
want to sit and discuss it well I like
this about this one I like this but this
one and so having the idea cafe is a way
for everyone's voice to be heard
yeah but right now it means just its own
YouTube channel unless I'm gonna focus
on it which is what I was why it was
started was I was reaching out to
influencers to say hey come along and
have a conversation about a topic that
we both care about right and then pretty
much other people and that is actually a
really good business plan as far as if
somebody wants to do that to say right
like I'm gonna hold these and I'm gonna
reach out to various people's on on
these topics but I am too focused on
game being creating the solutions but
that no longer really calls to me like I
don't want desert go to the influencers
so anyway I'm not real willing to give
it up yet but if someone was like I'll
take it on I would absolutely hand it
over to them but I'm not willing to like
let it go
and so my time fills up because I don't
like letting things go I don't like
mm-hmm
so it's like I have my Wednesday I'll
make a conversation and I really love it
so I'm not willing to let that one go in
anyway we have our Friday meeting it's
like I have our Friday meeting at noon
which is the together tech I'm not
willing to let another tech thing go of
course but at the same time like we are
there's two different sessions for
together attack every week
and neither of them are really coming
together and wherever and the way that
they're supposed to do which is always
what happen it's like the idea cafe like
this will be June 6 not know that what I
didn't work in and but it did it gained
followers faster than any of the other
channels it's a focus thing right and in
the beginning it was much much more
diverse as well over the last few weeks
his basic months it's just a gaming
conversations that will make a group
isn't candy thing yeah
Omega rule is a game EB thing and so we
got together to try to practice a mega
rule there's like Omega and alpha rule
both of which I don't really understand
but together which are someone speaking
to try to find the signal in their noise
and try to minimize your noise as much
as possible and assuming that there's
signal there and to help them kind of
find it you find it and they find it and
then seamlessly but you know more signal
end I don't know if we actually practice
in practice you make a rule group but we
do knowledge to form a really cool
dynamic and relationship that every
conversation is generative in like a
personal way like it's like oh I have a
lot of ideas from that I am growing and
learning during this process and then
there's the heat or I could started that
one it's funny because Eric reached out
to me I don't even know when we started
the group who said is there anyone else
you would like to invite and I invited
Janelle and Heather I don't know who
invited Kylie actually I didn't know
Kylie's it could've been me and it was
like even though getting B is mostly men
it ended up being like all women and
Eric and then they invited we invited
Wendy and the be invited Damon and with
someone else who's never showed up
and so um David comes quite often Eric
it's almost always there me and Heather
are almost always there and then Kylie
comes when she can because it's super
early I was trying for her and the
dynamic of like who shows up at the
right time like it has been a
conversation or just Heather and I
showed up but that was amazing and just
Eric and I showed
but it's like a complete because we
record them but we don't make them
public and so when I asked him the one
with Eric and I can I make it public and
keep cano and actually the part that we
talked about oh we've done it anyway
whatever that it's talking about like
which although our Dynamis is completely
different than when I'm talking to like
Jordan Hall or or max borders and
someone who I have like a one-off
conversation with I'm like I'm
interrupting him like like glad we
generate something from that and haha
like I but anyway idea cafes kind of the
one thing I see radically could let go
of and he wouldn't have an impact a
negative impact on my life and so it's
like well but right now it's still in a
gray area like alright I'm not right you
didn't have a lot you do a lot you do
have a lot going on and it's um I think
it's all there is a center a hub of
sorts in your what you're doing but it
is a lot I can see how that would just
be challenging to keep it all going all
the time
at least for me yeah but I'm very
impressed that you do it pretty well
everyone seems part of the reason both I
did and now not is that before Kobe 19
this thing happened my capacity was up
higher than it had been in a few years
because I was like okay I'm ready to go
out of my house right I really need to
merge into the world like interacting
more people's looks taking more on and
doing more and now yeah did stress it's
like I kind of need to cocoon me and yet
I'm not I don't want a cocoon like I'm
not gonna let everything go and drop by
the wayside so it's like okay I want to
show up for these hours every morning I
want to do together Tech and I want to
do solution raise eating and that so
like that is more than enough for
anybody
individual like a boat and also
acknowledge that because I don't do free
work right I don't sit here and take a
bunch of notes I don't spend three hours
getting ready for this hour this is what
I do because it's what I'm capable of
if I needed to do all that prep work I
wouldn't be capable because it's just
hitting live right it's just hitting
that like it's like I can do this it's
super easy it's within my capacity and
so I can take more on but then at the
same time because I took more on for my
old self
it's now beyond my open 19 it's like
okay actually I can't do all like I
can't walk I'm not reaching out to other
people right now I mean baby and it's
Tran having one-on-one conversations
which I was doing quite regularly or
because one that was but I'm just yet
realizing with Kovac 19 but I'm like
Hello I am more stressed than I normally
was and stress isn't great so how do I
act most powerfully within the current
my current limitations and coming on for
an hour every day seems to be good for
me like it's like okay since it's
everyday it's not but there was
something that would happen when I would
do something just Monday to Friday it
would like oh I got to do it again on
Monday as opposed to when it's every day
it's just part of the routine and it's
early enough that there's just something
about it that I'm like okay yeah and it
can become something powerful and it
cannot be and it's all okay it's just
about surrendering to that and I was
just ready no hmm yesterday I don't know
if what you'd follow like what how you
how do you decide how do you decide the
next thing that you do um I think my
stress stress level really what though I
mean not right but we check with my
heart and be like well is it really
important like heart center for me and
it's like yes and so then I'll push
myself and sometimes it's wrong and I
push myself to do the difficult thing
and it's wrong but just like you were
showing with this process there is
something that I'm learning during that
it's either tougher skin not worried if
people don't agree I don't know but yeah
i i'm not the best to ask about I think
everyone's the best to ask because it's
like how do you pick the next and one of
the people I got
what I do from which is similar to what
you do is like following the next GPS
coordinates the GPS doesn't give you the
full big map it's just like take the
next right
right take the right and five meters and
you don't actually you can zoom out and
look at it actually that they like all
you can do is hold the next step and
that's kind of all my brain can do love
it and yet I want to see won't see the
whole big picture because that's my
personality but I can't so it's it's
like just follow the next thing and so
there's a few big things I've done in
the last few years that were rather big
it wasn't just moved this cup to the
other room there are a lot of powerful
things though like go live right now on
periscope and every time I've had that
any cleaning to do that in that way
where I wasn't just because I was born
or I had an agenda it's just like yep
you're supposed to go by but it's
usually weird times like 3:00 in the
morning okay okay
someone has shown up to powerfully with
this morning it's been this woman angel
spells it with an eight who shows up
randomly on my periscope and always is
like this amazing force and then one
blessed at all so that's given a few
things but it's like if something comes
out of it same with like smoking pot
like one of the reasons I haven't given
it up completely is that there'll be
times right it's like from it's that
message it's that GPS coordinates like
smoking like okay and then there's
something that comes out from like thank
God I did this god I listen and
sometimes you know it's just an
addiction speaking but the person I
learned that from has also been very
recently had a falling from grace and
I'm like a little me to movement he
still got a suppressed said he's still
trying to like keep his ducks in a row
and not fall apart too much which is
causing everything to fall apart oh I
can't even say his name without like oh
this is who I learnt it from I would not
suggest learning it from him and yet
honoring what I did get from him right
yeah Capel making apples apple trees
making apples without worrying about
what's happens with those apples just
making the frigging apples and it's like
okay just but they just put out whatever
my apples are I don't need to coordinate
what is gonna happen with this
someone gonna do business just produce
the apples and that both of those tools
were very powerful for me so now it's
about kind of incorporating them in a
way that other people can use them
without needing to go through him right
and he didn't come up with them anyway I
don't think I mean it's he you know got
them from other coaches and stuff so boy
so one of the few things that I want to
do during these hours and maybe you can
tell me if any of them kind of resonate
with you one of which is kind of having
an interview about the four questions so
either one prune intervening you always
sound so formal but like a conversation
about hey how who are who when I were
you and like how do we define ourselves
can we define Wynnum and whether it
would be someone new every time and we
would go through all four questions or
whether it would be someone new every
time we go through one question right
like Who am I
we could talk about for a good 15
minutes half an hour maybe a full hour
and but I don't know if that resonates
with people because I think it's more
about answering those questions in
groups and having actual tools to figure
out who you are mm-hmm but to to know
what people have done so far in their
life to know who am i who are my people
what is my purpose and what do I need is
a huge part of it it's like right then
you can see that that dynamic in your
own life and see it in other people's
and see how powerful you can do it
together
why don't ya that's kind of hard to just
to tell like what is the best it kind of
all of them all you know all of them at
want to be good at times but one at a
time would also be good like breaking
the questions down I think that they're
all important and really deep so I think
there's a lot of lot of time you can
spend on them just depends I guess on
your audience and who you have involved
with you but I do like I have taken the
questions over and over and listening
I'll try to answer them and they're
different every time for me like Who am
I changes with my mood I guess it's kind
of it's it's fast
but it's really healthy because asking
yourself those things really gives a lot
of insight like you were saying about
your subconscious kind of works through
those questions at a certain point when
you stop thinking like okay what am I
like listing your jobs or whatever it's
like okay now I'm the steeper person you
know I love a lot I have a big heart you
know there's different ways that you go
eventually Walker you keep going over
and over so I think that there are
worthy questions and I'm thinking even
though I just said I'm kind of done with
the idea cafe now in resonating that
like actually for the next four weeks I
kind of want to have those four
questions be the idea cafe like Who am I
nobody's gonna show up and answer it but
like because it's not just Who am I it's
also how do I answer the question yeah
and and maybe that's actually the
question how do I answer the question
Who am I
yeah because then it's also it could be
the process and it could be literally
answering the question who am i right
I'm a smart person and a little all over
the place is fun you know like like I'm
a kind compassionate person and how I
answer that is by constantly being
opened never fully knowing who I am and
why things I've uncovered about myself
that are huge that like remap everything
in my life right figuring out what I was
putting away when I was 36 figuring out
I was autistic when I was like 39 was
like oh I can now look back and see
those things and if I didn't know those
about myself I'm not really attached to
any part of my identity it's like who
knows what's coming down late yeah but
even little things right like oh I'm
more resilient than I thought I was or
strong in a different way like my body
is weakened getting weaker
open like my kid's gonna be stronger
than me probably in a couple years but
the true strength and resiliency that
comes from that is a different level of
strength that I honor in myself
and in other people and I'm and the
köppen 19 stress is that that we
talk about these people like they're
weak instead of then there are actually
the people we need right now
both the chronically ill that this
affects more and of course the people
who are older to spend more time on this
planet and have more more wisdom to pass
on theoretically and not all of them but
a lot of them right it's hard to spend
80 90 years on this planet and not get
something out of it right and so but
we've now been on for an hour so thanks
for joining me for the the end of it I
will be back on tomorrow tomorrow's
Saturday though so I only do a 20-minute
reek I'm doing Saturday's as recap ups
so what I did in the last week what I'm
thinking of doing in the next week
basically my own little round table
before attending the actual round table
and at o'clock which is why I only do
them for 20 minutes because then I have
to they start at 8:30 we have the 9
o'clock round table or together Tech and
then I might go you forward take Sundays
off but I'm not doing that it still
feels like I take the whole day off
really give it a spurt an hour why does
the other things feels feels pretty good
so I will be back tomorrow for 20
minutes and then I'm still figuring out
what to do for the different days of of
the week I have some kind of a schedule
like I said Wednesday's can be solution
raising I would love to have a pop
inside like a coaching session with
other people going going forward maybe
what I need to do is have that person
already preset so that they're here for
because there's the possibly more people
coming and I can't even like 5 mini
coaching sessions in the hour or I can
focus on one person and un right and
they both have they're just kind of who
shows up and who wants what but anyway
but for that's until II wanted to people
watch it make sense to have it Priest
the freedom and then see if that
generate it when there's five or six
people who are coaching then switching
over to anyone and are doing groups
coaching sessions on soon as opposed to
Center for some people especially
coaching this is a very bull-like it's
vulnerable to let alone vulnerable coach
live on camera but there's also the fact
that it's free so for some people it's
not but if I'm incentive that
like camera I'm okay with that I'm what
you're everything so I'm okay you
probably have to go but I do one thing I
would say me personally I would like the
questions ahead of time so I could think
of answers it's really hard for me to
think in the moment questions to adjust
the process that you went over today
you mean the the coaching yeah the coach
team but it's something that it is kind
of supposed to be in the moment I think
it's the generally speaking I'm doing it
the opposite way cuz I can't a lot of
the tools don't work online so I'm
picking the tool and then the coach
coachy whatever person the right person
shows up but generally you have the
person in front of you and then you let
your intuition pick what the tool is and
then you you work with it that way but
there's the basic questions that happen
every time which is like what is your
current stress or challenger hole and
then it's which process you're working
through to do that
oh okay if you wanted to do it I mean
once you've watched if you are to
participate like participated by
watching of you you could also request
one of the tools frightened to say oh I
want this one and then I know that's the
one and you kind of know what the
questions are by having it not having
been through I've done them all on
myself and I've done them most of them
on other people so like even then I was
like alright I need these papers I need
these pages and that part itself is I
don't if someone just showed up I don't
know how I'm gonna show them that right
I could just hold it up the screen I
guess and they read about I mean I guess
that's how that's actually that's great
well it'll evolve I'm sure in work its
way and I am much more in alignment with
making mistakes as they come like I'm
like oh I don't need this to be perfect
I don't need to look like the perfect
coach I really don't I just needs it
move forward and help people if it helps
anyone in any way it's our use of my
time and energy then trying to figure
out what I'm supposed to be doing which
is I'm surrendering to it yeah it was
kind of perfect coaching session cuz
nobody showed up I coach myself and got
exactly the answer I'm supposed to get
of like it's the rhetoric man how do I
do this powerfully you do
what you're doing hmm thanks yeah all
right thanks pick it up Shiloh by
YouTube by periscope