welcome to the Blitz Oh show does your
host Mike Bledsoe and today's guest is
Daniel smacking burger
he's an evolutionary philosopher systems
designer and strategist there's a
special show because I bring to him some
things that are on my mind that I'm
working with and working through and he
helps me see things on a deeper level
and unravel some truths that are within
myself he does this regularly for me
when I say regularly I mean every few
months I seem to have some type of
question that he is extremely skilled at
helping me see a different perspective
on and I think he will help you see a
different perspective as well
additionally he is the guy who created
qualia that's the no tropic I go on and
on about all the time and a co-founder
of the neuro hacker collective so if you
like what he has to say you might want
to try as product out too so if you do
want to do that go to neuro hacker.com
and add that qualia product to your cart
use the coupon code
Bledsoe 15 and you'll get 15% off I
highly recommend just going over to the
website and doing some reading whether
you're gonna buy the product or not
there's a lot of really cool stuff over
there beyond just nootropics there's a
lot of cool discussions that that if you
do dig what we talked about here you're
gonna dig what they've got going on over
there additionally one other thing make
sure to go over to iTunes give us five
stars positive comment please and helps
this podcast reach more people enjoy the
show
[Music]
Daniel good to have you good to be here
with you my friend I'm looking for
today's conversation every time we have
a conversation I leave feeling like I
definitely having learned definitely
having learned and today we're gonna dig
into being versus doing I think a lot of
people one of the reasons I want to
bring this up is this is something I've
been working on myself and being in a
culture and society where so much value
is putting on what we do and even when
I'm asked or we ask children what do you
want to be when you grow up they the
answer ends up being a doing answer
versus a being answer even though the
question is being and so we get this
association you know what do you want to
be when you grow up it's like oh I want
to be and then they name the job which
is interesting something that's come to
my attention recently I watch kids only
be a firefighter or an astronaut that
seems like a very doing thing would you
agree that that's that's just how our
culture has been molding us up to this
point oh yeah and it goes deeper than
that not only is it a doing thing it's
one very specific specialist role and
it's a specialist role that is usually
related to how they're gonna make money
and so it's what do you want to be when
you grow up first it takes them out of
the moment into the future
it takes them into wanting to develop
who they are right in the framing of
their essence as a job so you can look
at how that is the effect of
macroeconomics forming people to be
effective cogs in that system there's a
whole bunch of things going on right
being in doing is definitely one of them
as you're as you're exploring that
inquiry yourself if we reframe it to
something like who do you want to be
rather than what do you want
here what do you want to do what the
what comes up for you as meaningful
answers to that I want to be honest
trustworthy want to be a community be an
asset to the community and and that
things like that things more along the
lines of characters or not characters
but yeah what what uh what's the value
of my character am i I somebody who
tells the truth things like that and how
does it relate for you to what that
character is doing what is the
relationship those qualities of being
and doing it's some but it's something I
can do it's something I can be right now
it's not uh it's not even it's something
that aspire to as it as choice you know
I can just I want people to trust me
then I know that I need to behave with
integrity
there's a number of embedded dialectics
or dichotomies here there's now versus
later so you said this is something I
can be now versus something that's
aspirational in the future and there's
something that is more around qualities
of character versus specific types of
action someone can show up with
integrity as a artist or as an inventor
or as a entrepreneur or as a mother
right lots of different roles and those
roles are meaningful they are deep and
meaningful to who that unique being and
their expression and their Dharma and
their purposes and then there's also the
difference between the qualities of
character of how other people feel in
relationship with them and their own
quality of experience how they've
experienced life yeah and so when you
look at the fact that we have choice
over our own experience and we also have
choice over how we affect the experience
of others right all of that kind of
shows up here so there's something
around optimizing the relationship
between all these dialectics our own
acting in ways that optimize our own
experience and the experience of
everyone and everything that we touch in
effect showing up right now in the
fullest way we can now and in a way that
optimizes our growth trajectory into the
future and qualities of being and
specific types of doing that are both
aligned with each other and the deepest
aspect of who we are yeah I think it's
challenging sometimes to think about
what it is that we do I find that
sometimes there's a challenge between
who we are or who we want to be and who
were showing up how was showing up in
the world for others and I've had
conversations with others and then I've
had this internal conversation with
myself around am i showing up for the
purpose of am i doing this I tell myself
and I've watched other people tell
themselves they're doing this because
they love other people like
I'm doing doing this out of love when in
reality it's the motivation is born out
of out of need in that if I am NOT this
way or I don't behave this way or I
don't do these things then this person
won't love and accept me and so we end
up in this we end up in this place where
I either have to behave the way other
people want me to behave in order to be
liked or I do whatever I want to do and
no one's gonna like me I can't do both
that seems to be a reality that's being
created for a lot of people and a
reality I've had to wrestle with myself
so we have more things where you have
two different things that are both
meaningful framed as being dichotomous
right so you have your individuality and
your authenticity and your sovereignty
on one side which is who do I really
just want to be for myself and this is
prima facie meaningful right obviously
meaningful and then you have the
relationship connection communion side
which is how do I show up in a way that
is enriching to other people so that
they also want to show up with me
because this so much of what's
meaningful that only expresses itself
interpersonally which is obviously also
meaningful if we believe that there is
an inexorable that cauda me between
those where we have to sacrifice who we
actually are for a relationship or
sacrifice relationship to be who we are
then life will suck and
it's not actually true it is true that
those are poles but they're poles that
are actually complementary and when
navigated properly are symbiotic with
each other that you being who you
actually are and you relating with other
people in the way that creates most
meaningful relationship are symbiotic
now you might be in a relationship with
someone where they want you to behave a
certain way because you kind of made
that contract with them where from the
beginning you acted a way that you
thought that they wanted that was never
true to who you were to get something
from them where the whole thing is a
 commodities exchange but that
just might be an unauthentic
relationship to begin with would you say
that a lot of people have that
relationship with their parents
sure defect though most people have that
relationship with their parents if their
parents weren't really focused on
facilitating those people being who they
actually authentically were which is not
most parents right and so then they are
being who they think their parents need
them to be and this is why they don't
like going home for the holidays right
now there's then one can rebel and say
I'm gonna be whoever the I want to
be and lose connection or they can
sacrifice who they are and their
authenticity in a codependent way for a
connection that isn't real connection at
pseudo connection or they can see what
is the authentic overlap between who my
parents actually are who I actually am
what is the what is the overlap of that
Venn diagram that's authentic and let's
see how we can explore that let's see
how we can expand it yeah what what
would you say to somebody who say grew
up and I was just talking someone
earlier today who grew up in the Mormon
religion and then they leave that
religion and when we look at that Venn
diagram there's really not a lot of
overlap or maybe there is overlap but
it's it's very difficult to find how do
you go how do you go about do we do we'd
need to reconcile those relationships is
that something that we owe other people
so we talked about being I
environment I think you do to where the
new the relationships that are new are
easy to get into because we're showing
up as our most authentic selves more
than we ever have before and so there's
you start the relationship without the

but a relationship that where you grew
up with it and now is it something worth
cutting away later on in life and
cutting people out or is it something do
we ople something
I think there's another way to ask if
that's more insightful it's not do we
owe our parents in obligatory false
relationship which is not actually very
meaningful for anyone or on the other
side do we just cut it out I think one
meaningful question is as we are
interacting with our parents can we feel
comfortable being who we are hmm without
needing their approval and without
needing them to understand us and agree
with us and can we let them be who they
are and even if they can't even if they
don't have a worldview maybe they think
we're gonna burn in hell or they think
whatever it is right can we accept them
get them where they're at and be who we
are or do we go into some trigger where
we think we need to change who we are
for them or we need to change who they
are and to the degree that that trigger
arises is there an evolutionary
opportunity for us to heal that and are
they a really good mirror for showing us
where those triggers live inside of us
I've been that conversation with people
before too is like you think you're you
think you're enlightened or whatever you
want to call it let's go hang out your
family and they'll show you it's a very
classic statement that yeah if people
are focused on some kind of personal
development one good measure is if you
hang out with your parents the degree to
which you can be authentically you and
at peace around them without trying to
convince them of anything and let them
be who they are without being triggered
on who they are is a good measure for
how you've come yeah that's powerful
because they pretty much installed the
triggers yes so this is why it's such a
deep mirror for the triggers you know
they are for you yeah which is why you
disproportionately react to them in a
way that nobody else does right other
people won't see them like whatever it's
it's irritating it's cute it's no big
deal and you're freaking out about it is
because all of your trauma you know has
history there and to the degree you've
healed your trauma it's not so getting
pushed yeah and to the degree you
haven't seeing it shows you where you're
gonna work
yeah so coming back to I just want to
dive in just the definition of this
which is we talked about states of being
and and I personally been looking at you
know doing versus being and you know I
think a lot of us in the Western culture
consider we go oh if I do these things
then I'll be this person and then we do
those things and then we and we gonna
become a piece of this person we thought
we would become once we do these things
and now we have to do more things in
order to feel good and I've been
investigating the possibility of going
straight to being and then once you
become the person that you want to be or
the person you were you remember the
person you were before you were
imprinted you become this person that
has that is this being and this being
just does the things that they're
supposed to do or it just unfolds easily
so a lot of my focus has been around how
can I be different without focusing on
the doing first and then coming from a
lifetime of being taught that you do to
become and now I'm going in Reverse
going okay I want to be different and I
need to go and and can the motivation
and is the motivation pure it's like do
I want to be so that I can do and in
which case is that even possible or do
it do I need to have the pure motivation
of look I want to be for the purpose of
being and being authentic and then I
need to trust
trust them the uncertainty of what that
looks like when the doing happens mm-hmm
there's a bunch of elements kind of
wrapped up in there let's let's pull
them apart and see if we can address
them I'd actually like to address the
topic of dichotomy and paradox a little
bit more essentially because it's right
at the heart here of is being really
what we care about we actually care
about who we are character-wise or we
care about our state of experience right
and all the doing is really just so we
can be happy or good or something and if
we're there already then how do we have
any idea what we would do and who cares
and does it matter or is doing really
relevant because we're actually evolving
the world and we have a role to play and
what is the relationship between those
and is there causal influence both ways
does doing affect being and being effect
doing and can they be recursive and so
think about this very simple analogy but
the analogies illustrative to think
about a cylinder a cylinder is a three
dimensional object it's a very simple
three dimensional object we're used to
thinking in three dimensions three
spatial dimensions so it's an easy thing
to think about but if you imagine a two
dimensional creature right a plane on
plane or creature they can't see a
cylinder they can see a two-dimensional
slice of it now there's an infinite
number of two-dimensional slices since
they're infinitely thin that stack on
top of each other to actually make the
thing up so they're actually reducing
the total information of what that is
infinitely right one dimension reduction
is infinite right reduction so they
slice the cylinder one way and they get
a circle and it's very clear that the
reality they're seeing it's kind of
passing through their space as a circle
if it passed through perpendicular to
that they'd get a rectangle right the
other and a cross-section from a
two-dimensional perspective like is the
cylinder a rectangle a circle well
it's obviously whichever one is
happening like it being a circle is true
it's very clear that from a
two-dimensional perspective like that is
what is being seen it's true if there's
the perfect fidelity to it right from
the other direction as a rectangle it's
also perfectly true and those two
descriptions of reality in two
dimensions cannot commensurate right
they are disparate mutually exclusive
descriptions of circles is totally round
thing rectangles these corners and so
then what are the opportunities well you
can either just say I saw a circle so I
know it's circle and the other side is
just wrong mm-hmm that's fundamentalism
which is kind of like there's some truth
and I'm sticking to it right and I'll
fight with the people on the other side
or you see the circle and then you for
some how you happen to be on the other
plane and see the rectangle too and you
go there's seemingly truth to both
of these now I have embraced paradox
what do I do with this and you have
different options one way as you say
well maybe there's a middle path but
you're still trying to reconcile in two
dimensions cuz you're two dimensional
creature so you say well what's kind of
in the middle of a circle and a
rectangle and you get a rounded
rectangle now you kind of round the
corners of the rectangle make it a
little more circular like now that isn't
even partially true right like that
isn't even a little bit of any part of a
cylinder or you just say well they're
both true and neither are true and we
embrace paradox and that just means you
gave up on understanding its really what
it means the truth is a cylinder is a
very straight forward thing which is a
circle translated over the space of a
rectangle or a rectangle rotated to the
space of a circle but you can't
understand it in duty you can only
understand it in 3d which means you need
an entirely higher dimensional framework
of understanding to get the nature of
reality when you're trying to reduce
reality to a dimensionally smaller
perspective you're right because
that dimension simply can't understand
it so then you have false paradox
because the the perspective the view
itself is reducing the total reality and
you can even see just looking at the
east side of a building versus the west
side you could argue over what the
building looks like and it's because
perception is inherently reductive you
cannot see the whole of what something
is because there's
many many different views of it right so
you need a trans perspectival
understanding that can reconcile them so
the the reality of the cylinder is
different than circle or rectangle but
both of those are partially true from
that kind of perspective well when we
come to many existential questions it
seem paradoxical or dichotomous like
being and doing is what really matters
my state of being in the moment or was
is what matters my state of becoming and
that I'm becoming more and more right
being side says outside of time and am i
touching the infinite am i touching the
eternal am I in wholeness my own
fullness now becoming side says universe
itself is evolving am i evolving with
universe am i adding to universe and my
self actualizing and realizing right
circle rectangle these are both true but
we're not just saying well it's both a
circle and a rectangle we have to put
those together and say how are they both
true how do being and becoming reconcile
in that way and they the key thing to
get and we can see all the other
dichotomies that come with this based on
the being model it's well I'm gonna love
and accept myself exactly how I am I'm
gonna love and accept others in reality
exactly how it is I'm gonna see the
beauty and everything right now on the
becoming side you're like well I want to
make myself better I want to help make
others better I want to make the world
better right well which one is it do I
want to love what is or do I want to
make it better this is exactly the
struggle I think I've been having and
that I go through phases where I'm going
through accepting and then I'm going I'm
going you know what I need to really
step it up yeah and there's things that
need to change and I want to I want to
see the progress and and see the
evolution and then I it's almost as if I
get caught up and pushing the ball
forward and then I feel as though my
state of being there's static
line and then I have to go back to
accepting things just as they are and in
that state of being so this is as
fascinating to me is I've been living
I've been living a life where I'm
switching between truths right because I
can't reconcile the two so we can be in
a place or we flip flop between truths
that both are self evidently true and
yet see Mun reconcilable or we can
reconcile and live them both more fully
simultaneously but we have to go higher
dimensional to do that we have to go to
a place where they can really reconcile
and that requires and higher-dimensional
here isn't spacial dimensions it's how
we understand the complexity of reality
so we're gonna get to I'd like to add
another element of a model because it'll
really help with this and I think I
think might find interesting
I want to compare for a minute roughly
generalized very oversimplified an
Eastern model and a Western model of the
nature of reality and meaning and
spirituality obviously it's
oversimplified because there's a lot of
Eastern models and a lot of Western
models and the delineation between them
isn't clear at all but let's just take
by Eastern I mean they kind of Vedantic
Buddhists the primary interpretations
which are very being focused and we're
using these as a reference for for this
particular dichotomy here so you notice
in most interpretations the Buddhist
tradition the focus is exclusively on
being right not doing not becoming in
fact any chop wood carry water doing is
just because if that needs done do it
but it's all about the quality of being
while doing it it's the only thing that
matters
the reason why or one of the reasons why
that becomes insightful is the Buddhists
and the Hindu vedanta model of time is a
circular model of time all right they
have this system of time called the
culpas or the egos where where the time
and universe itself is believed to cycle
cycle through birth and death so you
know if you if you think about it these
people watch nature very deeply and they
saw seasons spring and fall and they saw
empires rise and then fall they saw
people born and then die they saw
relationships come together and come
apart and they just saw everything
cycling they watched the precession of
the equinoxes they saw cycles within
cycles days within months within years
within Galactic cycles right so they saw
it was all cycles and so because of that
if everything cycling and then then they
extend that up to but this is just a
intellectual extension everything in
universe is just cycles then nothing is
actually going anywhere we're just going
in circles there is no actual thing
called progress it's just the wheel of
time right so they have this concept of
the wheel of time so so if you're trying
to push something forward you're just
moving to the cycle more quickly you've
bought into the illusion that you're
going anywhere right
that spring means anything other than
its way towards fallen death right
mm-hmm and so this is why then they talk
they talk about it as Maya right
illusion or even more some sort of
suffering so then if it's just this
 loser e wheel it isn't actually
going anywhere going further is
meaningless so then there's actually a
movie samsara
on Netflix you can watch which is just
yeah
it's demonstrating that if you want to
go see it that concept to concept right
and so then the goal there becomes
getting off the wheel and so that means
getting out of time in the concept of
linear time completely so then the goal
is being able to access the eternal
through the now and so the idea of
becoming or of progress or making the
world better when the whole thing is
illusory to begin with meaning
fundamentally to begin with just means
you bought into the illusion you don't
get the ultimate truth so the goal there
is is to step out of time to be now full
complete in a way that doesn't have
progress built in at all mm-hmm right
and that's the kind of pure zenith of a
being model you notice that happiness in
that model is a model of happiness it's
like contentment or serenity like
fullness right now with what is right
and in fact anything like passion or
desire or excitement is called the cause
of all suffering right because that
means that you believe something good is
in the future so you sacrifice being in
the moment for wanting something in the
future and that just leads you to
getting all feverish and up and
then when you get it you weren't even
that happy and you want something else
and then you're anxious of losing it so
just don't desire anything don't have
passion or anything just be full and
content now all right this is also yeah
this is great because this is also
something I've been I've been studying
you know like how do I be and then how
do I and then also it's hard to not
believe that my passion and my my drive
in my just my desires are for nothing
well they in that model they are for
nothing that isn't a losery and stupid
right right they they are for plenty of
sound and fury leading to suffering and
nothing and so that's that model but
that is circle right that it's kind of
true but it's so far from true that it's
just actually infinitely off okay I'm so
far from the whole truth it's a
dimensional reduction so then let's look
at the Western model so everyone think
it sounds boring it can sound boring but
of course then the idea of boring in
that model would be a mental trap and
that when you come into the fullness of
being right now you can access and this
is true a state of serenity that has a
kind of blissfulness to it it doesn't
need you to do anything and that is
unperturbed well so be like no you
actually don't get what the fullness of
being and you drop into it is
right that is eternal and that's unfuck
with Abel so that's that
now the Western model of time kind of
originating Judaism we can say and then
the Greeks and modern science and you
know I've told most of the world now
because early Jews were very focused on
history and noticing their kind of
progression as a as a people new
technology as it emerged and new law and
new ideas and etc they and they were
recording that they were actually
noticing net change over time and that
new things were emerging that didn't
exist before and so rather than focusing
on the cycles and in nature and seeing
everything as cyclic they were focused
on the emergence of things humans were
creating that were additive and actually
going somewhere and so they had a linear
model of time so time was actually going
somewhere and so that led to a dialectic
of progress
and a focus on becoming more than being
then that in that model there is their
what I've seen is there's a beginning
and an end maybe or maybe not sometimes
there is a beginning and an end and
maybe the beginning is the beginning of
universe in genesis maybe the beginning
is when you were born maybe the end is
heaven right there's different kind of
theological x' they can disagree about
where the beginning and the end is they
can even have a reincarnation model
within it but that there isn't that
progress along the whole thing right
because universe itself is actually
going somewhere and so you're going
somewhere within it and you're adding to
universe going somewhere well if you're
if you think universe is actually going
somewhere then adding to universe going
somewhere is inherently meaningful and
you being part of where it's going is
inherently meaningful so then just being
in the moment is not that interesting
becoming evermore in a universe that is
itself becoming evermore so developing
oneself right in which case being just
completely content in a way that has no
Drive is is antithetical to what's
purposeful so you notice their
definition of happiness has a lot more
it sounds like passion and excitement
right right and which way you were to
look at if you look at those cultures
there's a lot of singing dancing you
know even partying whereas you look at
some of the more Eastern philosophies
and it's things very quiet and and it's
the traditions are that I that I that
I'm that I'm imagining right now like a
tea ceremony yeah very just it's very
calm not a lot of excitement very bland
or vanilla well you're giving a Western
bias here so you're calling it boring
and bland and vanilla sure they would
say profoundly serene I'm am i insulting
people that come from that perspective
you think well probably but what's more
what's more interesting is that you're
not getting it yet right because you
haven't you haven't dropped into that
place of getting it but you probably
have if you think about it you might
have had moments where you're surfing
and you stopped and everything kind of
stops and you just see sparkles on the
water and thinking about what's coming
next stops and the moments full mm-hmm
and it's more full in a certain quality
than excitement about the future is yeah
there's no doubt about that I've
definitely had moments right staying
there so the whole eastern process would
be staying there right each moment being
fully with that need the endless wave
except it doesn't it's about it
independent of circumstance right it's
some you're in the eye of the storm no
matter what's happening around you you
keep your peace yeah a part of the
enlightenment and that model is being
able to be fully with what is no matter
what is no matter what is happening
because everything that's happening is
in illusion right it's all just changing
and flexing but the consciousness that's
witnessing it is ever-present and
identifying as that and that that is
actually the fullness right that the
light is actually the light of
consciousness
that's what waking up means there now so
if one wanted to bias from that
direction they could look at the other
thing with all the singing advancing and
say look how feverish it is hmm look at
how kind of immature and it's excitement
when things go well and disappointment
things don't go well look at how little
sovereignty that people have where
they're so affected by their environment
and their circumstance look at how they
rush around trying to change their
circumstance to make themselves happy
look at how attached they get to other
people and how up they get when
things don't go the way they want look
at how unhappy they are when they lose
something look at how when they get what
they want they're only happy for like 15
minutes and then they want something
else and that there's like almost
nothing of seeming enduring depth there
right now these are both true right so
we're talking about circles and
rectangles so to just finish a little
bit on the on the Western model so time
is going somewhere dialectic of progress
so the focus becomes purpose because
purpose is a time bound concept purpose
unfolds in time right and evolution is a
time bound concept and so evolving
ourselves evolving others evolving the
world around us becoming more being able
to express more of infinite potential
through the finite through time work and
and in there in that model it would say
well of course when you get what you
wanted you aren't just enduring ly happy
because then you would stop becoming the
goal is to be becoming forever the goal
is actually to be in the process of
blossoming at the depth what universe is
the evolutionary impulse that brings
subatomic particles together into
particles and particles into you know
higher order particles into biology the
whole thing from the Big Bang on that
that that what keeps organizing universe
towards more orderly complexity is a
becoming impulse an infinite blossoming
into higher order potential of universe
and that you resulted from that and you
also have the ability to choose in a way
that aligns yourself with that and so of
course when you get something then
you're not you're happy for a moment
because you're in the becoming but it's
actually the being in the becoming
that's what's interesting
right what tear
Chardin called the lore of becoming but
because it's about becoming and it's
also ever every moment right and so
there it's more about excitement passion
you know associated with becoming now
what's interesting when you put these
together you have a circular model of
time and a linear model corresponding
with the circular is being with the
linear is becoming with the circular as
presence with the Lanier's purpose with
the circular is contentment serenity in
the fullness of the now and with the
linear is passion and purpose and the
promise of possibility you notice that
the circular model maps to the serotonin
like happiness and the serotonergic
systems right and the linear model maps
to dopamine right and the dopamine kinds
of happiness like processing and that
the practices are tying this to the
there are transmitters this brings so
much application and if anyone knows
anything about how those things are
impact or if you've had experiences
where you had an excess and dopamine or
serotonin right and it's like oh that's
why those experiences were it that way
people have interesting people who've
explored it might resonate with thee
they took a serotonin urja faint right
they took MDMA and they became very in
the moment very sensory very feeling
very in the fullness of everything being
overwhelmingly beautiful now yeah almost
no awareness of other than now okay
someone took dopaminergic thing right
they took adderall or cocaine or
whatever they become profoundly focused
on what they wanted to create and they
all they wanted to do is be in the
process of creating it right and we can
see the beauty and the crashes of both
of those and what becomes more available
and less available in both of those we
can see them the practices right a lot
of the eastern practices are serotonin
Erick practices being in the moment
breathing slow being
nature having all of your awareness your
sensory awareness and what is a lot of
the Western practices are create goals
achieve the goals feel good that you
achieved them check them off reinforce
having goals create more goals check ray
and those are dopaminergic practices now
if we come back to our 2d 3d technology
I mean dopamine is addiction yeah right
dopamine dopamine and its relationship
with opioids the dopamine opioid system
is feels good do it again
because it is time-bound what things
were evolutionarily relevant to do again
right
nobody said in terms of addicted to
serotonin if you're having an experience
that is more about being in the moment
you're not jonesing for the next moment
right that would explain why people tend
to get hooked on something like cocaine
and maybe MDMA is not as addictive right
now someone might have a serotonin
imbalance so they're gonna keep wanting
to go back to some serotonin magic thing
does all you see all SSRIs are focused
on that but it is all addiction relates
to the dopamine axis hmm other things
are involved but it will always involve
that okay now come back to our 3d 2d
analogy with the cylinder but let's look
at their models of time here and the
circle and the the circular model of
time linear model of time and if we
embed those on each other in a higher
dimension because those are both
one-dimensional right one dimension
curved back on itself like a circle or
one dimension you know if time that just
continues straight if you bring them
together you get a spiral of time right
which is a circle that isn't closing on
itself it's a circle that is actually
moving along a line so then you say are
there cycles yes there are cycles and
there is net change from one cycle to
the next now why this is meaningful as
we see we look at the ecosystem and we
see that you've got spring and fall and
spring and fall and things are born and
die but over the course of deep time you
look at the fossil record there's
evolution of new organisms that weren't
there before
so there is net change over time while
there are cycles and how that occurs
it's important to understand that there
are cycles because that means that in
how you proceed in becoming you need to
have phases of activity and phases of
rest phases of going outward and phases
of coming inward phases of learning new
things and then phases of applying that
learning phase of learning new things
phases of digesting and you know taking
taking that to process with everything
else you know if you don't understand it
there are cycles every time it's time to
come inward or to digest or to learn
something new or to step back you'll
feel like you're not making progress but
the key is that those like this or
you'll never want to sleep right mm-hmm
I've gone through phases where I'm
pushing pushing pushing and then crash
and it looked you know in hearing this I
could have been more sensitive to the
fact that it has to cycle in that way so
you don't have to push and then crash
where the cycle forces itself on you you
can go with it and you actually you
optimize yourself over time hmm now at
the same time you realize that within
that cycle net growth is happening so
you might come back to it's interesting
how I can see this in some aspects of my
life but then I completely neglect them
and others right right
well now the area's you've neglected
them and you can start looking at and
saying where am i pushing where it is
inexorable that there is a cycle that if
I give space to it I'll actually get go
further faster and I'll enjoy the
process more my being and my becoming
well both of all yeah so now we put this
together right and if we have a model of
time in which cycles happen but net
growth also happens then and we start to
simple
to reconcile all the elements of both of
those do we want to be unconditionally
able to access fullness and contentment
now yes do we want to be able to access
creative desire and passion about the
future yes do we want to be excited
about making something happen and not
devastated if it doesn't happen yes both
at the same time right do we want to be
optimizing our dopamine or Jick circuits
or our serotonergic circuits yes both
right the fullness of the human
experience and so we can see how
different cultures were or pioneering
the insights that now we can synthesize
right they were pioneering how to really
bring those insights and practices about
where now as a global people that can
harvest the wisdom from all these
cultures right here together we can
really start to synthesize how do we be
in the moment fully and be becoming
fully and so the fullness of the human
experience is both and if we look at it
like this so here's someone and I want
to love them unconditionally the way
they are right now I also want to help
them grow which one do I do to go back
and forth between them when I really get
it I realize that they're the exact same
thing the cylinder is actually one thing
it isn't a bunch of circles stacked up
is one thing right yeah if I love them
the way they are completely the way they
are is not actually a static thing they
are a verb right they are different than
they were yesterday they will be
different tomorrow there's a sameness
but there's a becoming that is part of
their being and because there is an
impulse in them to express who they are
more and more fully to self-actualize to
self realize to add to universe to
realize the depths of what's possible
for them loving them for who they are is
wanting for them is wanting for their
fullest expression is also helping them
become that so loving them
unconditionally the way they are and
supporting them to be what they're
becoming are the same thing when
you actually get that those aren't
dichotomous at all the built within the
being is verb Ness
this is this is extremely helpful and
then I as you're talking about that some
visualizing a couple different
relationships I have where in the past I
had a heart had a hard time accepting
people where they were at
mm-hm and then wanting more for them but
the simple fact but I wasn't accepting
them for where they were at in that
moment and who they were becoming like
potentially stunted that or it harmed
the relationship in the least yeah in
which case there was no way for me to be
support think about this you were born
in a particular place to a particular
family
you really have much choice in that I'm
not gonna get into if there was a spirit
that did or no whatever you as you
understand yourself to know much choice
in them had you been born somewhere else
right
had you been even given up for adoption
as an infant
and had you had you grown up with the
matcha Ganga tribe and in the Amazon or
had you grown up with the Sioux Indians
or had you grown up on the Upper East
Side Manhattan with a banking family or
almost every part of your identity would
be different mm-hmm your aesthetics what
you like what you don't like the
language that you think in and perceive
the world in your your everything right
you know so so much of what you think is
you is other people it's other people
that condition that in you and so when
you are mess is true of everyone else -
so when you're interacting with someone
and there's something there dealing with
some jealousy or laziness or pettiness
or anger or whatever it is it's not them
it is it's a part of the reality that
they are dealing with and being right
there's not essentially them that's what
they were conditioned into now what
you'll notice is the person's dealing
with that jealousy but they're like I
really want to show this jealousy and
just love unconditionally why do they
even want that if if who they really
were was just jealous they'd just be
stoked with it like yeah I'm just
jealous I'd like to be more jealous
right like it is essentially something I
value but no they're like no I want to
love more in Canada I don't want to be
angry I actually want to be a kinder
person with it where does that want to
come from even deeper than where it was
conditioned as a moral or a value even
when you strip those away there are deep
impulses that connect to the deepest
parts of the being of who they actually
are and so what someone is wanting if
they don't know how to access it is
deeper to the truth of who they are then
what they're working through and stuck
with so when you really love someone
you're not you're not looking at all the
conditioning that was put on
them and in them you're looking at what
is trying to express itself through that
and saying wow I actually see underneath
all of the drama and fear and
conditioning and nonsense actually see
the being your and I love the out
of it and that being is actually totally
beautiful and totally unique and a nun
conditioning loving that and accepting
that it's dealing with this that it
has to deal with
I want to help it deal with it when I
help it express who it really is more
this reminds me of I I like I think I
create almost look like workarounds when
I recognized something in a workaround I
I came up with
I'm not recognizing as a workaround
potentially and then you can tell me
what you think about it which is when I
if I'm getting upset with somebody or
somebody's getting upset with me I the
way I've been framing it my mind is
their story is upset with my story who
they are is not really upset with who I
am they love you know if they were
seeing me just for who I was or who I am
and I'm seeing them for who they are
then I would just love them it's the
stories that are that are in the way
would that be would that be accurate or
do you think that's a workaround
yeah so let me say it another way
Rosenburg the developer of the nomadic
communication system had a good way of
saying this point said our fundamental
needs and our fundamental values always
work together sometimes our strategies
for how we go about acting on those
values or meeting those needs don't work
together and sometimes we get very
attached to the strategies and don't
even make a distinction right so there's
a couple and one of them is having
they're fighting about like you never go
places and go to parties with me and you
never give me space and you know
like that they're in that dialogue and
they and one of them is really wanting
the other person to go interact with
their friends and the other one is
really wanting to be about themselves
and it seems like they are unreconciled
things that they want and there's a
million versions of this right but
underneath it
one person is usually wanting more that
their actual need or values around
connection when the truth is most people
value connection and one of the and the
other person might be valuing
sovereignty you know or individuality
freedom both people actually value
freedom right and so when you get to
what is actually the essential value
that I have here you'll realize we
actually share this and they're like oh
 I want you to have freedom I want
to freedom to oh I want you to have
connection I want to have that too then
you say if we were if we stopped being
focused on I can only have connection if
you do this thing with me this way which
might be something you actually hate but
there's plenty of other things you might
like to do that we could connect on
that's the strategy that's the strategy
or I can only have freedom if I don't do
this thing and I do this other thing and
right maybe I can have the freedom to
choose to do that rather than feel
forced into it knowing that I'm choosing
it right you know so if you let go of
the strategies and you come to the needs
you say are there ever a time where
those needs don't work together no they
always work together or those values
those values always work together so
then to the degree we can actually chill
out on the strategies and say is there a
strategy that meets all the needs that
fulfills all the value simultaneously
there always will be yeah okay and this
is another place of like getting past a
false dichotomy it seems like these are
unreconciled but when you can step to a
higher level right the level of values
not strategy they are reconcilable with
this with this perspective I imagine
people are thinking now what's there's
nothing stopping us from loving each
other fully
why do we prefer some people over others
and and who we connect with mm-hmm it's
a very deep question why do we or why
should we continue to as we have all
were very different oh we do
historically for a bunch of mostly
unconscious and not really great reasons
right we prefer some people because
they're the color that we're used to or
because they're wealthy or because
they're hot or because they're mostly
like one that one is their right that's
that's a where your biology program to
you I was gonna ask about that how much
of that is biology and how much of that
is culture well because there's
definitely you know our our you look at
what a model look like fifty years ago
even now any difference and what
different cultures find beautiful there
are differences there's also
similarities the similarities our
evolutionary biology and that relate to
fertility right signs of fertility and
the the differences are culture but the
point is those are both conditioned now
you relate with those but how many
people are there that I could find
really hot from an evolutionary biology
point of view it would be absolutely
terrible matches for me most of them
ain't like it's not hard to go to a gym
or go to a beach and see a bunch of guys
or girls that are hot regularly and yet
they you might have almost exactly
opposite core core worldviews values
ideals beliefs you might be very
symbiotic with supporting each other on
a path or not and so it's not that that
is a completely meaningless metric but
it it's a metric that's important to
make sure does not override your
assessment of all the other metrics and
especially as you if you are thinking
about enduring relationship if that
metric will fade period
it will fade because aging will change
aesthetics and it will fade because even
before aging changes aesthetics
chemistry wears off as soon as it's no
longer new and novel and if you think of
it from an evolutionary biology point of
view there's a lot of evolutionary
advantage to staying together long
enough to make sure that offspring
happens and then there's a lot of
evolutionary advantage to have more
offspring in more places so that some of
them will get through right yeah and so
that looks like serial monogamy right
that looks like fall in love and then
fall out of love fall in love somewhere
else if it's not falling in love it's
falling in biochemical procreation
patterns and then rationalizing a lot of
love that is all really nonsense
just so realizing that that is going to
fade then you say all right how control
by that do I want to be versus how much
do I want to create something enduring
what is an enduring basis of
relationship and this is going to be now
this comes to being and becoming again
our beings need to connect and our B
comings need to connect if we're gonna
have a relationship that's enduring who
they are becoming and who I am becoming
actually need to connect so that as time
goes on we are on deeper and deeper
paths so you see a lot of people it's
like they're vectors are crossing so for
a while they're coming closer together
and then they cross and then they start
going further apart and to stay together
they actually have someone has to pull
the other one off their path mmm or they
go further apart there are other people
where it's almost like two converging
vectors right like they're
asymptotically converging towards each
other and this is why part of a good fit
is is not just does our lifestyle fit do
our way of being now fit to our
chemistry's fit but it's actually do our
deepest aspirations and our basis for
choice and our visions of the future fit
which is this is super meaningful right
very and because this is something that
people I imagine are exploring
superficially mm-hmm and it might be
superficially like do you want kids I
want kids or you can make enough money
yeah okay cool we can do this but as it
goes much deeper it's one of the metrics
of a healthy relationship is that you're
becoming paths right as you are evolving
you're becoming paths that you are
evolving
better because of being in that
relationship then you would being out of
it right or being in a some other one
that was less good of a fit in that way
and so who you you are actually being
who you essentially are more fully
because of their influence in your life
this doesn't mean that you're
codependent Lea depending on them for it
but it means they are an enhancement to
the degree they're influencing you of
your own being and your own becoming and
you are for them oftentimes will have
relationships that are more about
addiction than love where I'm actually
being less of who I really want to be
and then becoming less right I'm I'm
less available to my friends and
families I'm absorbed as in the
relationship I'm doing my work and my
dorm and my creativity and my art and my
etc and I practices less but I really
really like them right and and
what you notice is my relationship to
them is a lot more like a relationship
to cocaine or heroin than a relationship
to an evolutionary path right it's more
about I like the hip I'm getting from
them and my life is getting worse
because of it rather than I am actually
evolving in who I essentially am one of
the key criteria is with an addiction
you become less able to enjoy anything
else other than the addiction right this
if if you're addicted to coke when
you're coming down off coke the Sun sets
not beautiful right flowers don't smoke
only getting some more coke is the only
thing right and if you don't get the
coke everything else and so you're
focused on pleasure but it's becoming
more and more and more focused on one
source as one is moving in their actual
enlightenment right there being
direction right the eastern side of this
is their ability to love everything more
to get to get connection pleasure with
everything more and as they're evolving
they're becoming they have ability to
contributes everything more and that
their being is evolving through they're
becoming right they're actually evolving
which is a becoming thing in their being
and so if I have a relationship that's
like cocaine what it means is if they
aren't calling me back there it takes me
back I can't think about anything else
I can't chill out I can
I'm up right life's meaningless
and but when there when I get the hit
everything's great
that's addiction not love if it's
actually a meaningful evolutionary
relationship my ability to show up to
everything else in my life increases
because of them my ability to love and
appreciate everything else increased
because I become a better friend because
I'm learning how to communicate better
from them I started loving and
appreciating other people more because
my heart so many more how long I didn't
think we'd get into dating but I find
myself people asking me for advice about
it and and you know I think I've given
good advice in the past for sure this is
actually really helpful for me and and
even being able to to see what it is
that I have in my own relationship and
being able to direct others into finding
something similar how long does it take
to identify for somebody to go and this
is a this is an addiction or and because
we're really good at tricking ourselves
and you know this doesn't just apply to
relationships but you know we may take a
job or we may we make a lot of choices
and well technically every everything in
our life is a relationship you know we
take a job where we're we're doing a
thing in relationship with other people
because everyone in the company is a
relationship and business is just a
series of relationships so at what point
are we how long does it take for someone
a spot this is you know an addiction
versus you know growth well you can
actually notice the vector shift in the
moment you can actually notice the
quality of being in the moment so
am i relating to this thing in a way
where my presence to the rest of life is
decreasing hmm or my presence of the
rest of life is increasing I'm doing a
bodybuilding competition and all I can
think about the bodybuilding competition
and if I lose everything sucks in life
and I actually don't really love the
people in front of me actively and I mmm
that might be an effective mindset to
take to be obsessed about doing the
bodybuilding thing but here's your
question does doing create being will
you actually be meaningfully happy with
who you are at the end if you win
no because on the becoming side right
okay so I became buff but then that's
just gonna it's becoming forevers so
then it's I'm not happy because it was
only mr. world need to win mr. universe
or whatever so then it'll lead to more
becoming it'll never lead to being in
that way unless the things I'm working
on becoming are related to my being
right I'm actually evolving in my
presence my character my and so one of
the key things is am I even evolving the
right things
am I even focused on the evolution of
the right things or do I have a wrong
causation believed I have the belief
that this strategy is how I will then be
happy and so I'm trying to pursue
happiness or how much money or how buff
I get or something it is actually a
wrong causal strategy no amount like yes
I might get richer yes I might get
buffer no I won't get happier that
actually isn't related to a mechanic of
happiness right and the happiness
actually accessible now so then do I
still have a reason to get buff or do I
realize that was actually just nonsense
maybe I do still have a reason to be
buff it might be a different one yeah so
your question around how when do you
notice so kind of all the time you can
notice do I feel like my I am being more
of who I really want to be your question
and I might becoming more of who I want
to be because of the way I'm showing up
in this relationship in this job in this
activity and if not if I'm being less of
or becoming less of what I really most
value switch something
yeah that's it's a sounds like a
checking in process mhm
I think that's that's something that we
might want to look into doing more is
how often are we checking and reflecting
on what's going on well this is what
mindfulness means is that can become
continuous there can be a continuous
noticing so there can be real-time
correction because especially as one
gets more powerful there so they're
moving faster then it when they get a
little bit off if they don't check in as
fast they can get much further off of
what really matters right quickly
so there's there's a good argument for
the practicalness practice and is an
argument for why it's some more
important the more powerful you get yeah
absolutely
it's the faster you're going the more
steering matters what what are your
favorite mindfulness practices or what
is your what is your preferred method of
improving mindfulness
it's a huge topic right mindfulness
basically means noticing what are you
noticing so I can be mindful of my
breath and so I'm noticing my breath and
the process noticing my body rising oh I
wasn't I wasn't actually breathing very
much
or there's tightness or pain in my body
I'm haven't been paying attention to or
there's a lot of anxiety I wasn't paying
attention to what do I want to do about
that right that may help you feel a lot
better in your body might help you
change things you need to change and I
hope you live longer
right because you notice something you
tend to it so there's you know there's
body based mindfulness
there's noticing your thoughts and
noticing how many of your thoughts are
fundamentally in a positive empowering
direction and how many of them are
basically have no meaningful utility
right like they are negative but not
negative in a constructive way and then
as soon as you notice that when you
don't notice that you really have no
choice cuz it's just an automated
program running itself out you didn't
choose the moment you notice it choice
enters the possibility for choice enters
you can say well do those thoughts
affect how I feel
yes do they affect how I perceive you
have to they affect how I act yeah so
how do I want to shift the thoughts so
that I perceive enact it feel
differently
you can notice your emotion similarly
and say oh when I notice I'm feeling
angry or agitated etcetera then I want
to actually stop and see what I can do
to shift my state and recenter because
if I'm acting from that state that's
gonna be subtly affecting how I perceive
and how I behave there's a lot of things
you can notice you can notice that we're
talking about here being in relationship
and
your own sense of being on path and
being in relationship and how those
relate to each other so there's a lot of
good mindfulness practices for various
aspects of it and they cross apply right
just increasing awareness is valuable
but I would say a very deep one is if
someone takes some time to write around
being like you were saying I want to be
a person that invokes people's trust in
is worthy of it want to be a person who
has character that leads to me being a
support and a pillar for the community
not because I asked to be but because
people just recognize that I show up in
a way that supports me buddy so you kind
of look who do I really want to be and
then what how do I most want to become
what I most want to do what are the
things I really want to contribute to it
and you mind this and then you ask why
on all these things and you say how much
of that is still because of some
unconscious that my parents taught
me how much of it is still because I'm
insecure and don't think I'm enough and
this is my compensation strategy and
then you see can I let that go and then
what do I actually want underneath that
and you get deeper and deeper of what do
I really value and then you're mindful
of is what I'm doing right now is what
I'm thinking right now is the state I'm
in right now aligned with what I most
deeply value
and if so great and if not shift
simplicity I think that's a it's
probably one of the not probably I think
that's the best explanation around
mindfulness and the argument for why you
might pick up a meditation practice
which is a practice of noticing
with
is not yeah there's not intentional plug
even but the supplement quality which
you created I've been taking it for a
year I've noticed that it has helped
create an expanded awareness for myself
and then I would say my wife even
explain what she's report has been much
more dramatic even so that there there's
it's taking a supplement like that
adding if you're not having that
mindfulness practice and just taking it
unconsciously you're gonna fire the
rocket in the wrong direction
good yeah we've had many people describe
being unqualified that the effect it had
on neuro chemistry
getting more balanced for them actually
help them get clear where they weren't
before because it helped shift their
state and so as they were shifting out
of agitation or anger or depression or
whatever into more centered empowered
states none of these are medical claims
make no medical claims but this is what
people reported some of their experience
that it led to them being able to hold
clarity morin you know etc many people
because there's there's things for the
body's endocrine system to balance it
out so you're less likely to get swayed
by triggers so or maybe we shouldn't get
can you make these types of comments I
guess let me finish we're was not sort
of acting on the mechanism because it's
all relevant so other people have
described that when they feel on right
they feel generally centered they take
qualia they feel a lot better they feel
like they have more power nitrous right
into the system when they are off
they're angry they're agitated wherever
they take qualia then they feel more
empowered but they're not directing it
and in a way right like the
not directing their thoughts very
sovereignly and so now they actually
feel kind of more of that going on so
for most people it has been supportive
for them coming to Center if they are
not but for some people the order of
operations assets that more centering
would be more software side would be no
relevant first or at least in
conjunction with well you think about it
and relate it back to like or what would
a supplement have to do with anything
we're talking about if you think of the
brain and the associated rest of the
physiology as the hardware right the bio
hardware mm-hmm that the kind of
software of thought and emotion is
running on except that the division
between hardware and software and
computers is a hard one right the
software is not affecting the hardware
the hardware has to be adequate to the
software to run on it in us every time
you change the physiology it
automatically changes the
predispositions for thinking and feeling
and every time you have a thought or a
feeling it is actually an
electrochemical process that is then
changing physiology so there it's all
kind of firmware that's interacting each
other yeah it's not fair to think about
it as a typical computer it's not that
distinct but it is a fine starting place
to say that most of what we call
psychology is on the software side of
the gradient it's a gradient rather than
a hard binary right and so it's a the
psychology is looking at what do you
focus on what meaning do you make from
things you know etc so mindfulness also
would fit in there that most medicine
and biohacking neuro hacking biophysical
optimization is focused on the hardware
side of things but these automatically
and or affect each other because
everyone has experienced having their
body out of balance having a headache or
their hormones are out or a hangover or
whatever where your physiology affects
your psyche no doubt and you're angry or
you're depressed or whatever because of
a physiologic process people have also
noticed when their physiology feels
great say they recover from a sickness
now they feel good in their body again
how
that automatically affects their psyche
right we also have noticed where you get
really stressed out psychologically and
you get sick right or you feel great
psychologically and you feel increased
energy so you can see that there's this
psycho neuro in so the optimal process
is to pull the levers one can in both
simultaneously leading to virtuous
feedback loops and up cycling so how do
I work with my focus to focus on
empowering things how do I work with my
meaning to create empowering meaning to
that which I'm focusing on how do I work
with my just energetic state through
visualization through breath through
subtle kinds of movements etc how do I
work with my body through chemistry
health diet fitness supplementation
where each of these lead to a system
that is up regulating in or affecting
all the other aspects so qualia is
something that the first product that we
designed in our collective to help up
regulate certain aspects of neuro
chemistry and neural physiology so that
the hardware that is mediating thought
and emotion is both more in tune right
more balanced and moving towards more
net capacity through things like
neurogenesis development of more neurons
or more synapses more actual
computational capability and the reason
why we developed that and all the other
projects that were in process of
developing on the hardware side is the
goal of neuro hacker collective is
actually evolving sovereignty may
helping evolve the collective
sovereignty of humanity and we define
sovereignty as as the relationship
between three different vectors and you
know so we imagine three vectors XYZ
axis perpendicular to each other one is
intelligence one is agency one is
sentient so intelligence is our ability
to understand things our ability to
understand they caught them as things
together and how to optimize for both
them and right our ability to think
critically to think systemically to have
a total body of knowledge that's
meaningful memory intelligence right
agency is our ability to in disposition
to make choices or follow through our
responsibilities or drive or resilience
or all you know all the things that move
us in universe and our sentience is
actually our depth of feeling and our
feelings of our self our feeling of
whether we really are in tune or not our
depth of being right presents connection
with life at the moment and others are
empathy and our ability to feel other
people so you actually see how agency
very much relates to becoming and being
and sentient SAR very related and the
intelligence can help reconcile the
relationships between those so if you
think about evolving sentient evolving
sentient fully starts to look like
Bodhisattva it looks like the embodiment
of deep compassion embodied awareness
etc evolving intelligence looks like
polymath right like full genius across
multiple spectrum evolving agency looks
like power the ability to have more
power to actually create in reality
fully empowered Bodhisattva polymaths
we believe our will be the new normal in
the future and have to be the new normal
in the future because the scope of
issues that the world is facing actually
require people who are fully caring for
the whole have profound capabilities
complex thinking problem-solving
capabilities and a profound amount of
agency to do to actually take care of a
lot of right and so we define all
of those together the volume of the
sphere defined by the shortest of those
vectors as kind of proportional semi
proportional roughly to one sovereignty
and so what we're talking about here is
you can also think of then that being
and becoming are both parts of defining
the sphere of what matters right and the
relationship between them being becoming
in the and the relationship between how
we navigate those
yep
I'm gonna have to go back and listen to
this show it's been I'm not sure I have
anything left to ask I definitely want
to have you back on for another round is
there anything that you want to mention
or something I didn't ask that I should
have asked I run into this a lot of
times when I'm talking to somebody who
knows a lot more about what they're
talking about than I do
and there's always you know what
question that I not asked that maybe I
should have it's a very meaningful
application of this dichotomy and
looking at the
situation in the moment which is
is everything really up or is
everything actually perfect right and
everything tending to itself
mmm and it's both in neither but it's
actually again the cylinder isn't just
both in either circle rectangle there's
a deeper way of understanding what that
means we can look at how all the
exponential technology you know your
phone has the computational capability
of supercomputers not that long ago we
can look at all the all of the places
where technology is giving us the
capability of building better technology
faster that is enriching certain aspects
of the quality of people's lives
and when they're tremendous metrics on
how everything's getting better the same
time there's all these metrics regarding
biodiversity loss and ocean
acidification and overarching
environmental metrics problems and war
that's empowered by more and more
powerful technology and where
everything's getting worse and you can
cherry-pick the data on either side you
want look at big enough data sets
things are getting exponentially worse
and exponentially better at the same
time you'd say well what does that mean
if things are getting exponentially
better next one and she worse but
obviously neither of those in our the
trajectory to project what we're going
what it means is the current system is
destabilizing right things are moving
further and further away from a center
line the system's destabilizing because
we have a world system overarching lis
it is coming to the end of its lifecycle
at the end of its phase where we've you
know we've had a world system that had
exponentially increasing population with
exponentially increasing resource per
capita all based on extracting more and
more stuff I couldn't see more stuff
from the earth each year and turning it
into trash how long can you run a linear
materials economy where you take stuff
out of the earth unruhe new ibly faster
than it regenerates and then turn it
into trash put it back in the earth on a
finite planet you know with an
exponential rate of you can trim it that
long and we're basically at the end you
know so and yet that system has given
the technologies and tools that are
necessary to build the next system right
and so we're at this very interesting
place
what is necessary for the emergence of a
new world it is at a radically higher
quality of life possible for everyone
than has been possible so far is
emerging but it will be a fundamental
redesign of everything of economics of
governance of infrastructure of world
view
we're also to place with a current world
it really is ending and having to change
and so then we it feels antiquated I'm
not sure if it's a generational thing on
if every generation feels this well no
this is not just generational there's
generational stuff but there's there's
since the plow we started you know
removing stuff from Earth faster than we
were regenerating it and since the
Industrial Revolution
you know exponentially faster and we're
actually talking about the end of a
phase that started then so it's not that
long well not that long in evolutionary
terms but the entirety of what we call
recorded history yeah yeah considering
so from evolutionary not long from you
know from human awareness of our own
history standpoint the whole of what
we've had so far as a phase coming to an
end which has been a phase defined by
finite games zero-sum games finite
amount of resources and the total number
of us are growing and were competing for
those finite resources and if you have
them I don't if I have them you don't
and so our answer is pull the resource
set a nature faster and compete with
each other harder and now our tools of
competition our tools of warfare are big
enough to destroy the entire planet and
we our ability to pull the resources out
is enough that it can also destroy the
whole planet so we've outgrown the
playing field and so that game is coming
to an end
so either we end with that game or we
create a new game in the new game will
be an infinite game not a finite game
it'll be a positive something zero-sum
and it'll be one where fundamentally our
ability to thrive another business
ability to thrive or not in opposition
to each other yeah and that is an
economic model shift right it is a
worldview shift it is and we could do
another show just focused on these
topics that's exactly what I was going
to suggest
I've been we're going from the micro to
the macro here's where we'll tie them
together
yeah we live in a time when
there is more
at stake than there has ever been where
because of the magnitude of our
technology we can all affect more than
anyone has ever been able to affect
Gandhi couldn't put things on YouTube
and get virality right and so we we have
the potential to affect things in a way
that it could actually contribute to
moving in the direction of humans mount
continuing or a higher quality of life
than anyone has ever been able to
realize emerging so this is this is the
context for all of us contemplating our
becoming so the being side is I can
access the same state of timeless
fullness and beauty now that people
could in the time of Buddha right
because it's eternal it's timeless and
that can be a place I can access as
respite and as fuel to then come in to
this actual time which is very different
than the time of Buddha or any other
time and say my becoming is not to win
at a game that is dying
but is to actually try and help change
the game what is my role what is the
role that I could have in self
actualizing in a way that serves not
just me but all life so I'll just leave
it as a thought to tie the micro and the
macro I like that that's a it's a
purpose worth pursuing I like that you
know excellent thank you for joining us
tonight
I think everyone it's gonna get a lot
out of it like I said out I'm gonna go
back listen again and make sure I
harvest this fully and I encourage
everyone that's listen to this to do the
very same so thank you for joining us
Daniel thanks for having me always fun
coming in conversing
[Music]