[Music]
my sense is that there is a almost a
certain solidifying of a level like a
developmental level of collaborative
sense making like the the awareness or
the noticing of the but I call it maybe
the incapacity or the limitations the
horns should have to do as charitable
the incompetence of the official
channels didn't just kind of hit and
leave a sense of demoralization but
actually I think created a song stronger
sense of discernment and agency towards
the reality of the possibility of
finding alternative methods of finding
out what is in fact going on what is
true and what is effective and that that
that has I think begun to settle like
I'm noticing more people almost like a
feeling of a groundedness around oh okay
this is what to do now what to do now is
actually to begin the process of finding
out what is more real or at least a
higher degree of confidence for myself
what it's really the case by engaging in
a seeking activity in a much broader
field than just turning onto one
particular channel or some small number
of channels and listening more more
taking out of responsibility for for for
gleaning on their own on our own that
for sure and also I've noticed a broader
how do I say this a broader sense of the
reality that this is actually isn't as
as much a possibility as it is a threat
like I've noticed a very high level of
consciousness about the okay what do we
do like this is a remarkable change in
the possibility space
what are we do in that context right not
a sitting back and reacting with the
okay what do I do to take care of myself
or protect myself but now more of okay
what do we do so I would say that's that
at the very very broad brush levels the
sensitivity and Sensibility that I'd
have some awareness of I can go on
forever on that direction by the way I
could disclose really really great
resonates with a lot of the sharing in
our particular group people feeling
actually quite energized and quite
almost excited by the possibility of
what's happening so I'd like to invite
yang a man in China to begin as you were
the first question on the list the high
journey and the question that I wrote
down was what would it take for the
Chinese game a system to successfully
hijack the Internet and the social of
self organizing social collective
intelligences in our dystopian future
and to explain where this question is
coming from the first place is actually
coming from Jordan your conversation
with BJ can bail on the intellectual
Explorer podcast which I do recommend
everyone to take a look and you said at
the time that you really saw this
through that there's a 95% chance that
the China strategy of trying to use big
data and the algorithms to enforce
control would not work but then BJ said
that you know but if you think about it
the 5% is going to be a real bitch and
some TV I'm sure you can call me a five
percenter the second reason is because I
felt like the government here really
capitalized on the perceived success of
our you know response to coronavirus and
even I mean like including my parents
who have never been fan of the system
are feeling like a sense of pride so
like on the other one and irax you
resonate with the pride but on the other
hand I feel cautious about it because
you know it might be like oh really
hideous I don't know whatever that is
you know actually making us using our
sort of adaptive evolutionary tribal
instincts to I don't know whatever and
also lastly just to make sure that you
know I say that I'm not a secret agent
from the Chinese government well the
first thing that pops up for me is I've
always noticed a pretty good heuristic
that if you're feeling pride in
something over which you actually had no
responsibility you're probably being
suckered you know if if your team wins
the Super Bowl and you feel pride I
guarantee you you had nothing to do with
it and so that's actually a very useful
channel for you for yanking you around
if you feel pride in something that you
actually put specific work into
individually and your wrist
sibility took a lot of that you took a
lot of risk yourself that's what prides
for right so it's an interesting jacking
of the underlying system well you know
one of the things that I noticed I think
three days ago blew me away I saw it on
Twitter it was this conversation between
a young I think probably Taiwanese
willing but I'm not quite sure and the
guys in charge of the whu-oh and you
know she kept asking questions about
just you know my can you give me any
perspective from the point of view of oh
no CDC no no WJ so the perspective to be
a chair you know who's done well bubbly
blonde she's like oh how was Taiwan done
and the guy just dodged the question and
then she you know she asked him again a
slightly different way dodged the
question so he gets got to realize oh
 this guy's actually committed to
one China policy where there's actually
you can't use the phrase Taiwan full
stop alright that's a very interesting
insight because it's not obvious the
whu-oh should have that as their
operating parameters which is to say
that game a China has definitely done
some serious work and making sure that
their particular preferences are
influencing the wide variety of
different institutions on a global basis
there's a strong intent good planning
pushing hard they will definitely have
that so if you look at it from the point
of view of game a game eight interfaces
I think will actually tend to be pretty
strong and to be perfectly frank I think
game eight China has a significant
bandage on that interface so if you look
at situations where we those of us in
all places who choose not to find
ourselves are sense-making bent by
perspectives and bias that are not in
fact in our best interest let's just put
it that way regardless of where we're
from true degree to which we are finding
ourselves dependent on game a channels
to make sense of the world we should
expect that those will not be in our
best interests regardless of who in fact
is doing the one that is bending them
and now it proposes a hypothesis that
China is more likely to be doing a good
job in that domain than other players
for a very large number of reasons which
I could articulate if you'd like
so I think that actually makes it pretty
clean now we actually have a necessity
to meaningfully decouple ourselves from
dependency on let's call it official
game a channels or even official
channels and to cultivate a rich
sense-making network on our own
that is operating a long pier to Pier
human relation allottee chains of real
trust earned trust human trust this is
really the only way that we can
meaningfully have a capacity to engage
in collaborative decentralized
distributed cognition without being
subject to various forms of
disinformation regardless of the source
that disinformation or frankly its
intent yeah I've written down some of
the things that we could double-click on
then maybe we can come back to if we do
get to the end of the questions but
there's so many really great questions
that people have submitted that I think
it's good to keep them relatively
concise and then we can expand if we get
time so Dan Crossy is next Oh Jordan
you've probably answered this question
in many ways but I kind of find it
overwhelming to see to come across the
kind of information that you and Daniel
schmuck dan berger sort of release it's
I find it hard to know what to do in the
short term in terms of effective
altruism but also in the long term as
someone who's like 29 as a fairly clean
slate in terms of the next 10 years it's
just I was wondering if you could offer
any guidance for because it can seem
quite overwhelming and also urgent they
kind of all the different threats that
are going on that you guys talk about so
I was just kind of an open question yeah
I can okay yeah okay so I think that the
that we now are in a circumstance for
some of the things that I have not been
able to articulate effectively in the
past can be articulated much more
effectively and that has to do with the
fact that change is strictly nonlinear
there there are small amounts of change
that happen during ordinary times and
large amounts of change that happened
during extraordinary times
I personally I'd like to use the stoic
Chronos Kairos distinction because I
feel like it's a very rich mythopoetic
way of talking about it so in many ways
the the appropriate movement is a
movement of preparation and then surge
or action during the periods of Chronos
when time is moving an ordinary pace you
need to be engaging in upgrading your
own capacities locally the chains of
trust you've developed your own
sovereignty and ability to respond to
what's happening your own sense making
and discernment be able to perceive
reality you Chronos is a period of time
to be able to prepare yourself to engage
for when the the storm has broken in the
wars upon you Kairos is the time to
actually use those resources and move
and make aggressive movements into the
possibility space with all that you've
put together the inverse is an exercise
in either wasted resources or magical
thinking
many many people endeavor to exercise
Kairos action during Chronos time and
they can get very frustrated because
they want to make big change they see
the big change needs to happen and then
try very very hard to push that big
heavy boulder up the side of the cliff
but it's a very inefficient effort and
sometimes you must do it sometimes you
have to do in which case you know I hope
that you're successful but broadly
speaking you'll be crushed into that
effort and therefore it's not a model of
saying only do the work right no it's do
the work because the moment will come
and when the moment comes then act does
that make sense mm-hmm the moment has
come so now it's time to say oK you've
done the work with hope you've done the
work now start stepping into it how much
can be built now when the energy is
available in open somebody actually sent
me a very interesting query directed to
the men men look around you look at your
friends your male friends and this by
the book could be elders as well as
youngers who among them would you feel
very comfortable marrying your daughter
who among them would you be very
comfortable covering your back in a
fight where people are gonna die who
among them would you and trust that the
tutelage of the raising of your son if
you die if the answer is none of them
you done up better fix it you got
a lot of them then you're ready to move
you've got a team because that's the
kind of stakes that's the way to feel
if you've got a strong immediate sense
of that answer you could just imagine in
your mind a friend of yours and be able
to ask those three questions and just
nod yep
I don't even know why I can say yes but
it's there it's very clear and very easy
then you were a tuned instrument you're
now prepared to be put to use that's it
as simple as that
now from that point start looking around
for those people gather them around you
among them begin to discover what is
yours to do collectively what can you do
where are you it could be anything you
know there's people doing all kinds of
stuff right now
you can be figuring out things that are
very very local worst-case scenario just
make sure that you and your own are very
well taken care of because if things get
very bad you don't want to be making
choices out of fear you know I don't
know about everybody else in this call
but I noticed that there was a period of
time where everybody kind of had to
unstuck themselves from complacency and
being in a in a bad spot to getting into
a place of some level security actually
called a bucket one when I was calling
people I was like okay what bucket are
you in right now
I need you to be in bucket three where
are you oh you're in bucket one all
right well you know finish driving and
picking up your mom and dad and bringing
coming out to the farm and making sure
you got food and water call me when
you've got your together
and by the way now you're in bucket two
bucket two is your solid if you've kind
of done whatever you needed you to
transition to a state of readiness for
the environment that you're in but now
you're looking around what is the thing
that I need to be doing generally
speaking that's kind of a tactical
mindset and it may be the bucket two is
where you're supposed to be you're
supposed to be in a tactical location
there's holes for you to dig there's
code for you to write there's things for
you to do that your hands run right now
bucket three is a strategic disposition
now you're actually in a situation where
the fires on the ground you're able to
actually step back from the things that
are going on and look around either
because that's your position in the
environment or because it's your natural
disposition but you can start looking
around say okay what are the questions
that need to be asked in the context
that we're in how do I ask these
questions and how do I come to create
context where I can actually begin to
answer these questions in a way that is
appropriate to the scope of what we're
dealing with I can go and did more
detail Matt if you like again I think we
should come back to it I think one one
thing that people might want to ask is
does that apply to women as well or
what's the
don't know I'm not a woman I hope I hope
I hope there's a good answer that
question that could be a good inquiry
what's the similar thing for for the
questions that the woman might want to
ask right now cuz I think I I expected
that is an extraordinary power flow
inquiry and once it is fully discovered
things will change meaningfully for the
better hmm okay that's a toss we're
giving to some of the people on the call
okay
so grace Rukmani you're next what's so
hi um what's really interested I'm not
gonna answer that last one though what's
really interesting is that the question
I asked got answered and I asked a
question about getting young people
involved because I've been working on
Agent centricity and you were talking
about collective sense trust based sense
making and currencies and how do we
create new forms of in better better
information for us to create our
networks of sets making on a canoeing
that on sort of a larger scale and I
can't seem to talk to my kids about it
and they're older they're 19 20 and
those are the ones that we want to build
the future and it's been very
frustrating I feel like the level of
brainwashing of people and the level of
people who you know the number of people
who like yeah after this is over it's
just gonna go back to normal it's it's
kind of yeah I find it very hard to
speak to that um so and I'm sure that's
a question other people have but I'm
just gonna add that the way that the
universe answered my question was
somebody else came to me with a group of
teens asking me to teach them and have
them help formulate some of these things
so actually the university answered me
but I still think we have that question
like how do we talk to people about we
don't actually want it to go back to the
way it was all right so this is what
comes up for me and I'm just imagining
my own teenage daughters so I've got a
very first-person experience on this run
what I would say and this is by the way
in general you know I've said this
mantra a couple of times that the that
game be which can't be spoken is not
game
so this should not be a theoretical
exercise one should not talk about it
but rather one should do it in an
invitation to do it in the context of
young people here in my mind I'm
thinking about you know 15 to 19 not 22
or 25 or 35 as the case may be
it is kind of really getting into their
zone of proximal development
look what's one step they can take in
the direction of increasing empowerment
in this kind of an environment which
what's one little thing that they can do
with their own their own embodiment
their own practice the things they're
doing I'll give you a very simple
example I've actually begun to notice it
so we can think about acceleration up
until two days ago my daughters were
doing we're very passive
watching Netflix playing Minecraft
things like that and then I noticed two
days ago a little shift into a little
bit more creativity a little bit more
agency a little bit more than figuring
stuff out one was playing distributed
cards against humanity' and so they
figured out a whole new thing that they
could do you know it doesn't feel
massive but that's actually a build
developmental step not just taking a
spoon-fed piece of stuff but they just
plug into but actually on their own
figuring out some new thing that in this
context they could take ownership
responsibility for they invented
something new now somebody else may have
invented it but the point is it was new
and it was invented and they had
absorbed it and began doing it what was
the other one there was another one that
that was rather interesting again that
the basic structure of it is that it was
a it was lightweight
it was not heavy I was not asking them
to figure out how to solve big problems
asking them to do the thing that they
want to do which is to actually feel
life to feel like adolescents to feel
like they're hanging out with their
friends and doing fun teenager things
but not plugged into the matrix that
plugged into the menu of prefab things
that you can do but rather actually for
the first time staking out and beginning
to take their own capacities and realize
oh I can do this and not having right
it's not naming it's not saying hey you
could do this you have this capacity
rather just to get our single step
actually do it don't try to theorize
that don't try to make the thing
don't help us do this don't make it so
heavy that they have to actually think
about what they're doing just get them
to a place where they're doing the thing
and then as they get better at doing and
it starts to settle in then see if
there's that moment of Epiphany where
you can sort of see that they themselves
become conscious of oh that's right
we can't invent these kinds of things
and this is a lot more fun it's a lot
more interesting in this place in this
case in this stage the development of
that capacity in their bodies and then
if there is a single epiphany of
consciousness raising about that is
worth 10,000 steps for everybody else
you guys it's very high leverage right
great so Dan Gagan so I'll just write
the question to quit you from the last
session I don't really care that much
about how the Federal Reserve works
because it's going away really quick so
that's true who or what is going to
replace things like that not
specifically the Federal Reserve but
think of it in the abstract like things
like that there's sort of systems boys
gonna replace them and you know groups
that are actually working on those
problems specifically well we can talk
about that thinking maybe two languages
so I'll talk about it in mmm this way to
put this shenanigans all right there we
go so there's one approach the other
college turn an against there lots of
shenanigans going on that's that's one
answer to the question those are folks
who are in positions of power folks in
positions of power looking at the
current Federal Reserve structure and
going awesome this looks fantastic I see
something I can make very pliable and
then up gradient the kinds of things I'd
like to see and we've already seen that
like right now the thing that we used to
call the Federal Reserve guess what it's
gone I don't know you guys know but the
changes that were made in the past
couple of days so radically change the
nature of that construct that it's
called the Fed Reserve in name only and
those are serious shenanigans like that
is a massive change the underlying
financial structure of this country so
check it's over
shenanigans done now there's other folks
who are trying to work some shenanigans
to show we'll ask what happened to the
Fed oh well just do a little brief it
doesn't take too much energy so the
Federal Reserve's is very very limited
in the kinds of things that's allowed to
do by the way it's actual amended its
miniscule compared to what it's been
doing recently but most fundamentally it
can only operate through a very small
number of primary lenders these big
banks the too-big-to-fail banks the
reason why they're too big to fail is
because they're the way the Federal
Reserve hits the real economy so if they
failed the head of the Federal Reserve
would have no interface with the real
economy and they can only engage in a
various
small number of kinds of transactions
with them it could take we called repo
actions this is going to get very
esoteric break quick but some period of
time not long ago like three four days
ago a complete restructure has put in
place where a series of things that are
called special-purpose vehicles were
created managed by a private firm called
Blackrock which is the world's largest
asset manager and direct interface to
the United States Treasury which so the
US Treasury now is able to and on the
hook for put in Treasuries which is the
kind of assets that Fed can count as
being real things into these specialist
special-purpose vehicles the SPV s can
then use those assets to acquire almost
any kind of financial security which is
safe equities like shares and companies
and what's called corporate papers so
bonds and companies put them on the
books of the special-purpose vehicles
and the Treasury's assets are what's
called first law loser which is to say
that if the price to say an SP V buy
shares in uber an uber goes from 40 to
20 the United States Treasury takes that
loss so what that means is that as of
right now two things have changed one
the Treasury can now inject the quid aid
directly into the into the economy at
the most almost the most fundamental
level not quite down to human beings but
we're getting there real quick and the
US Treasury is actually not more or less
driving the show they're actually on the
other side of that actually being able
to pressure things and I would be very
surprised if at this point now Secretary
of Muchin and the president are not able
to actually just do the things they want
to do directly to the tunes or trillions
of dollars and so that's what happened
to the Fed now would say that's a very
high quality level of shenanigans all
right now let's look on the other side
yes there are groups that are looking at
what might replace it I am associated
with some of these groups
have been for quite some time
alternatives actually looked like a
radical devolution of authority and
power from the existing institutional
structures using a combination of
principles to design new models so for
example one principle is to push as much
choice making authority down to the edge
as possible so ubi is this very simple
example and I don't mean ubi from the
point of view of means I mean ubi from
the point of view of how do you make a
functional economy actually no we just
throw this out there let's see what
people think about it
take collective intelligence as the
metaphor of the market the market is
supposed to provide a really
high-quality function of collective
intelligence I had a price function
supply and demand function supposed to
tell us stuff a whole lot of stuff about
what the very large number of people out
there are perceiving is what is needful
and are able to provide to that to that
need but we have at least two major
problems with our collective
intelligence as it exists right now one
problem is we're not getting the right
kind of signal balance from the from the
nodes now if if Bill Gates has all the
dollars then our market is getting all
of its signals from one node now he
doesn't but he has a lot of them and
every other node that may actually have
real significant perception that it
needs to inject into that collective
intelligence if it doesn't have the
right amount of signal then we're
actually getting a very warped sense of
reality and so this the thing that
Piketty looked at he kind of looked at
it from the point of view of injustice
I'm going to look at it from the point
of view of a malfunctioning sense making
system we're actually not getting the
sense thinking from our system that
we're supposed to be getting because the
network topology is all up all
right well ubi is at one point one
element of that is to correct that I
need to I must inject an adequate amount
of signal which in this case is money at
every node to make sure I'm actually
getting signal from my entire network if
I get that then I've actually got a
network topology that is constructed so
as to maximize the collective
intelligence and that just is a more
effective more powerful machine so I
don't need to have be worrying too much
about things like equity and fairness at
least not first order I just need to be
worrying about what this thing's
supposed to do
and then I've got another one there's
another one I think is extremely
powerful people grasp it and this is
very well known but it's shocking how
much economists have taken into account
if I'm looking at the the supply and
demand function we know that we have a
massive cliff like a nonlinear jump in
choice making at the threshold of
privation and so if I've got enough
money that I can tell somebody all right
so somebody comes to me and says I would
like you to clean the toilets in my
office building and I say all right well
what do you willing to offer and they
say bucks an hour
my response is you because I've got
 you money
that's a terrible offer I ain't willing
to do it but there's a lot of people who
can't say you and the problem is in
our particular economy if you don't have
 you money then you've got oh I'm
about to get money you just have
to say yes to whatever offer is made so
you got a whole lot of people grow
radically being underbid there the price
signal and demand signal or asymmetric
because of this non-linearity and the
ability to say no to an offer so by
replacing people's ability to say no to
an offer you actually reestablish the
symmetry and continuity the price and
demand function now imagine what happens
when somebody is now sitting there who's
currently being paid minimum wage to
clean the toilets and JP Morgan's office
building just says you I'm just
gonna go home and plant a garden instead
then the boys of JP Morgan have to
figure out how they're gonna get their
toilets cleaned they got probably three
choices right now they can clean their
own damn toilets which is perfectly fine
or they can pay a fair wage which will
probably be in the order of like $85,000
this is how much you have to pay me to
clean their toilets and that's it's
really actually what the price signal
should be that's how much value this
this actual work actually has if the
market was doing his job fairly that's
what you would see then he got option 3
if people are paying $90,000 to get
their toilets clean guess what Elaan
musts gonna be doing not building
electric cars he's gonna be building
building toilet cleaning robots boom our
economy is actually doing the right
stuff for the first time in a long time
all right if you think about ubi as a
mechanism for solving the problem of the
fact that the collective intelligence
mechanisms or markets have actually not
been functioning because they haven't
been designed to program
make sure that the signal we're getting
from the pricing and demand side is
actually right then you've actually got
your head on straight if you're
designing your economy and your finance
around that kind of thinking right it's
it's just creating a network construct
that gets the right kind of signal
through the graph the people are
participating in to get maximum
collective intelligence then you can
design something actually works yes
there are groups that are trying to do
things like that on that basis
with any luck we and/or they will start
releasing proposals over the next couple
of weeks because the opportunity for
actually doing is pretty high right now
all right so that's some stuff again I
said a lot of words I can go on forever
about it but it feels like hopping about
seems to be the right thing to do here
yeah I think everyone needs to invest in
toilet-cleaning rooibos I think is what
the takeaway from that is find the
dirtiest job that people don't want to
do and find a way to get robots to do
that first if there's a pretty good
principle cool do we have David Jones on
the call Dave yes I'm a meeting Jim
Jordan I think it's something about what
do you see happening in the next medium
in the medium term what's your what's
your vision for what you'd like to see I
think you said specifically in the
culture war piece in your question Dave
it was the red well I actually heard two
distinct questions there one was what do
I see and what would I like to see which
would you prefer
both put again their loss all right all
right I think I mentioned this in a
different venue and but I'll put it this
way I'm noticing that my hairstyle is
vectoring directly into the American
Revolutionary vibe pretty soon I'm gonna
have a Thomas Jefferson bow in my hair
just because it's gonna be necessary I
think everybody's going in that
direction step
Alexander Boehner is going more than one
Stadion direction so one of the things I
think is a kind of a primary opportunity
right now it's simply like growing up
maybe or stepping into the how do I say
this
all right maybe I'll say it this way
this is just just a frame but you can
you can do this across a bunch of
different dimensions so this frame is
hopefully this frame lands
I've done it before and I think I think
it worked out pretty well so one of the
one of the the things that I've
discovered or at least I've noticed is
that human beings have I think very
distinctive Elemental stages in our
lives there really is a difference
between childhood adolescence young
adulthood mature adulthood an elder hood
are there just different stages
neurologically physiologically all of it
all the way down as you're talking to
somebody yesterday was give me a deep
dive on the actual neurological changes
that happen in men in their early 50s
it's a real thing all right so that's
one and then two we could talk about the
notion of their deep being different in
this Chronos Kairos there are different
states of the context that we find
ourselves in and the hypothesis that I
would put forward and I don't I don't
really matter too much whether my
hypothesis is any good but use it as a
as a way of thinking through the
question that you're asking this is a
way of of creating a model that helps
anchor that is that
things are good I think Dave actually
sent me that message I this bad times
create strong then that one something
along that so during good times there
are things that can be done and should
be done by people at different
developmental stages but during bad
times there's a transformation that
needs to occur that there needs to be a
different capacity or identity we need
different things so for example in this
case what I would say concretely is that
the the elders really really need to
step in to elder hood for the first time
in our live so I don't meet me nearly
people who happen to have a lot of
calendar years on their on their
biography you've been around the Sun a
bunch of times I mean people who have
actually lived life and remember things
like they remember when people actually
used to sort of do things for the right
reason when people thought that lying
was shameful when people knew their
neighbors and cared for their neighbors
like they have an invited experience of
the things that we need to actually
relearn pretty quickly
and they've actually lived first person
and they can share their first-person
experiences of what meaningfulness
actually is over the long arc and I
think I said this previously I don't
care that much about the the stuff you
know about the things we do it's it's
okay I'm it's cool I really like the
fact that you have really deep learned
experience about how to change the you
know the the fuel manifold and the 57
Chevy or how to rejigger the way the IRS
is COBOL system works those are good
skills but that's not the time and
elders that's not the role right for an
elder it's actually stepping into
helping people reconnect with the
foundational archetypes and the deep
sense felt sense of humaneness
and orienting people towards rightness
like calling people up into a greater
sense of the commons and their role in
this bigger picture in the story in the
in the arc of life right if you're face
to face right now with mortality bring
people back to feeling what it feels
like to be human beings alive in the
world
that's the elder right to step away from
snarfs ism and entitlement and
themselves and particularly materiality
and step into the sacred fully and help
represent that for everybody
that'll be hard on my own cohort the the
maligned Xers right our problem are our
sin is that scent of cynicism now the
slacker mentality the skeptical
mentality the how would I put it
as a generation we're all kind of a
bitch when it comes to it alright fine
we have to actually step into service we
have to take responsibility we have to
actually be willing to do the thing that
perhaps our lives have prepared us for
and bring that into into the hole all
right without cynicism without
skepticism with actually hope and in
most cases actually I don't mean I mean
very key and hope and the way that we
guys have been we've been talking about
it because most of us have kids now this
is that question we talked about earlier
we can't ask those kids to solve these
problems we have to solve the problems
and some of us have things some of us
have been working a long time trying to
figure things out and we've been awfully
beaten down look it up
alright I'm gonna call out shout out to
Eric right now Eric Weinstein you think
you've been shaking your finger at this
for an awful long time but we just have
to step up now to take personal risks
and this is the time where Gen X
actually has to be willing to put
ourselves right in the line and be
willing to take risks as individuals and
just say this is what we think is the
thing to do and we're willing to take
positions of responsibility and
leadership in service of the whole
that's that's the Gen X responsibility
then you got your millennial
responsibility and think about this Dave
again from the point of view of what
does it mean in the context of the
culture war when people move from an
immature state to a mature state I think
that's really what I'm saying
the immature state resolves the culture
war in an immature way immature state
resolve the culture war and a completely
different base it's a completely
different footing alright a bunch of
boomers we got mad at each other in the
1960s and 1970s and never got over it
and are still fighting about something
that's 30 years old when they step into
a mature state and they recognize
they're both gonna die in a couple of
weeks anyhow and they might as well get
their together
they can heal those wounds in a real way
and recognize they have a responsibility
to heal those wounds on the basis and
for everybody else that's just got to
get resolved and I mean immediately all
right
Gen Y it's actually taking
responsibility meaning okay good we get
it
you've been coddled and put upon for a
long time and you were sold a bill of
goods that wasn't true and Gen X by the
way is catania hasn't been true the
whole time but you know we suck
well guess what this is actually your
world right now this is the world you
will be the ones who are actually living
in to making this world so we're here to
help but you're gonna have to do most of
the work and take most of the personal
risk because worst case scenario we're
gonna dive sooner than you do you're
gonna have to live through and endure
whatever happens after this so it's a
big thing but taking personal
responsibility doesn't mean trying to
carry burdens that are not your burdens
that's not how it works
by trying to imagine that you can do
things you can't do is not taking
personal responsibility taking personal
responsibility as things like not
injecting noise into the comments just a
simple thing like that you know what the
 you're talking about then shut up
ask for help alright if a conversation
is going on and you have an impulsive
response to just drop nonsense into it
stop doing that if you're interacting
with somebody who is doing that tell
them to stop doing that and that's
that's like the simple simple stuff but
as people to actually begin to behave in
just a simple mature fashion appropriate
that a developmental stage reality
begins to reset itself and things begin
to happen and then of course we've got
the kids again so to loop back to them
and their job is to just be kids God say
can we stop making them have to be
machines awesome so let's try and crack
through a few more before you have to go
Geoff Loveland your assessments have
been super helpful I'm curious in
keeping with the you know the Jefferson
haircut he famously had a copy of Seneca
on his nightstand and when you chatted
with John rebecky you mentioned that the
collapse of complex civilizations was in
your top 5 I'm curious what other books
you might be rereading or that you're
gifting out most often to people Thanks
well in imported materiality when I
packed up the RV and headed out to the
Texas Hill Country about six weeks ago I
did not pack many books with me so I
don't have any of them but let's go
hypothetically that's a really good
question
you know in the past not too long ago I
would tend to recommend books that were
let's call it educational I quite liked
carroll quigley his book the evolution
of civilizations for example I thought
he did a very thoughtful job about how
civilizations evolved and I've always
glued that together with dangerous stuff
and had that be a very powerful thing
Peter church's works for example also
very very good but you know this is
Kairos it's really the time for that how
about I think it's called carnage and
culture have you ever heard of that
that's a pretty good one that's the
story about how it is that for whatever
reason Western civilization seem to
always have this weird thing of
asymmetrically winning stuff they should
have lost over and over again which is
just talking about how do we pull that
off what is it what does it mean when
you're faced with absolutely
overwhelming odds and yet you're able to
pull off victory as the carnage and
culture is about and it talks about a
lot of the things that I've been talking
about here like how do we actually build
the capacity to have reasonable courage
and how do you know he can count on
that's kind of the stuff that I would
point to right now and I also take take
a look at deep mythopoetic archetypal
things because a lot of what's happening
right now can only be grasped through
that lens Arthurian legends and I don't
mean it in terms of entertainment I mean
now in terms of sacred texts like read
it and see where it lands in your body
where does that give you a signal of
what is something that needs that is
being called for now and by the way
who's mortared in this story
great so Dani Mulhern hi I think you
might have answered this in a way
already but I'll try and make it brief
so given that it's the crisis that's
happening and it might be coming in
waves have you already come across any
evidence of institutions or governments
implementing new ideas that point in a
game B direction I guess in short is it
all just shenanigans or are there any
optimistic signs yet oh this is nice so
check check this out certainly how I
think it works it's a bit tricky but
when you get you get sensitive to it
you'll see it let's see hmm
all right so imagine you've heard that
played that game with a parachute when
you're a kid you all kind of get around
it you hold it and you pull it taut and
you're carrying things
all right so imagine that and imagine
that's that's the the institutional
structures we're familiar with right now
and there's stuff heavy stuff on the on
the on the tarp and people are trying to
carry it the the bet but then imagine
that there's a oh wait maybe this is
even better
mmm no I can't do that in yet but
there's a different place like a totally
different thing over here over to the
right and nobody's picking it up and
nobody's carrying it and you've got to
be a bunch of folks who are holding that
and they're carrying and they're lifting
it they're moving along that's game a
right that's the world we live in and
that and that's the stuff on that tarp
is the things that is our lives are the
things that were carrying and every time
somebody who's holding under that tarp
looks over and sees this over the thing
over here and they kind of nudge the
person next to them and kind of like hey
that thing over there that's the game B
piece and that's it's the the awakening
and the awareness of the reality of the
embeddedness of people inside the
environment who actually have the right
capacity and competence now this is
happy
whole lot it does it's not obvious and
shenanigans are the nature of the beast
the beast cannot but do shenanigans but
the beast at the end of the day isn't a
thing right it's an emergent property of
a whole lot of people collaborating and
being willing to give their energy and
intentionality to the maintenance of the
beast to degree to which those
individuals are beginning to be aware of
the possibility and the necessity of no
longer giving their energies to the
beast and the reality of being able to
give their energy somewhere else that
caliph eration z' like a hollowing out
an ossification you've you ever seen the
way a bone looks with the holes the
micro micro elements is this microbe
dissolution of the integrity of the
coherent coordinating structure that
gives rise to the emergent Beast and as
the most talented individuals all right
the people who actually see game B first
from the inside of these kinds of
structures almost invariably are unique
in some way I don't mean necessarily
unique in a good way but they're unique
in some way they're sensitive they can
feel the possibility and they feel the
pain of the beast and their complicity
and the beast in a uniquely powerful way
and they try to figure out how do they
continue to participate in what's
happening to make it as good as possible
but as they continue to watch what's
happening there are starting to find
each other I can't name a lot of names
here but it's happening very rapidly
truly competent good people skillful
smart are beginning to just say you know
what it this thing is not working I
need to just get like phone and call the
guy I went to college with who had his
 together and see what he's up to
and see if I can collaborate with him
and then I'm gonna figure out how to
create permission to do it inside the
thing that I'm doing which is the way
that it always works best anyhow if
you've ever been inside some shitty
corporate environment you always know
the only things that ever happened when
people actually create capacity peer to
peer inside the environment well in this
case is doing is happening super rapidly
and across the entire system and we
actually have a whole lot of people who
are incredibly capable and have learned
a lot of skills about things like
counterinsurgency
and intelligence you know it's it's it's
a it was a different ball game in the
1950s so that I think is the way to
think about it and when we have to do is
we have to become increasingly conscious
and mindful of how to cuz remember we
don't want to drop the ball on this
thing unfortunately that thing that that
tarp that I was talking about the thing
it's holding that's our lives and if we
let go of it our lives fall with it and
that gets really bad really fast so we
have to actually find a way to kind of
like get the music to slow down and then
have the capable hands the truly capable
hands increasingly steer what's
happening inside like it's a fabric that
lifts up and weaves itself underneath so
people are actually held in something
that's real and then we begin to move
over to this new attractor as people
kind of point at it so yes I am seeing
some things happening inside what we
would call existing institutions it's
largely correlates with the degree to
which those constructs are made up of
people who are close to reality let me
can I can I feed one more piece of
theory in here I was talking about with
somebody just today and I think it's
actually very useful I was asking the
question of why it is the dairy dog went
wrong because I got to tell you dairy
dad went wrong and the reason why it
went wrong I'm pretty sure it's because
when the pipes burst in his apartment he
did not fix those pipes himself in fact
in all likelihood he didn't even call
the plumber he had to talk to the
supervisor supervisor called the plumber
the plumber fixed the pipes which is to
say the dairy dog was the first person
experience in Baudrillard simulation the
farther you are away from reality the
more likely it is that you'll find
yourself playing in simulation space
which means you're going to lose the
thread you're gonna have to play games
by capital in social segments
manipulating or getting other people to
do the stuff you wanted to do instead of
having be able to actually be directly
bound to reality so the people in
institutions who happen to be directly
bound to reality they're the ones who
actually starting to have to figure
things out the people who are the
furthest away from me outta that ones
are the deepest in the simulation
they're the ones who are actually very
confused and or dangerous and so we have
to figure out
to decouple their capacity to make
choices and to a rapidly upgrade their
sense making if they happen to be
amenable to it so that's a long-winded
way of trying to answer your question
apologies if it wasn't very tight Thank
You Jordan we've we've hit with just off
to half past do you have time for
another couple of questions or do you
have to have let me check I had a hard
stop at 3:30 but let me see where they
are yep perfect I have 27 more minutes
amazing awesome so Danny Mulhern and
David Gabbard I'm gonna ask you both to
one at a time really concisely ask your
questions but I think they're in the
same ballpark so I think they can run
together
I've just been David so David I mean
sorry great
David Gavin great David do you wanna
start do you wanna ask your question
first I just had my students in the
foundations of education class that I'm
teaching right now
read understanding the blue church and I
gave them an assignment it's actually
their final paper that requires them to
evaluate whether or not compulsory
schooling should have any role in
helping us move forward in a kind of
post blue church world and I was
wondering if you're familiar with Yvonne
Ilic is D school in society or if you
had any thoughts that all along the
question of compulsory schooling as the
kind of foundational element of the blue
church my opinion I think it all comes
down to the question of how we raise our
kids and how we bring them into
collective since making thoughts
yeah and gray do you want muscular
questions I think it's in my mind if
mine can work in that same space I mean
you've hit I'm an educator teenagers and
you said kids being kids but you can
apply that to his question just being
with those younger primary school-aged
children teaching them this I mean how
does that I had access to be able to
alter that game very quickly at my high
school just as a matter of fact so I'm
interested to you which you stay
well I'm noticing in myself that I'm
gonna have to keep this in a somewhat
academic form because if I actually
allow myself to feel it directly the
amount of rage and anger I feel at the
the damage that has been done would be
difficult to contain so can i match yes
I have Fred Ivan Illich and I feel very
close to connected to the things that he
was talking about I think he hit the
nail in the head pretty well I kind of
wish we've done a better job so yes
absolutely I mean the the the yoking and
the training and the embodiment of the
causing of the people to separate
themselves from their own bodies and
their own sense of what is right wrong
and their own ability to actually
develop their own capacity to refine
their sense making in their discernment
on the basis of who they are I mean
that's the thing that we just have lost
so enormous Lee is that everybody is a
singular event in the universe which
means infinitely subtle and in filling
mysterious to themselves and everyone
else and that endeavor to yolk them to a
cookie cutter methodology is
unbelievably harmful and so to cultivate
an individual their actual unique
capacity to perceive reality and learn
how they themselves understand how to
come into conformity with what is and to
respond to Anna fashion which is
actually effective is simply nothing
more or less than ethics so everything
that has been done thus far under the
heading of compulsory schooling has in
many ways been distinctly categorically
unethical in the most monstrous way
imaginable
even though perhaps the many ways well
intentioned and by the way if you know
the history of Education in many ways
not so well intentioned so compulsory
schooling is an absolute nonsense
compulsory life well it turns out that's
just the way it is now ug actually do
have to live you have to develop you
have to be in relationship with
experience and with other people and
with yourself and it's okay let's figure
out how to support people and doing the
thing that they have to do anyway and
make it as natural and rich as possible
man if anything at all came out of this
it was a shift if it's a shift there I
would consider that to be the biggest
possible boon thank you thank you
I think Teemo Teemo your next team oh
shoot yeah I joined I think my question
somehow relates to
question just going to read it out so
well the c19 crisis presents a great
chance to get people to question
existing institutions and to deploy new
ways of sense-making it also creates a
chance for governments to introduce
lasting authoritarian measures without
resistance as they can be effective in
the current situation so how can
something like decentralize collective
intelligence or game be gained traction
in a time in which authoritarian
measures can be perceived perceived as a
valid fallback option to weather crisis
situations like this yeah well I think
this goes back to that notion of Kairos
I think right now we're in a situation
where things could either move very well
or they can move very poorly I think the
general answer is if we were on the
other side of authoritarian measures
putting being put in place and it will
make it much harder for us not
catastrophic it's not impossible just
make it much harder and by the way it'll
make the consequences of the shifts more
let's call it energetic so the key right
now is to figure out how can we go about
nudging and influencing the shift that
takes place so as to minimize that and
whenever possible actually maximize the
good side so I'll give you a concrete
example this is really really real like
right now and over the next several days
and near-term weeks significant choices
are being made in the United States and
everywhere else around the world the
choices of large has already been made
in China as I understand it about how
we're gonna go about trying to address
the problem of contact tracing for
example or testing now there are many
many possible solutions and actually now
come to mind with Ivan Illich there have
always been many solutions around
education we just chose the ones that
were bad there are many solutions to the
question of how do we actually build an
infrastructure that is able to
powerfully effortlessly respond to the
problem domain of these kinds of events
to crises along the viral and viruses
what I would like to see is wisdom being
used in those designs and I don't mean
this
naively there are actually people asking
for that
significant powerful people are asking
for that we just need to find a way to
create space for it and then bring the
right people in so that we can actually
propose designs that will solve the
problem well for the long term and it
was not only without threats to freedom
and liberty in our capacity to
communicate in affected with each other
but actually up gradient that make it
better
so I think right now the situation is
the the the die are about to be cast and
when it is incumbent upon us to find a
way to put pressure to create the space
to make sure that good solutions are put
in place if we can find AK one thing so
I said if I there's one thing that comes
out of this that I would like to see be
a boom but you have massive shift in the
nature of how we go about supporting the
development of our children if I had one
thing that I would talk about people
just rallying around and just saying no
to would be just short-term mindless
solutions to these problems you know
what it's if I could get people to say I
would prefer I am willing to stay in
quarantine for another six weeks in
exchange for having a good solution to
this problem like a trade-off on the
part of the people we demand a good
design we demand this something actually
makes sense
in exchange we're not gonna riot in the
streets where I can do crazy stuff we're
okay we will create some space for this
to happen and that would be a wonderful
thing I don't know if we can pull it off
because there's a lot of diverse
interest out there and I get it I mean
people who have small businesses right
now are feeling really really put upon
it people who work for a living and
don't have a lot of coverage you're
feeling really really put about I
understand that and so there's an
urgency to figure out how to put
solutions together you know so such as
is Right Kairos is never pretty we're
right in the middle of a very messy
circumstance and bad things are
happening and left and right so we've
got to try to figure out how we can get
as smooth as possible to make as good
things happen to me a question about Q
so that's thoughts flashed across my
screen yeah there was a question but
wouldn't kind of very appropriately an
anonymous question in the document that
just says you frequently allude to Q do
you follow Q drops yes I do
into that
I'm into it yeah I think I've been
public on it I've tried to pay attention
to everything it's good interesting
Sigma and it doesn't mean that I
considered the structural huh that's
actually funny I think if this is
confuses people a whole lot when I say
something mmm I'm gonna say it right I
really believe that the particular
arrangement of words that are presented
by a person who's saying something is
the meaning that is being conveyed
particularly anything that's happening
in a public domain that's not what I'm
doing when I see something what I see is
I try to figure out what's going on how
is that showing up why is it showing
them what's the context is giving rise
to it like if you think about it this is
very Brett Weinstein and when I see a
saber-toothed tiger I'm not inquiring
into the saber-tooth tiger I'm inquiring
into the niche to gave rise to the
saber-tooth tiger and so when I see a
cue drop I don't really care about the
content in the cue drop I care about the
context that it's telling me about what
that implies for everything else in the
entire environment that I'm operating in
so hell yeah when Q first emerged I
think I was there on 4chan about a week
after it first showed up cuz I had some
other folks were watching her and the
closer they said she'd probably pay
attention to this so I did a lot by the
way like I went straight crazy
I drove all the way into it I was on
4chan probably five or six hours a day
and on a chain and all the other chants
and all that kind of I gave up
after about four or five months because
I kind of absorbed the end energy like
I've figured it out and got an embodied
sense of what was going on there it's
possibility these days the queue drops
are telling me what is the cultural that
culturally approved or permissioned
expressions in a particular subset of I
guess culture space so there's still
signaling to getting there for sure and
just one question your piece that you
wrote about Q got taken off median I
think yeah a couple of people asking
just for a little bit of background on Q
yeah do Nell did me the kindness of
actually allowing me to be on the
website that she had create
you could maybe put it in the chat room
or send it to somebody else and I
migrated it there along with a number of
my other medium post just in case the
kid folks had media decided to take
everything down all at once as it turns
out the the the book-burning ended with
just that particular piece and so you
can find everything else on medium but
uh but yeah Jenelle Jenelle created a
safe space for that particular article
to be secured and by the way and the
event that medium decides to go or
Twitter decides to go for store
mannequins you know that's their I guess
I've got a question and a challenge so
the question is there's so many so much
abundance of byproducts that may be seen
as negatives at the moment how do we
make the best use case scenario to flip
those byproducts and I'll give a couple
of examples into our solution instead so
for example significant amount of people
being laid off obviously they have a lot
of time they're confined to a small
space how do we best empower them to be
part of the solution as opposed to were
seeing that as a problem that we need to
fix and there are many many other
circumstances like that including the
amount of people that are out there
trying to create solutions so how do we
unify them and create a self
organization and have the I guess the
right things emerged that can resonate
with enough people for the outcomes to
not only make impact now but last so
they can be applied to I guess our
future civilizations and ecosystems
future Forge and then my challenge is
and this is coming from personal
experience over the last couple of
months we've koban and working with a
number of people globally is I'm finding
even with my background
there is a severe shift back towards the
boys game and the boys club to the point
where some of the conversations that I'm
having where we're instigating these
incredible opportunities for change or
for support within medical supply
systems or education or mental health
etc have literally been at tables where
I've been told not to worry my pretty
little head about it which I've been
absolutely stunned it seems that we're
going back to the roots of what we know
to be as opposed to taking an inclusive
and diversity
ah okay that is you talk about the power
of many and the good men and I love that
and I am so on board with that but how
do we use the good men to start
unlocking the potential of the good
women in these scenarios because I
believe that it's the same use case as
we've had in the boardrooms where we
need the good men to fight the fight and
start those conversations and open the
doors we're going to need that same
scenario to play out for for women's
potential to also be impactful at least
time so that's that's the two things
they question and the challenge may be
working backwards may be working
backwards I got to tell you it is my
instinct it is my distinct intuition
that it is actually in some sense almost
the opposite of the way you ended it I
am reasonably sure that the the
successful navigation of this crisis is
ultimately a question that is lying on
the side of the feminine I think the
masculine has a role to play for Shore
it's a significant one I do believe and
I cannot give you good reasons for why
this is the case although I imagine I
could make some up if we press it if you
press me hard enough there wouldn't be
 they just be figured out in the
real time that the feminine is the
actual answer to this to the question so
that makes your question even more
intense
the thing that came to me while I was
trying to inquire into into the
situation you were describing is I think
I think one of the problems we have is
that we found ourselves kind of stuck in
the middle of something and we have or
had effective ways of doing things in
the 70s and we haven't yet figured out
effective ways of doing things in 2020
so I can see that being a devolution now
the the middle zone that we've been
sitting in for the past 20 years which
has been trying to figure out how to
actually get to a solid developmental
stage which is at the next level
squishy all right it's squishy it is not
solid and so it can happen I can absence
see what you're saying I have not
experienced this firsthand because I
would smack somebody in the back of the
head if they said some like that in
front of me but I can see it happening
because they would just drop down like
 I can't make I cannot figure out
how to make things work right now I've
got to drop down to something I
understand and they just pop down to a
previous level that makes sense I could
see that so the challenge I think is
this challenges can we actually go
through rapid development to something
that is solid as
but that's the next level up yeah that
sounds good that sounds right so I'm
game you guys want to put another one of
these things together we actually try to
take that on directly I meant I'll try
to participate I'll throw down whatever
I've got awesome yeah weird so we've
been recording this and I think it was a
question maybe from you Catherine
whether this will be transcribed yes I
can get the the audio transcribed and
send that over if you wanted to go
through it and as we're coming up we've
got about three minutes before Jordan
needs to go I think be great just to
show some appreciation and say thank you
to Jordan for making the time it's been
really fantastic
and huge quality of questions and
excellent answers as always they says I
appreciate the opportunity
Thank You Julian yeah so great thank you
very very great good to be here
[Music]