we're question mark you so Red Sox flash
cross my screen
yeah there was a question wouldn't kind
of very appropriately an anonymous
question in the document that just says
you frequently allude to Q do you follow
Q drops yes I do
to that I'm it to it yeah I think I've
been public on it I try to pay attention
to everything it's good interesting
Sigma and it doesn't mean that I
considered the structural health that's
actually funny I think if this is
confused as people a whole lot when I
say something mmm I'm gonna say it right
I really believe that the particular
arrangement of words that are presented
by a person who's saying something is
the meaning that is being conveyed
particularly anything that's happening
in a public domain that's not what I'm
doing when I see something what I see is
I try to figure out what's going on how
is that showing up why is it showing
them what's the context that's giving
rise to it like if you think about it
this is very Brett Weinstein and when I
see a saber-toothed tiger I'm not
inquiring into the saber-tooth Tiger I'm
inquiring into the niche that gave rise
to the saber-tooth Tiger and so when I
see a Q drop I don't really care about
the content in the Q drop I care about
the context that it's telling me about
what that implies for everything else
and the entire environment that I'm
operating in so hell yeah when Q first
emerged I think I was there on 4chan
about a week after it first showed up
cuz I had some other folks were watching
her very closely and said she'd probably
pay attention to this so I did a lot by
the way like I went straight crazy
I drove all the way into it I was on
4chan probably five or six hours a day
and on a chain and all the other Chan's
and all that kind of shit I gave up
after about four or five months because
I kind of adsorbed the end energy like I
figured it out and got an embodied sense
of what was going on there its
possibility these days the queue drops
are telling me what is the cultural that
culturally approved or permissioned
expressions in a particular subset of I
guess culture space so there's still
signal to get in there for sure
and just one question your piece that
you wrote about cube got taken off
median I think yeah anywhere there are a
couple of people asking just for a
little bit of background on cue yeah do
Nell did me the kindness have actually
allowing me to be on the website that
she had created she could maybe put it
in the chat room or send it to somebody
else and I migrated it there along with
a number of my other medium post just in
case the kid folks had media decided to
take everything down all at once as it
turns out the the the book burning ended
with just that particular piece and so
you can find everything else on medium
but uh but yeah Janelle Janelle created
a safe space for that particular article
to be secured and by the way in the
event that medium decides to go or
Twitter decides to go for shenanigans
you know that's there
[Music]
you
[Music]