I don't know how I'm gonna possibly live
next week not going pace there's so much
to update everyone auditory growers pet
this is like the second to last time I'm
doing the possibility during the
pandemic because as of Sunday I've yet
to know what storytime I'm doing it on
Sunday but sunday is the last one and
then next week I am taking off beside
solution raising and then the following
week I'm gonna be coming back with
conversations so however any
conversations I can recruit people for I
have four plans but today this concept
of the dance keeps coming up in various
conversations I'm I'm part of as well as
videos I'm watching that have nothing to
do with me like that but they don't even
know I exist so it's definitely not that
piece of it because I might be the one
bringing up the dance in the
conversation itself that I'm part of
right but the video I talked about last
week with Russell Brandt and Elizabeth
Gilbert she talked about the dance as
well and how our source of creativity
how we can maybe she didn't talk about
the dance
maybe I just registered it as the dance
but it was very that there's a lot in
this world that were at Laura as
individuals and as a society and art is
one of them that you have to suffer to
be a good artist that you have to and
that is being more with art as opposed
to being in this conversation and this
play and this in this dance with it the
same thing happens with creativity and
innovation and I know I'm discovering my
dance and that is what I talk about when
I talk about listening to the universe
and following my own guides and
following my own map and yesterday's
conversation every Wednesday we have
this Omega rule conversation group it
started in the fall and there's five of
us that regularly show up yesterday was
one of the few calls that all five of us
were actually on the previous week I
spaced on it forgot completely it felt
like missing I don't know like being a
kid and missing church the kid part
isn't actually important missing church
I just only went to church when I was a
kid
and I remember that like rejuvenation
feeling of like singing and being with
community and then it going away for the
week and then like there's what are they
called like Sunday Christians but that's
literally like the day that they follow
God's rules then they kind of let it
fall away and back it feels like
reconnecting to spirit having a
conversation with these people and
reconnecting to to my spirit and a
community of people who share very
different and yet similar journeys and
one of the things that was shared was
this idea of a box of a grief that
belongs to like society um humanity and
the difference that that we all five of
us on this call have that experience
that we have this box of grief that
isn't our own and the difference how the
person who brought it up talked about it
is like a box on the Shelf that they
know where it is one of the other one
talked about it as a grief at the center
of the universe the center of the earth
and yeah I don't know just the
commonality this isn't this this isn't
going to church finding a doctrine and
then finding how our world ties to the
doctrine right are you are you following
God's rules are you following the Ten
Commandments I'm gonna need to judge you
if you're not this is the dance that
emerges individually and yet the
commonality of other people also
experiencing the dance is itself the
dance like it's your individual myths
your your role your purpose your people
yourself to me figuring that out
answering the five questions to me as
the dance and it is my own what I am
here to do and in doing it it has its
own reward there's also a like team
dance of being in a conversation of
being on a project and everyone having
their own dance somehow it weaves
together somehow and that's kind of the
point of whatever this dances that is
emerging in the individuals and in the
groups is that and this is what was
coming up in this amazing conversation
span and we record all of our
conversations and we make them available
in two
to us and every time I participate one
I'm like yes I want to rewatch this yes
Henry watch this ID yes actually I think
we watch one but this one at the end one
of the people was like I think this
should be made public and so we're
looking at making a public it won't be
on this channel because it's not my
conversation it's on the great mankind's
Erik's
channel is where it will be but I will
link it it'll be in one the playlist is
here I think I can add it to
conversation playlist even though it's
not like on my channel but having
accesses conversation is amazing but
also like just what was brought up in
this conversation and we're all
experiencing the pandemic because
everybody is and hearing about the
individual pieces that are coming into
play in people's lives and what it's
what it's bringing up and this idea of
metabolizing crisis which was a cool
thing okay
but it's different it's not necessarily
whether or not you've encountered a lot
of crisis in your lifetime although that
helps you develop an ability to
metabolize crisis and if this is your
first crisis the chances that you're
good at metabolism crisis are next to
zero because it's not necessarily
something we're taught and most people
aren't natural at it but having been
through several crises especially ones
that the rest of the world doesn't
validate is it ends up helping you
metabolize crisis in a different way and
so most of us who have PTSD most of us
who've had to metabolize crisis are
doing better during this pandemic and at
the same time we're still struggling
we're still having issues but this is
dance this it happens in nature we're
talking about like the swallows and how
they dance in the sky right and if they
are aware of this dance they kind of
mess it up that if what and one of them
goes wrong then like the whole thing
goes off because they bang into someone
else bangs into someone else there's
something about being aware of the dance
stops you from doing the dance
and yet humanity because of our
awareness both has never needed this
dance bar but it's like it's happening
on another dimension that this I don't
even know like this beauty
this love that I call the universe we've
called like the religion it's not a
religion and a god that's not a god it's
magical and amazing and yet you can't
actually understand it that's why it's
different than a religion that you go to
clergy you go to a governing body to be
like explain this to me this is my
interpretation but it's the Bible it's
founded on it's the Quran it's founded
on the Torah books the dead
whatever your holy books are actually
Buddhism is really on the books of the
dead there's part of that half anyway
having um that instead because it's
arising in you and you're having a
conversation there is no at least in our
conversation in validating the other
one's experience there's oh I have that
in common with you wow I wonder we all
have this in common I wonder if this is
a humanity thing or whether this is a
five of us thing because we happen to be
in the same work I think we happened to
be here did you help create a world that
that works better
helped a great can be that's how I'll
met each other and the dance that
happens behind the scene the magic the
womb it's not the Wow though every it's
like the blank that's not the blank is
what keeps keeps coming up and there was
a new word that was given to it is sorry
new word to me it's not a new word it's
the opposite of entropy which is that
everything goes to chaos if you don't
put energy into the system and this is
that everything kind of goes to the
opposite of chaos which is I guess order
and design and yet at the same time it's
new like we just talked about so much
for this conversation the idea that
there's levels above them below and
that's very much a integral ken Wilber
at least I know it from Ken Wilber
Steger work that you transcend and
include the previous layer so in biology
in chemistry it includes the physics of
the molecules themselves and it can't
exist without that but it doesn't
include the hoots the elements it
doesn't necessarily include the higher
order but the biology Wow a cell it
includes the chemistry that it
based on which includes the physics that
it's based on the organ includes the
cell that is on the chemistry and the
physics and you know the the person has
the organs has the trait you transcend
and include I can't be Jubilee without
my organs I can't be Jubilee without my
cells or without the chemistry or
physics that holds me together but
whatever next order is isn't necessarily
including she wakes up the next layer
just the next layer so my community is
my society whatever it is but we can't
even comprehend the next layer above
that because we're not even really in it
like it's it's it's integral work it's
whatever that's what I did for the first
part of my twenties looking into and
studying and how that is this dance that
emerges that it's like the low one
higher layer governing this one I'm
talking about in a football match how do
you not have a referee and we all again
have different versions visions of when
a football game doesn't have a referee
right why it has a referee the like
thing that's at stake is part of the
reason you have a referee if you are
print play this sport for a profession
and making millions of dollars you
absolutely need a referee if you're
playing it just to play the game and not
to win and you're just playing with
friends you don't necessarily need
referee there's something about the
higher order refereeing this one and yet
a cell doesn't need a referee right a
cell it doesn't really get guidance from
from the orbit mica guidance from the
organ but not the person right I don't
tell a cell what to do my organ might
and I might I can give like the chemical
feedback but not the the intellectual
feedback to do it and so just that this
dance is emerging that it keeps coming
up and that it isn't that well there's
just some stuff that that David said
that I want to share because he he just
was in his in his zone of I'm sure he's
amazing thing because you're like yes
this is what I've been trying to say and
I think this was actually a redo of
something I had said earlier he just
David it isn't it sound not going to 15
that you can't mess this up but the
beauty of the dance is there isn't a
wrong way and that's the difference unit
dances war is a war is very much
competition in one single winner right
no matter what more looks like whether
it's the octave on two people enter one
person leaves for their it's not death
and you're just one boxing and one
person wins and one person loses or war
right it's like that a lot of the wars
that exist today on the planet are words
that are like just so stretched out
because there is no winning because it's
like well neither of us have won yet
it's like a football game that just goes
on and on and on and on and it's very
much because of the competition there's
a winner and a loser who has the best
weapon so that's the best warrior who
has the best team cohesion who has the
best media and propaganda surrounding
our war there's a lot that goes into it
but it dance although there are
professional dancers and there are still
there's only gonna be one prema prema
prema Valerie Navy from the Olympics the
point isn't to become the top dancer
it's just to dance just to move your
body just to discover your rhythm and
your movement and your and when you
learn that life's a dance then you're
like oh they're dancing to a different
song than I am they're not dancing wrong
right you war it's like who comes out on
top there's no rules there's no or but
if you don't follow them you have an
advantage if you're willing to use
landmines if you're willing to take
prisoners of war
I don't just kill people and not take
that sir as a war that there's just this
difference in the war in the dance
because I wake up to left
I also there's so many things so many
things I went I had my nap yesterday and
I woke up and looked at Facebook
one of my friends acquaintances friends
posted this thing about there's this
movie called the bland emic it's got
Judy Miko Vic in it and this person
posted that and posted an article that
was the reaction to this this video
that's about a conspiracy theory
now like all of a sudden all I had on my
feed was this planned epic movie from
various different places and one this
person who I don't put in this category
I also know that they didn't vaccinate
their kids and they were first born and
now they do vaccinate their kids since
they went from a strong stance on one
side to the strong stance on the other
but when you look at like their wording
around if you read this article and
you're still sharing the plan demek
unfriend me and I'm like why do you
assume everyone reading this article is
gonna come to the same conclusions as
you especially knowing this person is a
very enlightening spiritual it like this
isn't quite in character there's
something else there that's not quite
last time they posted something that was
and auntie auntie box and knowing them
and knowing their history I was like
wait a minute did you back say your kids
now because when I first met you this
was part of your and their belief in our
backs it was very spiritual and so when
they got to the logical back medical
side they did backs aggregates they got
them caught up on the schedule whereas I
came to it from a very scientific point
of view oh wait we haven't done the
science we haven't done so it's a very
you can't I guess spiritual like mine
doesn't get fixed by our current society
you need the system needs to be fixed in
order for there to be a change in my
stance the science needs to be fixed the
system that's done for profit instead of
purpose needs to be fixed we need to
look out for individuals in society
who've been damaged no matter how or why
they've been damaged especially if
you've decided that there is a
beneficial risk to society by the
individual taking the risk if the
individual takes all of the
ramifications of the risk if they happen
to be one of those people anyway look
wait but watching I just watched because
in this documentary keeps getting taken
down the fact that this person put up
that thing and I was just watching it
there's nothing in it that's over the
top this idea though that YouTube keeps
taking down videos of doctors who are
disagreeing and I get it it's really
hard to have the other side giving
falsehoods when it's gonna make people
not do the right thing
so this happens in every sector you have
the oil and gas company we know they lie
we know of course they're in for profit
but so does the green industry because
they have to counteract their lies you
have it happen on on every side but it's
like what wait you're the good guys
maybe you shouldn't lie maybe you're
actually based on truth but if theirs is
based on truth if you're the honest job
applicant and you're in for a job with
all these people who are lying about
their talents and lying about their
skill level who are they gonna hire they
can't hire the Liars because they don't
know they're liars and so there's this
like arms race and the truth that if
they tell that if they're creating a
fake narrative and twisting the facts
then you have to create a fake narrative
and twist the facts and I don't I don't
believe in that I think that we need to
have truth as our highest value in
things that truth can be the highest
value so in vaccination I don't care
whether you are pro or anti Beck's
I want to know or is the actual science
show our vaccine safe short term long
term just the facts
does the data show are vaccines
effective short term long term and short
term the science has been done long term
the science has not been done and you
can't just ignore that science that was
I pointed that one that we're dividing
based on whether your program T vaccine
right so there's opposite sides to that
debate both sides should have truth as
their highest stance both sides should
have and listen I want to know our
vaccine safe and effective for my child
for me and for society my job is for me
and my family it's not for society but
also there is a true cost in my
decisions on society at every level on
every decision and so why this is the
one everyone since I own your body my
kid at risk and so are you bike washing
your laundry with this phosphate so are
you by flushing that down the toilet so
are you by making those specific
purchasing decisions
and so removing the conflict and looking
for the common ground that the even in
this current current stance because the
question isn't is planned emic true I
mean it is but like that a documentary
can be made and then one side can just a
bunk it and therefore the whole thing
like it's we're not doing ourselves a
service following the same path we
followed continually we need to have a
new path right so both sides let's say
let's go with the binary and like okay
the lockdown people are right this is a
deadly virus we should all be in
lockdown and uh you know until we have a
vaccine and a vaccine
okay the other side is our government's
orchestrated this dress to have a to an
you know instill fascism and to make
vaccination mandatory for whatever
reason they're doing that and okay what
what if either of those is true right
how would you know it's true not argue
whether it's true or not how would you
know not a knee-jerk reaction wait I
don't agree I thought that's not right
no like because even the article I read
the first paragraph and it was like this
person can't be trusted there are known
anti-vaxxer well considering anyone
anyone who has any question about
vaccination the schedule and the
ingredient
this person has a background in this
stuff was vilified by the pharmaceutical
company for five years she's not Andrew
Wakefield and she sounds very
intelligent do I know if everything she
says is true
no because it's a documentary it's just
her talking it's not you know blurbs of
actually this is shown to be true and
this is shown to be false and this is
based on this study of this studies been
debunked because of various reasons it's
like we're dealing with all the surface
level that puts us into various camps of
the vaccine Merced aunty Beck stuff like
that to get us out of lockdown we're
gonna protest and you're gonna pry my
hugs out of my cold dead ends to like
it's just a really when we can take the
step back and say what is truth what do
we actually need to know because whether
or not a vaccine
can this be a vaccine Kenko bid 19 have
a vaccine weather and part of what they
talk about implants emic which I think
I'm like they could because it's within
my my belief system but that they're
squashing all of the things that can't
be patented anything that can't be made
into a profit out of this is being
squashed out of everything I know about
the medical community and our health
care system yeah that sounds about right
like it's like why use vitamin C when
you can charge somebody five hundred
dollars a month for it pharmaceutical
drug that now is vitamin C as as good I
don't know because we don't do the study
is because there's no money in to do the
studies and there are natural remedies
like just being part of the ecosystem
the sunlight the zinc the stuff that we
should know is it good or not so our
lack of trust in the system is like are
there things we could be using to
increase our chance there are doctors
that same respirators are not the not
the thing we want to be using and this
is this is putting people in any
disservice instead of good service this
woman also the one thing I was like what
she was talking about why in Dilys has
such bad numbers and one of the things
as it Billy has a really old population
that is correct one of the other things
is that Italy has people with high
inflammation I think they probably
because of their their whole Italian
diet but that wasn't reference so I
don't know what is that mega story how
do you know that that's just and then
also they got this um studied which
because it needs to come out every year
is always unstudied flu vaccine for that
year and and that's why if these people
had that shot and they have inflammation
and they're old is why they have this
huge thing and I was like it's a
reference you can't just put out even if
those things correlate it's not
necessarily causation but if you could
see Italy have this vaccine and these
people have this vaccine and these
people didn't have this vaccine then you
can see it if your answer is you're not
allowed to study that you're not allowed
to just don't even look at that
there's problems the fact that our
entire systems for profit is problems so
what you have to ask is if we don't want
a vaccine to be mandatory it would truly
don't want so if I seem to be mandatory
because of everything that that means
for our civil right
then you want and if about if there can
be a back seat and a vaccine can be safe
enough and effective effectives the
thing we care about very deeply with
this right if you get the vaccine are
you immune now are you immune for 10
years are you different life can you
ever do that with this with this is this
more like the common cold we don't have
any nem co vid virus vaccines the cold
is the closest and we don't have a cold
vaccine for obvious reasons that mutates
too fast the flu we have one and it's
not really that effective because it
mutates and it's anyone every year so
finding what I think we need to be
asking is if one is it can we come up
with a vaccine is that even plausible in
any way shape or form because if you
need to get this thing yearly you're
gonna mandate yearly vaccination that's
a whole other show you don't want
one-time vaccinations and then it's like
well what do we want it to be mandatory
no I don't think we want anything to be
mandatory that's gonna come with all of
the people out in arms you're gonna
vaccinate my kid this isn't my choice
why is this it's just not okay it's not
okay to have a medical procedure become
non to become mandatory so that's not
between your and your doctor whether the
risk awaits the benefit or not but if
you ask people who are vaccine reluctant
if you ask people what would you need to
be in place so you trust in this vaccine
that is what we should be putting in
place open sourced science how has this
been tested
where does the money coming from
where is it going and I want the other
things to be like vaccine is separate
vaccines don't get the thing at the
first place but if you get it how do you
increase your chances of survival and
how do you decrease your chances of
getting it or do you not withstand it
side we're doing that we can also
possibly do that with things like
vitamin C and zinc and vitamin D but
they help our immune system and so they
might help it so that you go from
someone who'd be highly highly where
you'd be on respirator be someone who's
less symptomatic these things have been
tested and they've been shown but
they're not
we need one place to go for information
we need to have a a place that we trust
go to the in fact that we don't is
costing all of us because you have
conspiracies on both sides how dare you
say
they're locking us up for no reason how
dare you say that you want to because I
felt I shared this in the call yesterday
one of my kids friends go to school
together last year and we're both in the
only the only crazy auntie backsight
I've ever been part of we're all of the
things that the pro backs are save and
Auntie Baxter's say it's the only place
I've heard them like the only place
knees on people whatever but we're both
in this group and and I do five but
these people look crazy but they're
looking to set up playdates for their
daughter and there's part of me that is
really angry at them for that like I'm
like how dare you how like my I am my
life might be at risk but more like like
my dad's life is more at risk by your
taking this on for other people first of
all and the dad in that family is also
in the demographic that might be
susceptible ends more deadly but any
rate it's like I'm angry but I don't
understand their family dynamics I don't
understand how hard this time is for
their daughter I understand she was
really active before this and now less
active my kid wasn't very active in now
but like who what gives you the right
for your special kid to be the one on
play dates when everyone else is dealing
with this and that's like real emotion
it's real it's real it's like now my kid
can never play with your kid basically
because I know that you don't take this
seriously and if you're not taking psych
social isolation seriously how do I know
you're washing your hands how do I know
you're doing anything to keep people
safe you're just basically saying that
our blindness to get the disease which
might kill one of the four of you so but
anyway that that's like there's actual
motion that's brought up but they're
living their best life or they're living
their life to the best of their ability
you know I'm living my life to the best
of my ability and I have to deal with
the if they get to and I don't wanna
have different family situations if
school is back on next week I can't send
my kid this year September maybe but
like then we have a higher threshold
risk our risk threat our we have more
risk in this way than people who don't
have a risk we don't have anyone who's
susceptible to it I don't know anyone
who if they get it is going to be most
likely dead like they don't have that
they know because
I actually think that this could be play
but sunny sabes my morning was watching
a bit of this which is continually taken
down oh the weird thing was when this
person posted on Facebook I hadn't I
hadn't seen plan to make it all and then
all of a sudden like all and I was like
did you all post this for last five
minutes this is weird but every link I
clicked on it wasn't there this one link
that I'm watching is only I think half
an hour but I don't know if the longer
one other one it's longer but it's a
documentaries just not the way what we
need is a tool to actually assess the
truth it's not coming from our
governments and elected officials
because a lot of what this also is is
this person basically saying that I
can't report Assange is the doctor guy
in the states that Trump keeps putting
on and actually whatever his name is is
involved in like owning patents for
stuff that's gonna profit off of this
vaccine and has been involved in
controversy in the past do I know that
that's true no but why would you say
like there's a part of every conspiracy
of like why would you say it if there
was zero grades like I can clearly be
debunked and yet like on both sides you
can say some crazy crazy things and just
be like yeah you know totally eating
alligators every night they're you know
endangered all these endangered
alligators and they're like feeding off
the soul of children and they're doing
it and if I have any kind of thing to
back it up like you can make up anything
and then it hurts
whoever that truths about and also
anything could actually be real and how
do you know it's real and that's where
instead of hey this conspiracy is real
or not real and we're on different sides
looking for the truth looking for if it
was true what would that look like
and if like if the other side is correct
what does that look like if my side is
correct what does that look like and
then what does it actually look like
when does it what are the tests the
experiments we can run to see what is
what can we put in place so that the
negative side of what the other side is
saying isn't happening right how do we
keep people safe from this virus how do
we know the truth about how deadly it is
how do we stop our governments from
taking over in fascist ways even
that is their intention how do we make a
vaccine as safe and effective as
possible so that most people want to
take it what does that look like it
doesn't look like yelling across at each
other on different sides it looks like
taking a step back from that owning that
the emotions are gonna be strong and
looking for the truth looking for
creating the systems of I'm Trust know
that we need and so anyway so that was
by 24-hour it's just like the dance
keeps coming up and for me in my psyche
right now this idea of the war versus
the dance and how often am I at war with
myself with society with other people
were in debate instead of are we in a
dance right can I switch it to a dance
what if they're at war can I be in dance
there's that song by kid she heard for
the first time last week so she's uh
didn't sing you don't every so often
with the with the accents and I'm gonna
butcher it but like it's on take a talk
what is it you can really dance y'all
can really dance the two old guys are
like having a dancing word it's in like
a Scandinavian accent and was my point
of that oh that's the dance war you can
really done it doesn't really matter if
the other person's at war if you're in
your own dance unless they're literally
at war with actual weapons that are
gonna physically hurt you
you can be in the dance even with other
people our award more we try it because
if we're all have before in the dance in
us this is the more we can own like
right now that emotion towards my kids
friends family is war it's not dance
right it's like well they're doing it
like how dare they and how it's like
that's not they're dancing they're
living their life to the best of their
ability and that has implications on me
and my family but their life I can't
really control it and if I do want to
control it how do I turn that into a
dance how could it be if I wanted them
to take this seriously what does that
look like and her society hasn't even
set up for that conversation right it
would be set up for either yell at them
for what they're doing
debate with them what they're doing
knowing that if we can change the ride
instead of like hey just like I can't be
honest about my feelings really to some
degree I have better things to do but
like to say hey
says it feels like you're not taking it
seriously Mike my dad's life's at risk
you're the daddy your family's life is
at risk what it one it just doesn't help
it's not about me really see my my
emotions it is about our kids not be
able to play together and like just so
you know like I don't I honestly don't
even know how to have a conversation
with that and then with the whole
vaccine thing and on top of it as well
and oh my goodness my goodness but that
we need a better source of truth we need
a better source of trust in this we're
seeing what it costs us you don't have
trust on both sides and whenever one
side just takes down the other side and
I mean literally YouTube's taking down
this video these aren't just like
there's this meme going around if like
all the doctors are saying stay inside
all but like my high school the guy who
played football in my high school says
this is all a conspiracy
who'da truths and there's a truth there
but at the same time when there's
doctors on this side saying wait this
doesn't make sense for elegy does make
sense with our immune systems there's
some stuff here we're not liking and
it's not and you silence them that just
hurts your narrative there are
scientists on both sides of the climate
debate we're like no we don't need to do
this as a human cause how it's how
eco-centric are you we couldn't possibly
have an effect on the environment while
we're pumping toxic waste into whatever
that but discounting them not letting
them say their science not letting them
say well their math their models here's
why that doesn't work is giving them
more fuel than they need whereas letting
them have their say and having a way to
look at the actual truth it's hard like
documentaries I love them I watch them
but they are not the place to get for
the truth because they're one person's
one generally one person side very
rarely can documentary even if done well
right even if it's done with both sides
the person doing the documentary is bias
and they're gonna give more credence to
one side or the other and because we
know that even if you're fully balanced
we're gonna assume you weren't and so
now we look at him go well then there
side are you not on and that's the side
that you didn't give it up crazy so even
if you actually did and this is where
our current society benefits lies like
they benefit that if you're willing to
lie if they're willing to spin the data
and then it's broken the trust for all
of us so we don't trust the people who
are being truthful either and what we
need to do is create the systems to be
able to get accurate information to be
able to any documentary on anything to
be able to say okay here's every
statement that was made is it true is it
not what is that based on the best for
ability I don't know know is that
everything you say about Italy true I
don't know where did that come from and
where's the counter side and I know
there's tons of people working on sense
making technology to help us with those
things but we need to write the book now
like right now we need to know about
Coppa 19 about the back seat about our
system about to be able to trace the
money to see fully clearly faux cheese I
think Bo cheese ties to all this in his
in his life the ties to every all the
politicians and what they've invested in
and what they're currently invested in
and who their friends are and who they
Thanksgiving dinner with if that's
publicly available because those are
where the corruption happens like wait
you worked for them for twenty years
wait you hear kids go to school together
wait this is until they have access that
information than it is you don't need to
do a conspiracy theory documentary or a
documentary that some people call
conspiracy theory on is he compromised
we can all just clearly see yes he's
compromised
yes his money's in this you need to
defund your money or find someone who's
neutral can there be neutral we together
can be neutral don't leave it up to one
one one person to let us know what is
happening disseminate that information
in a way that's understandable
what is the virus how does it work what
is the best it's gonna change it's a
brand new thing that we don't know that
much on what is the best information and
as that shifts and changes what is the
best thing that what does the who'll
recommend and why what our doctors
actually saying what to our yards look
like what do I don't know all the
information we could use but in a way
that isn't I'm giving it to you and
you're on the other side and you're
gonna debunk it instead it's us coming
together and saying what would we trust
what would work right people who are
like if there's mandatory vaccinations
I'm gonna kill the government like I'm
gonna take up arms before you inject
that into my kid those people exist so
if instead of starting a civil war you
ask that home all right
when would you vaccinate your kid if the
answer is never never ever under no
science no god no anything tell them you
know that's then those people are never
going to be vaccinated we have to figure
it out without them we have to figure
out their communities even a thing they
always bring up but yet there aren't
studies for that we need okay so asking
all the people that are more like myself
more in the gray area of like listen the
science that makes me feel safe isn't
there do the science even if the
science is listen yeah we we can't today
to a 20-year study but we can look back
and do a 20-year study to the best of
our ability and we can look forward we
can start a study today and we'll have
the information in 20 years at least I
know they're looking at the long-term
implication I need to make it right now
it's just on the individual it's like
okay as a society they've decided the
risk outweighs the cost without looking
at it which is problematic it's like
right short term people aren't getting
measles short term people aren't getting
meningitis and we don't have to see them
in the ER but long term we don't know is
asthma more like all of the autoimmune
diseases what is actually happening with
our health on a societal level is this
actually cost-effective on that level
they don't even want to look at at the
asthma is just something else's problem
and so we've done good because there's
less people dying from the thing that
were vaccinating against instead of the
actual long-term ecosystem on the body
and so anyway that was from watching
like five minutes planned of me but it's
less about the thing and more about that
there's a thing that we have people on
other sides of and there's a truth that
stops us from dividing even with high
emotions and instead is like okay yeah
why aren't you vaccinating because it's
just constantly like vilifying the
anti-vaxxers
as opposed to having an actual
conversation about and this can happen
with any conspiracy theory anything that
the societies label as that why do you
believe that what would get you not to
believe it and if the answer is be like
just because I do and nothing will get
me not to believe it I mean that is
basically my family in Christianity and
I'm like well I can't have a
conversation with you if aliens came and
were like there is no God we created you
and can prove it with that undo God for
you
no okay well then I don't know if I can
trust your belief you got it can't be
undone I'm not saying that's happening I
don't have an alien to show you but if
there's no way you would not believe
that would God Himself coming and
telling you the Bible is not real would
that be enough of it
well no that might be simply that may be
hallucination but like you there has to
be a conversation about what would get
you to believe the other side right if
auntie if people who have a vaccine of
their kids are correct and there's long
term implications we haven't studied and
their kid is vaccine injured and that
what does that look like have we studied
it how the study is debunked it because
all that's ever brought up in the anti
anti backside is weak field study and
then all these crazy people think that
vaccines cause autism and that's been
debunked whether it's been debunked or
not is its own to me but even if it has
been debunked there are literally dozens
and dozens and dozens of reasons and
research why people don't vaccinate not
anything to do with Android weak field
study and so if that's all the society
keeps debunking right people think this
because that it's been debunked they're
just stupid for believing it doesn't
cause autism look I had a conversation
with one of the best vaccine doctors in
Vancouver one of the very few medical
professionals odd coming contact with
who's done more research on vaccines
that I have and my question to him
wasn't do vaccines cause autism it was
if there's a percentage of the
population who has a gene that can't
metabolize something in the backseat
which is basically probable what it's
like that's why we have to do long term
studies that's why we have to because
different chemicals effective for people
differently so if there's a percentage
of the population that can't
metabolise what's in the vaccine and it
shows up as neurological issues what
would we need to do to find that and he
basically said there's no way we could
find that unless it was something so
black and white like females get it and
males don't or vice versa
and that's worrisome if there's a tidy
because we're not looking for it we're
not and so right that is that is my
hypothesis is that there's a fraction of
us who are more susceptible to vaccine
injury and if we could find those people
we can make vaccine safer for everyone
because we have blinders on and it's too
expensive to test people then it's it's
that's why we do what we do so if we're
doing it for profit instead of for
purpose you're not you're not your
highest value is not for my kids to be
healthy and safe it's for society to be
healthy and safe and to have a more
cost-effective healthcare system as the
Canadian government it's not so my kid
is is healthy and safe and those are
very different priorities
my priorities my kid your priority
society and unless we can honor that
those are two different priorities on
the point I keep going on about vaccines
cause no kind of egg but it's having we
need to figure out truth more than we
need to figure out which side of truth
wrong well I max ain't my kid is less
important because it's one kid then what
would get me to vaccinate my kid when
this thing comes out right if there's a
vaccine I need to know what's a if I
need to know it's effective I need to
know it's one city forever it's done and
then yeah I would actually about say my
kid for this if it wasn't Bill Gates
owns the patents you don't get access to
any of the science you can trust us that
this is good for the good of all mankind
billionaire is doing what's right for
your daughter but hold society tells me
that's not the thing you're doing it for
profit you're do you work in your own
self-interest so why would no oh that's
not but us looking at it us coming up
with it it'd be not for profit it being
something that okay if there's money
that's that's pooled that goes to
actually helping people to look to look
after everyone who's has something that
could be looked at as a vaccine injury
if a kid develops autism at two I don't
care if it's a vaccine injury or not the
kid should be looked after the family
should be looked after it shouldn't be
all on one tiny unit to look
after people that may or may not have
been injured by society because they're
like whether it's your genetics or
environment it's society that that
should be healthy in society anyway
these are the things I need to have in
place before before I need the
probability to make sense I need it to
be less risky for my kid to get the
vaccine then to get the disease and the
COBIT 99 that risk is high the risk
she'll get it is high the complications
associated with the initial pass it on
to someone else you can get coffee
complications is high although not my
job besides my dad might be my job's not
not in fact the rest of the population
isn't necessarily if it's gonna hurt my
kid
it's and so the the risk reward to me
makes sense but not if it's in Bill
Gates it's not if I don't get access to
the science at all not if not in the
first rounds yeah but in the first six
months to a year like there's a lot of
stuff that will probably happen if they
do roll out a mandatory or not imagine
sorry an Universal vaccination across
the globe we will we'll see we'll see
that's as far as I know never been done
before
even with measles and polio and stuff
right there's still parts of the
population that um that aren't
vaccinated against it or because it's
just that group of people has it has it
been they haven't been offered anything
they don't want it and so I'll be able
to see that most of the world got backs
against this in 2021
and then what happens I'll be able to
see but not if they're whatever it is
questioning so what we need is a system
that looks for truth as opposed to tries
to make truth fit their narrative we
truth or so that we need a narrative of
truth in all things including that my
friends having play dates for kid right
like okay well I don't have access to
truth together I only have my my version
of what's going on
and what I feel is best for everyone to
do right everyone should be standing
home and taking a seriously even though
I actually don't trust our governments I
don't like so that's a little disc just
quite aligned with what anyway are these
things I was going to be the loss of the
center of universe that's always got
slice you can't
oh all of it this dance that that we're
in it is what I talked to off the first
the first part of this this broadcast is
something that you actually can't mess
up that you this is what David said you
can't mess this up
I love you no matter can't mess this up
I love you no matter what and that
whatever version of God is real if there
was a version of God that is real that
has gotten to be that I was brought up
evangelical Christian and there was a
lot of incongruity leaving the Bible
between the clergy between our family in
the Bible and between a lot of but oh
that there was a point in my early teens
late teens early 20s priority wouldn't
consider myself a Christian because I
kind of stopped in the beginning of my
teens going to church was that I can't
worship a God that I'm more evolved then
and the god of the Old Testament
especially is a very angry vengeful God
and I don't find that very loving and
this is what this idea of do we need to
be something to earn God's love or are
we just love are we just lovable exactly
as we are and I don't know a single
religion that actually tells you you're
good just the way you are
they're basic though you're born sinner
who doesn't might be the only one but
even then it's like life is suffering
we're all just suffering vessels of
suffering that's like and and so it's
still not like joy and you're perfect
just the way you are and you're loved no
matter who you are you can't this
up because of the magic of the universe
behind it if you go a different
direction as a swallow in the sky you
don't just bump you do bump into another
bird but that's exactly what was
supposed to happen and there's something
behind the scenes it's a different
dimension like a different level of
order that we can't grasp yet or maybe
ever as humans but it's working out and
it doesn't seem like that to people who
are just waking up to the fact that our
world is because you're not in
the day
when you get into the dance the world
starts you start dancing your dance the
world starts showing up and giving you
what you need and as you find other
people in there dancing their dance
you're dancing yours and like the
conversation emerges it just constantly
keeps showing you that it has your back
in a really weird way cuz it doesn't
show up in I have your back in the same
way that society thinks it should and
this is my conflict with it that I'm in
which is okay I've been calm like with
my own guy to my own back my own dance
that's my conflict that's my dance to
have that when is my conflict what is my
dance when we talk about I don't
remember I don't remember hey no oh we
only have this is the last one that I'm
doing that's just me in talking tomorrow
we're doing life coaching which I'm
still haven't found anyone to actually
come on camera and do it with which is
fine I'll do it myself again by which I
haven't fired anyone I mean I haven't I
forgot to kind of put out put it out and
ask someone if they wanted to come so
we'll see
again if somebody comes the last one so
why why do I need someone else to do it
I don't really um and then Sunday I'm
gonna do a story I'm thinking of doing
my story on the dance like my which I
kind of did my GPS coordinates my dance
but just this like all the beautiful
things that come together cuz it started
like there starts to be weird it's like
coincidences things that happen that
start to prove themselves to you and
when it's just one you're like it's a
coincidence I'm a logical scientist it's
just a coincidence it's bound to happen
eventually but when they start to add up
and stack up and you start to become
aware of them and then like how
permeating they are that the right
people show up and help that like the
right conversation happens the right
tool comes about and the right like it's
just the whole universe exists for the
sole purpose of teaching you what you
need to know and to help you figure out
your dance and everyone else's and it's
as weird cuz it's like both I'm sorry
did this hole
dekapan just so I could learn my lesson
I'm sorry did Kyle Steve sleep with his
clients so that I can learn my lesson
like it feels weirdly egoic because you
start to think the entire world is
designed to teach you and it is but also
everybody else all of the pen to make
isn't happiness of jewbilee can learn
her lessons but it is happening so that
Jubilee and Kyle and all the different
names can learn their lessons whatever
lessons they're meant to learn during
this and every interaction every
conflict every whatever the opposite of
conflict is every like cooperation if
you're open to it there's learning there
for you and you start to realize not
just the learning but that like the
universe orchestrates events to happen
to teach you exactly what you're here to
learn and when you start to figure that
out you also start to figure out that
okay this can't either I am truly in a
like documentary that everybody's
watching it I am the center of the
universe and you all are in on this or
you're all disputes of my imagination
none of which feels actually true it's
like oh the whole universe does exist
with me at the center of it to teach me
lessons and everybody else as well and
somehow the merchants of that that we're
all learning and you can't get it wrong
means that I'm here to do exactly what
I'm here to do which is save the world
and create a world that works for
everyone and I don't have to do a
 thing all I have to do is
surrender and let it unfold because it's
already unfolding my part of it is
surrendering to my now it's my piece of
it and then it will happen and it might
not look like Jubilee saves the world
and that's okay it might look like I
don't know
Bob saves the world but there's
something like it's it's all of us there
isn't one person it's about all of us
living our dance all of us finding our
purpose all of us figuring out who we
are and then finding groups of people
who will accept us for that because then
we're able to live more fully in
ourselves and give from our highest
place being coordinate being in teams
and groups of people that compliment us
I don't mean like I mean like you don't
have organizational skills and they have
organizational skills and maybe also
they compliment you maybe
who needs that you see you find the
perfect evening uh stuff for you but
finding the beauty in our diversity that
I'm exactly who I am supposed to be and
my only job on this planet is to truly
step into that is to fall more in love
with myself and surrender more and more
to my exact place in this universe which
doesn't look like what society thinks it
should look like and in so doing
hopefully I waken other people to do the
same but that isn't even my job it's
just to do my thing just to do my dance
and in so dancing other people join and
realizing that like right they might be
dancing to different music than I am
there is no right or wrong way to dance
move your body if you're flailing and
you hit me in the face
maybe that's throats don't hit people in
the face that's the line other than that
dance your heart out and I feel like
that's a good place to stop well oh wait
no I want to read this other clothe
that's right under this one something
good will come from this no matter what
you must go through it together whether
that's the pandemic whether that's
cancer or brain tumors or a divorce when
you've been through enough of the
in the dance when you've figured out how
to metabolize trauma and what the c-word
is then probably use either clear I'm
pretty sure it's the c-word
conflict a copyright metabolized can be
written on this tape somewhere whatever
that you've learned to metabolize trauma
and diversity you start to realize that
whatever diversity comes at you whatever
challenges come at you there's something
here to learn that it's uniquely yours
to learn and so thank God this bad thing
happened so I can learn the good thing
there's good always coming but you have
to go through the bad to get there it's
and life isn't up and down and you get
but all of it all of it but though it's
is this grief this box of grief that we
talked about it's both not mine and I
have no control over it I can only deal
with my little piece of grief and I can
hopefully make the world better but
I can't actually feed every child I
can't make sure there's never another
human trafficked I can't I can't
actually make sure that grief doesn't
get get bigger but I know in my own
personal life the more I surrender to
the process of emotions surrender to
grief and griefs moment and joy and
Joy's moment overall I have less grief
and I actually enjoy it while it's here
so even grief equals joy and the more I
go through this cycle the grief is
lessened by that joy then I know there's
something coming and the joy is made
bigger even if it's fleeting because I
don't need to hold on to it because
there's something coming there's always
good coming from the joy and from the
grief there is always good coming and so
in the bad I know there's good and the
good I know there's good so my overall
grief actual grief actual trauma Goes
Down and my joy goes up in surrendering
to that grief and fear and sadness and
all of the negative stuff is here to
teach me and in so teaching I learn more
joy and more surrender and I'm still
learning the dance of and that I don't
know if it ever looks good to the
outside I don't know whether this is a
period of time your house doesn't look
great your life doesn't look great in
fact the whole world is mourning living
your life right now I don't think it's
supposed to look good to the outside
it's really easy to have yachts and
vacations and all the stuff that people
want and then say I can get you that too
it's a completely different stance to be
my body is in pain that other people
could not deal with my body is exhausted
in ways other people can't deal with it
I have a lot of solitude time I have a
brain that doesn't quite do what I want
it to do
I have finances that aren't the greatest
or below the poverty line my health
isn't great and it's you know it's not
getting worse but it's also definitely
not getting better I have chronic pain
all of the time
seems pretty plateaued and yet I
wouldn't trade my life this life for
anything anything else you could give me
even though it's like yeah I'll give you
a million dollars if you just X but I
wouldn't I can't talk about it at the
same time I know that this is what I'm
given to learn my lessons and so if I
could just make my pain go away if I
could just make my fatigue go away I
would be doing myself a disservice I've
been doing the plenitude disservice in
doing that because it's your to teach
you what I'm here to learn and as it
teaches me and as I learned that I'm
okay with it going I'm not holding
strongly to it and I'm not pushing it
away
I am fully I'm a student to this
universe and I'm here to do my piece of
it and that is my master even more so
than I my master cos believe me I tried
it come on my brain in my body and it
like still falls apart other people
trying to do it it falls apart even more
so but even when I try to do it it falls
apart it's in the surrender and in truly
okay what do you what is the most
powerful thing I can do next I can't do
that what can I actually do what can I
do from where I am and just doing it and
it's taking leaps and bounds forward I'm
growing more than I've ever grown before
and I can feel it in a way when I was
growing for the outside world when I
there was this vision I thought I could
be um without quite even realized that's
what I was doing but needing it to look
like what did it look like for everyone
else following Tony Robbins stuff
following I'll see some stuff that it
doesn't look like that for me it doesn't
look like I'm becoming a Zen master
developing His infinite patience to the
world it looks like I've less patience
because my body's gotten worse but I
actually have more patience um something
more pain and more exhaustion so my
level of patience has gotten to go out
but it looks like it's it's the same or
getting worse and I can feel the growth
even if
xiety can see and in all honesty I also
get societies not supposed to see it but
the vast majority if I have the yachts
and have the money and was like you to
have it I'm selling something very
different then listen you too can be
happy by by you dancing by you answering
these five questions by you doing
anything that I have that you can learn
from another human being you can get
more connected to yourself you can find
out who you are you can find your people
you can you have a purpose that is
uniquely yours and yours alone and the
internal drive to discover it and follow
your own journey is reward in and of
itself nobody will have to pay you for
it you will do it for free you will pay
to do it that is how strong and set your
purpose is and yet who knows when it's
gonna show up who knows if it's already
in you you're already living it you
can't do it wrong you can't do it wrong
none of us can do it wrong and so it's
just about showing up and doing the
dance and getting to the place of
knowing and good comes out of the the
bad and therefore you start to fall in
love with the bad the same as you fall a
little bit and if enough of us do that
if I'm enough of us engage in the stands
and then we get together and have a calm
just conversations about the dance dance
look what this is the conversation is
the dance individual is the dance
it's not about are you living your life
according to the doctor and we've agreed
to limit by is the only doctrine I'm
hoping it is the dance is the five
questions is he isn't your enemy
committing that you have to answer that
listen for the next year I'm not
answering Who am I because you know what
I don't want to go that's fine but it's
as you live your own by your own
guidance and your own rules and paths
and your own dance the magic happens and
we interview together and create a world
that works for everyone
both with this magic whatever the
opposite of entropy is and also because
we are gonna orchestrated a little bit
we're gonna get together and ask who are
you what are your people what do you
need what is your purpose and then
create the tools and infrastructure to
actually help people find me they are
helped people find their people help
people discover and or live there
to the best of their ability make their
life so easy in every other way but
they're not great at so that they can
truly focus on their purpose and how do
we do that not by me do me not for
everyone by us coming together and
saying what is my purpose but what I
need to do that and what stops me from
moving it and how can we look at the
common stop and and help other people in
that same regard right if it's money if
it's raised if it's time if it's skill
those are all common factors that we can
come together and solve right we can
give ourselves more time by working
together to feed ourselves and raise
kids and do whatever it is taking up our
time we can have more time money we can
bring down our cost of actual costs of
goods and make sure our needs are met
and that isn't some outside force of the
media telling us what our needs are what
our actual needs and wants and how can
we meet them and they can be different
and you realize your difference is your
superpower even if it looks like the
opposite of a superpower my disability
is a superpower and there are days I
definitely don't live in that but mostly
it feels good I'm getting more patients
and more love and understanding and more
of the understanding of the universe and
the ability to communicate what kind of
world we can create together is also
coming together
if only I'd surrender to it if my
credibility is my permeability it's not
gonna look like Tony Robbins it's not
gonna look like Jordan Hall and that's
okay it's not supposed to
all right up it on for an hour it's
gonna get off earlier happenin as I said
I'm on tomorrow for life coaching we're
doing the brain walk solutions it's it's
a cool one I like it just why I'm so
doing one more Saturday I'll be on for
20 minutes on it so my five questions
and maybe also discuss the dance and
what it is that's one of the
conversations I want to have after next
week next week I'm taking off completely
besides solution racing on Wednesday
which I don't know what that's on and
then they're taking the rest week off
and the following week will I'll be back
on I don't know what the days are
expects one thing you know over the week
for for conversations the solution
anything being one of them a process
raising with people who want to talk
about how can we create a process for
10,000 people to create something that
it's gonna meet their needs
so that it is from the ground up what
does that look like and I want to have a
conversation on the dance actually
having a conversation live on camera
that is more like the Omega group that
is whether that's answering the five
question whether that's just showing up
and saying how the dance showed up in
your life and looking for those for
those connections and showcasing that
everybody has this and then the fourth
question I want to have is I don't even
know how to
how did it's like the power of
technology and how it can help us create
a world that works for everyone and
there's been people historically come
together and have those conversations
that's how holy chant got created it's
how they are created I'm pretty sure and
so having the same conversation of what
does it look like right what do the
blockchains needs solve like you know
governance and contracts and trust and
having the conversation of what would
technology need to be for us to trust it
what would technology need to be for it
to be as powerful as it needs to be for
it to be as risk-free as it needs to be
what does that look like and having that
conversation because it's conversation I
enjoy and I key keeps coming up at all
the other conversations so solution
raising process raising the dance ie the
five questions and the power of
technology and how it's even more
powerful when we figure out how to do it
together whether that's blockchain
decentralization or a transparent system
we own and create together that is more
more centralized it lets matter is how
we do it and more that we're just moving
in that direction
and that we are dancing our own dance
and in fact I will say you do okay