Angell one yoo-hoo behold the angel you
must remember to hold fast to the earth
you who behold the angel
you must remember else should destroy
you but the angel is not a mere piece
for the angel is of a fullness to which
you cannot conceive to which you cannot
imitate to which you cannot humanize to
which you cannot represent to which you
cannot become but what you can do is
stand before her and be wholly human
wholly vulnerable silent and awed be
bold o furious heart in the heat of
rapture and the coolness of space and
behold her for we might only see her
once or get a glimpse of that fullness
briefly and if you glimpse that angel
you might lose everything be vaporized
in a burning green seed go mad in some
humid tropic or blue Arctic for she is
the watermark she is the mantle she is
the sign she is the blazing path your
gift to her though she needs nothing is
everything angel to the angel does not
respond to the abstract prayer she does
not come when you grovel to divinity the
angel is already present it's just that
we don't see her she's the very
substance it's just that we don't know
her in rock and space memory and bow
psyche and see she joins all contrary
things in the space between two apparent
isolates at the end of mine babble and
opinionated she appears not as some
wispy abstraction not some sexual
persona not some kind of radio dial not
as those things which we capture and put
in our various cages not your woman on a
leash in truth we should never say the
word angels so baroque and timid is our
image of her but then what is she the
sign the direction the pure manifest
longing soon soon she will say but not
yet first turn away from your machine
towards elemental
but the Sun again be our mark of time
let wind be again your breath but water
and fire not memory and mechanism be our
treasure for she is all light and all
iron all gravity and weightlessness she
is the way you shall tell the time and
she will say in me time shall be a kiss
and that kiss shall be a rainbow how can
it be so you will reply stranded there
and all the fires with her name on your
lips
angel 3 what world is this a world
without vertigo or abyss with nothing
above and below a world of technocrats
and madman running fictions called
countries without even the Sun and the
moon as their guide a world that is flat
and barren and without fruit that
blindly tears up its own soil with
machines is a world without angels and
devils a world at all or a simulacrum an
absence a scream and those who drive
their deafening machines through the
still waters who lives sealed in
Palisades entombed in kitchen replicas
they think themselves very powerful they
think themselves divinely elected those
assassins of angels still she knocks at
their door still she beckons them with
another rain shower another dawn still
she fills the morning would do the
evening star with tenderness still she
never complains how helpless is that
angel in this world how terribly beyond
how terribly sad that the human is so
deaf to her music and yet if only one
human listens if only one human will
stand before her fully embodied and
adorned than all the angels will come
rushing angel for in a country beyond
despair without spiritual ghosts I saw
you there where a symphony of birds
gathered on a tree of red and gold your
breath no I do not think you are up
there in some ether but in the
bloodstream and bone in the nerve
constellation and brain in the heart and
nygma
no I do not think you are a ghost but
pure mercury flowing through absence
filling the hollow spaces populating the
blue air with bright flashes and
syllables angel you are the sign of our
longing the door to our becoming the
wind which blows inside our cages which
dares us to liberty angel you are dare
motioning us through flame and ice
tempting us towards abyss angel you are
intemperate chase but only to elevate
our desires and how deep and wide is
that desire how uncompromising is your
aim how hard can you be to meet her
gentleness how gentle can you be to meet
her flame the props of your culture
cannot endure that space where the angel
resides you can throw them away now for
no clever irony no pretty picture
no niceties our pretense no stiff
garments no solemn occasions no
consoling glances no puffed up speeches
no consensual laughter no timid glances
will do and when she burns down the
entire ghost town what will remain only
that a Tamil storm summit an abyss earth
and crown invisible monument where all
opposites meet angel five perhaps the
angel I call upon has little resemblance
to the cherished image perhaps she is
found on some charnel orchard and not
some astral plane
perhaps we find her in mud and muscle
and sinew and shovel and spike deep
terrestrial meaning we are the ones who
have lost the wing and remained haunted
by some remembrance of flying perhaps
all our bomber planes are thwarted
angels and all our machines are crude
replicas and vague remembrances of
flight and vision bind yourself to that
earth and not to machines for machines
are not angels or Devils either they're
only dust bind yourself to that ever
giving bounty to leaf and stem to piston
and root bind yourself to your heart's
becoming and not to some poison factory
of ideals for it is in the binding that
you
wings it is in the binding that you find
means it is in the binding that you find
verticality and flight it is in the
binding that the impossible task becomes
possible and the shadow of our wing
spirit is nourished in the shadow of our
wing wondrous visions in the shadow of
our wing in blood and feathers in the
binding we grow angel six I would not
pretend to know her I would not divide
her to sector I would not put her on
that grey operating table
I would not design to make another cult
to honor her there are enough of those
go call her name in empty spaces with no
crowds or cameras in moments when your
teeth shatter with terror and your chalk
white against the Sun for you cannot
capture her in frozen camera lens you
can only be subsumed when she floods the
retina with vibrant red trees no I do
not think she is up there seeing but
rather down here in the hot and cold
Hill no I do not think she will give you
your wish or pander to your lesser
desires I rather think she will unstitch
your heart slowly until your greatest
desire has made plain for she does not
abide sentimental displays of wealth but
she is always there among the poor who
call out for her proof the note is clear
if it has the right pitch and intention
it cannot fail to reach her if the
melody is fine and transparent and the
words are plain and the key is longing
she will come rushing no I do not think
that she will save you but she may show
you a friend no I do not think that she
will liberate you but she may show you
the labyrinth her gift to you will be a
density or that is the paradox of the
angel for she is as heavy as she is
weightless her singing fields are equal
to her dark metal where she has two
wings and if you balance on lightness
you may fall into dark if you face
squarely that darkness she will fall
like rain pin tear
armed angels seven and yet she says go
back to breathing forests and moonlight
be forgetful of the monuments of man you
only have to look not with Inquisition
or grasping but with tender regard you
only have to look with the fat man and
his edifice of flesh see that the angel
resides therein
you only have to look but the skinny man
who is always hungry it possessed by a
blue flame and all those fat skinny men
and women were possessed by the angel on
the Tuesday morning commute
paradoxically though she is here she is
not heard paradoxically though she is
always near and never far the task is
monumental the work arduous the way dark
and slippery for there are so many
layers of pretence so much slime and
afterbirth so many insects on the window
the angel is joy though she is weeping
the angel is sublime though she is seen
through a dirty window pane you win that
sparkles river that cools sky that is
undivided you who is ever-present in
feminine feast though I hardly dare call
you by name Gabriel or sky please hear
these words dear angel I call upon you
not from wishes but from the convulsions
of a violent dawn dear angel of fire and
flower wing in Tallinn dear angel of
rain shower birdsong moon set and
eclipse dear angel of avalanche and
evening star do you hear me do you hear
this prayer that is also a command angel
eight each false thing returned each
unblemished desire must be angel each
lapse of control every blackout has to
be angel for the sundry concept the
petty conceptual thieves the truism and
cliche the strategy will fail to move
her that is why we are thrown here to
unburden ourselves with those mechanical
things
that is why she gives you crisis and
conundrum groundless terror for only by
losing the lesser concerns can you earn
her trust
only by triumphantly failing to adhere
can you become faithful for each angel
is the fullness that you have lost the
paradox of embodiment inseparability of
flame and space and while you know about
her from rumor you have been sold the
similitude bought the reproduction been
fooled by those bright things that are
dark at their core each angel is the
curve on the horizon the infinite
expansion the total intimacy each angel
is a drop of rain water on a leaf a fine
ink drawing the outline of things each
angel is the location of a shiver the
depth of a sign the endpoint of skin the
doorway to a waterfall
each angel is the unwritten masterpiece
the raw matter and bone the summation of
everything
each angel is your ardent longing the
Swans curve of neck the spiral conch the
grappling love embrace the forgetfulness
and unmaking the unburdening the false
clothing the Lingam thrust the doves
sigh Dawn's obscenity tooth and winged
angel 9 between the clashing of air and
wing light and blood sea and star is her
abode where all contrary things are
enjoined in the hollowness of space and
fullness of flower the metal and melting
the wretchedness and sublime is her mark
before her you are paralyzed with fear
before her your mission is surely
jeopardized for you will find no comfort
in that place where the angel comes and
yet something else will be revealed the
very source and reason for birds
migratory paths that upward spiral of
leaf and vine know she gives you no
comfort or utility logic or deliverables
but a secret too deep to speak of the
more poison you extract from the root
the higher that sunflower bridge grows
that mediator of earth and sky it even
that Sun to flower bursts its seed and
was torn down by that winter angel for
not even the king son
our survives her because she comes in
unbecoming in the shedding of husk in
the natural dyeing but some the brave
and magnanimous ones will meet her in
life in that overgrown garden with its
grinning skulls and laughing children
angel 10 why then do you write of the
angel why do you draw her back into the
world surely she has left this place
surely we have abandoned her for good is
man the assassin of angels did we sell
her for black gold strip miner empty her
oceans haven't we gutted her precious
substance built terrifying monuments of
power and subtraction in her place why
then do you want to draw her back here
into a world that is plummeting towards
void where machines replaced honeybees
were humans ciphers shuffle blueprints
of doom why would you want to language
her hasn't she been enslaved enough by
words do not think you would spirit her
away do not think she will save you
where you have made a pact with her and
you must fulfill your end of the bargain
this is not an angel of sentiment not
that kind of dollar-store
angel that can be easily found and
cheaply bought this kind of angel is the
very contestants of your deepest song no
she cannot be managed as a resource or a
weapon no she cannot be subdued made a
personal plaything for she has none of
those boundaries don't you see that is
why she is so terribly feared because
you cannot circumscribe her the angel
principal is the High Principal and she
depends on earthliness the angel
principle is the vast sky principle that
she depends on your depth and gravity
she is the way of your footsteps on the
curve of the earth the intersection of
horizon and star so I invoke the angel
why supplicate er because all other
strategies have been exhausted and I
know in my heart no one else will come
you
you