welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
yeah I already said welcome to the store
I think so I don't need to say that
again
but for yeah for Daniel's sake stoah is
a place that I see as stewarded by a
stoic myself but not necessarily place
to talk or practice about stoicism I
view it as a digital campfire for us to
go here and dialogue about what matters
most at the knife edge of this moment
and today we have Daniel Gertz
he's one part of a Hansie fine a
character with this who wrote this book
The Listening Society we've got a lot of
buzz in the sense making meta modern
game be space and you missed it then I
was like doing sa ASMR on listening
society while we're waiting for you in
dividing people people they're like it's
a so how this will work today
Daniel will share his thoughts and then
if you have a question for Daniel write
in the chat box and I will calm you to
unmute yourself you can ask your
question if you want me to read on your
behalf I will do so that being said
closure of my friend
so first of all sincere apologies to all
of you and I had noted on the next hour
and it's a timezone thing I suppose it's
too much back and forth with everywhere
and things are over zoomed and over
Skype these days anyway good to see five
of you ooh plus plus Peter and then I
can switch and I see another five hello
Michael I have met you before Michael
see Liam hello Brent hello Lisa Norton
so there are simple and familiar faces
and well I saw somebody wrote also and a
lot of new people so where to start so
meta modernism I'm I realized people
have very different levels of background
knowledge and an engagement with this so
let's start with a very very very brief
intro here
so this might be redundant to some of
you and essential to others I suppose so
the meta modernism is one take out of
many on what comes next in society so so
[Music]
there's a general sense that in across
many analyses and Sciences and so on
that societies can be studied
indiscernible stages or at least the
epochs and periods can be described in
certain death and certain phases that
something happens and a lot of buzz goes
on here a lot of buzz goes on there it
takes on another shape another color
another flavor another sense and so for
a while people have been talking about
postmodern society maybe we're no longer
in modern times maybe it's no longer
that the time after the the second world
or me maybe with maybe things have
changed so much with with all the with
all the mass media and all the i ron't
my culture and all and then stuff within
philosophy has changed and so on and
this has been called post modern and
postmodern and post modernity then has
been twisted and turned and turned it
for many many different in many
different variations and in many
different ways but it's it has certain
it has been described as having certain
elements that are that define this epic
or period and one such element has to do
with the relativism another has to do
with irony another one has to do with
with cynicism and then over the last
five or ten years or so people have
started to argue may you were entering
another
kind of period another another cultural
face of our of society maybe maybe
things are shifting subtly but
profoundly and and the arts are
different and popular media are
different or changed particularly by the
advent of Internet Society and that
changes so many things it changes our
minds it changes how we relate to Jesus
how we weave the stories it changes our
religions even and and the expression of
spiritual and religious life and it
changes our psychologies and
personalities in different ways so if
you if you study this in detail you can
see there's a larger pattern that comes
after post-modernism and then many
people have suggested different takes on
this so so what is post post-modernism
okay that the words are getting uglier
right so post postmoderns what is after
post-modernism and bottom up modernism
and modernity just means the new and
then we have cooler than you then we
have after after than you but some which
after all necessarily such a misnomer
we're looking at modernity is this
impetus or drive when society start to
change dramatically and take on a sense
of direction we feel again it's going
somewhere technological development is
going somewhere scientific development
is going somewhere political development
is going somewhere it has direction we
try to try to figure out what this
direction is is it progress is it decay
is it higher truth is it emancipation
what what is it and in the postmodern
the postmodern sentiments they would put
a little question for examples on those
narratives of progress of Ananda
and emancipation and scientific
discovery and so on it's actually who's
to say that modern society is more
progress than say medieval society or
even tribal societies they oftentimes
anthropologists come back from from
their experience in a tribal society and
they're thrilled and they're saying okay
these people are right and wherever I
came from from the University of Chicago
or whatever doesn't happen so so in the
postmodern space you kind of kind of
switch switch around different
perspectives and you challenge them
against one another and so on where is
the meta modernist perspective then says
wait a minute we okay okay postmodern
mind we actually don't know which worlds
are the best ones we actually don't know
if we're going backwards or forwards or
sideways or obliquely but let's try to
at least figure out some sense of
direction so that we have we have an
idea about where we want to go otherwise
but what what would we use or all the
critique for and what would we use all
the questioning for so the meta
modernist sense then is that a mmm okay
you take all of these different
perspectives you take tribal
perspectives you take historical epics
perspectives from different historical
epochs they take from traditional
religions you take them the Stoics for
that matter you take from the different
wisdom traditions you take from modern
science and progress of the
Enlightenment project a mainstream
Western society and then you also take
from the postmodern critique their Robin
you think multiculturally and then you
still take responsibility for from
where you're at in the larger tapestry
of things and still try to weave
something worthwhile still try to create
something right because why shouldn't be
are we just gonna see things apart until
the end of days and and I guess right
there is mr. Mehta modern position says
something along the lines we can and
should use the multiplicity of
perspectives and put them together not
arbitrarily so what does the meta modern
mind start to do what does the meta
modern embodiment political cultural
psychological personal embodiment start
to do well it starts to create meta Maps
bigger maps which include all of these
things that's the project we need a map
of history of the different perspectives
maps of different worlds bridges between
these different worlds we need to travel
around many different worlds right and
that's difficult that's hard man so so
so we're faced with this momentous task
hey either we create shared meaning
making shared maps which can which can
help us build a society that goes beyond
modern society that isn't just modern
it's also postmodern it in it invites
and accepts that critique and has it
within itself but it's also pre-modern
it has the wisdom of the Stoics for
instance it has the the sincere piety of
the traditions of the religions it has
the visceral engagement of the pre axial
aah religions you know Bronze Age stuff
to be really alive to be at war with a
cabal some with nature and that's also
part of life and to express myself fully
through that and and before that do you
know yeah all the tribal engagements and
you know getting new rhythms dances and
prances where play and ritual are like
in the Yoruba communities I just read
calling wrote about this the other day
the Yoruba communities in West Africa
they don't they don't differentiate
between play and ritual and then feast
so all of these things are
non-differentiated which creates a very
interesting space so it's like going to
church getting married playing a game
and having a party is the same thing and
so so we need an element of that to all
of these all of this rich tapestry needs
to be non arbitrarily traveled on
momentum then you can have you have more
dimensions like that you add dimensions
of ok complexity management you're going
to need for black city theory and again
meet Brooke theory you're gonna see that
some some perspectives are more complex
than others you need developmental
theory you're gonna gonna have to rank
them non-judgmentally of course and
you're gonna have to see the pitfalls
and pathologies so you don't end up in
in flatland it's like okay so well I'm
gonna bridge all perspectives so okay
mister Nazi please please elaborate on
your view and I think I'm sure we can
reach 2 we can reach compromise no no
we're not gonna compromise with the
Nazis and no there are no UFOs coming to
to earth at this point and no there is
no magic not even post rational magic
it's we need to actually understand the
modern perspective and at the same time
when we're in the tribal space open up
for magic reach entman in a new
postmodern hell meta modern sense so
meta modern there is something happening
above and beyond modernity not just in
its cracks not just in its exceptions
we're like climbing out of the container
that we have lived in that is modern
life and we're beginning to be able to
see that container we see oh it's one
out of many containers and we have a
creative opportunity here to recreate a
fillable Society at all levels not not
with like one crazy master plan but with
a certain DNA or sense or perspective or
sensitivity or sensibility which helps
us to travel around and organize and
create patterns of patterns patterns
which connect other patterns and that's
that's why the world needs meta
modernists needs people who I mean not
nominal meta monitor disarray don't
matter if you if you subscribe to that
particular term and but but the world
needs what I would call meta modernists
so people who who want to partake in
that and that exploration of many
perspectives and they're bridging so
that's that's kind of where where meta
modernism comes in a word it tends to
create to begin with epistemic
communities communities of knowledge
communities of practice and knowledge so
people who share some kind of curiosity
share some kind of will or wish for
knowing together and who open up at
the same questions and we're all
corresponding questions or questions
which harmonizes least and so and it's
actually not that different from from
the invention of any paradigm or a
science all of the paradigms in all of
the sciences are born when people wake
up to to a question which before wasn't
apparent so biology comes into being
when people are fully capable of asking
and really wondering what is life
sociology comes into being when people
can ask the question what is society
before that society was invisible it
wasn't an object in people's hands so
modern life and all the other phases and
expressions of human culture and
perspective and economic systems and
informational systems and they they
weren't as apparent to us as they kind
of become now early Internet age it's
like if somebody turn on the light we
can see it I hope no it's in the dark
again this is thing I could climb out of
it okay where am I now and that's and
then we can have a construct where we
are now so so so we're left in a space
of reconstruction like we see modern
society we deconstruct it with
post-modernism we deconstruct all the
other all the other developmental stages
and multicultural things that we can see
and we can because notice that that
every culture can be critiqued that
every culture is incomplete that every
culture is full of paradoxes that every
system breaks down that every meaning
actually is meaningless we notice a lot
of these things and then you're left in
the dark you have to start constructing
reconstructing and then and well where
do we start reconstructing incident
is it a singular like I am become God I
can recreate the universe
no no it's through relationship so I
need Peter Peter meets me Peter and I
meet Aidan hall we made Eton who and and
Nick costo and and all the rest of you
who are here so in that meeting then if
there is enough resonance around such
perspectives we start reconstructing we
started noticing that wait a minute our
interactions are different I kind of
feel spontaneously at home with you guys
I felt alone then they heard in modern
society but I feel spontaneously
connected without not even knowing the
people so so something kind of emerges
there and and that's that's what we're
at you know and in the long run is
hopefully they're gonna be nomada modern
political structures meta modern
economic structures and my favorite meta
my legal structures but we're pretty far
away from that where we are now is at
this playful exploration and and I
insist that it's not just meaningless
talk you know and it's number any doing
I insist that I mean it's not any
serious commentator or or participant in
the development of the world system as
it is any serious such participant can't
just do stuff so it's this echoes the
Slavic sheiks
old thing like don't just do things
don't just do something don't you do
something talk and we're at that point
you know like if we just do stuff like
extinction rebellion has some
interesting stuff but it also has things
that aren't necessarily super productive
and it's this thing with a lot of a lot
of other interesting stuff that goes on
that people kind of like oh we have to
do something I mean especially bill is a
relatively positive example but if you
go to you remember the Occupy movement
people like yeah we're gonna do stuff
we're gonna do stuff out on the street
for doing stuff we're doing wait a
minute why are women are you men don't
what are we about and eventually
everybody just went home just dissolved
hmm and because people hadn't been doing
their talking before the doing the
talking them is preceded by something
else in turn this is preceded by for is
collected it's connected dumped doubly
connected and back and forth in a
feedback cycle with it mmm being and
becoming and an introspection so if we
want to push it one step further we can
say don't just talk meditate so we're
all you know we Club somebody turn on
the light Internet Society came heads
explode new perspectives are born we
climb out of the modern of the modern
container and post-modernism gave us the
like escape as you know there little
tools to escape the prison and we
scratch the wall we hit him under the
bed we got out we're looking at it from
the outside and now like okay so there's
that I used to be our prisoner we can
say we can see yes actually it's a good
thing we got off this train it was gonna
come gonna go off a cliff and it's still
going to with all our friends it's gonna
pull our down and pull us down with it
so and so now we in this in this
existential space of nowhere then we
need spiritual practice ground a
spiritual practice in someone communion
and then to reach a sense of the word
meeting
new religion something new to believe in
and then we need to explore that because
we needed to be open-ended so so it's a
bit all over the place it's a sentiment
in our time that there is something
becoming now okay Korona crisis so the
coronal crisis people call me very
optimistically with this thing ever
saying okay go ahead
so coronal crisis is happening all the
kids are in school and everything is
upside down right so now is the time now
everything will change okay like how how
does development work mmm so development
works it's it's messy
so sometimes everything is good you put
a perfect kid and a perfect kindergarten
with perfect parents okay development
isn't so messy you kind of just learn
things and then sometimes you cry and
you fall over and then somebody comforts
you and then can it go on like that and
yeah but and in larger systems and in
tougher times having confused times when
there are no there is no scaffolding
structure development is messy so what
what is going on now with that with a
corona crisis and you have a response of
so many responses of so many people
across the board and it's not that
people are getting a much more meta
modern perspective we're actually seeing
a decline in how progressive and and
multi perspectival thinking people are
are open to because people are being
pushed back into survival mode
and 16 million jobs man in the US do you
really think America at that point at
that very point will be like mmm I'd
like to really pick up on some
interesting new perspectives about
reality and my place in it like no no no
people are worried and and and then of
course with getting corona price itself
and then the health crisis and so on so
what we are going to see at this point
is I mean we were going towards meta
modern sentiments and society up until
2015
roughly when we wrote the first book The
Listening Society and at that point
there is an optimistic tune in that book
that I would have done differently today
at that point things really seemed to
point in such a direction you could
follow the trajectory in the progressive
countries the things were going more and
more like the liberal hyper liberal and
so on and the young generation was you
know hyper liberal really a 2015
happened around here was an immigration
crisis caused by the by the Syrian war
and the institutions were overpowered
and and the debate was still stuck in an
anti-racist rut for once people couldn't
criticize this until suddenly one day
the green social democratic government
of Sweden for instance just shuts the
borders so I mean the most politically
correct government we've ever had they
suddenly turned to the most restrictive
immigration policy we have ever had okay
reality just hit home and then at that
point the the entire the entire
looking at my own country Sweden at
least the entire discourse shifted and
became much much more conservative much
more aggressive and much more you know
back to basics kind of and and then you
know Jordan Peterson happened a lot of
people picked up on that and I thought
it was interesting and he had his points
but most of all there was you know an
angry angry reaction against all the
postmodern sentiment and especially in
young man and a young white man
particularly and you know feel satisfied
with this antithesis which is after all
what the post-modernism West about
deconstruction and like these then
here's the deconstruction and antithesis
of post-modernism in a they say well ok
I'm gender theorists will ok political
correctness will okay open borders
policies and now the corona crisis and
this is gonna be a have the same effect
on the larger population so this is not
the meta modern movement it's not a
moment of beautiful rebirth and
revolution and there's not that silver
lining in this historical moment in my
in my view or my guess so
instead there is a silver lining but
it's more subtle and it is okay there
are some questions one moment I'll I'll
finish in then I'll pick up the on the
questions so Dale so um when you're
finished let me know I'll ask you a
question then I'll feel okay everything
to you yeah yeah so there is is a silver
lining and it is that okay at least the
corona crisis shakes people up and and
makes us more open to I mean to the fact
that our reality is relatively thin and
it's not
and it's and it's fragile and and
everyday life can disappear at every
moment so just those gaping empty
shelves and where the toilet paper used
to be you know how that felt like you
were in a movie and that opens us up
like who don't things can be really
really really different for better or
worse right and the very fact that
everybody is talking about the same
thing it kind of connects us into like
one kind of field of what Lee knows us
so our words reverberate much more much
more in the same global discussion I
mean the Donald Trump had a bit of that
side effect you know ever suddenly all
the world was talking about Donald Trump
now everybody really really everybody
and it's more of a swollen eye on Trump
and the HP engages people more so so
that's another thing and the third thing
is that for minorities of the population
who are already meta modern ish they
start connecting much more you know
everybody's stuck at home and meta
modernism is the social logic of
Internet Society or the you know social
philosophy and cultural expression of
Internet Society well guess what the
meta modern is going to do they're going
to connect I'm going to talk about the
world situation so in that and about and
start getting strategic this moment in
history can be used which is by the way
why probably why you Peter suggests that
this issue to me right so and so I mean
there is that there's this seed but it's
gonna take a while no I'm not an
optimist for the next years or the next
even 20 years we're going in for some
dark and tough times because people are
gonna try the easier stuff before they
try the more difficult stuff now for
those lucky few who have
happened to have as their interest or
their or you know Providence or chance
that got us into these complex
perspectives we kinda already start the
reconstructive work and for us we're
eager to get there but the rest and they
don't want to listen to that boring crap
so so they're gonna first try the
something more you know easy and fun and
first they're going to try to resist the
complexity of society and and we also
have it and decrease in general
intelligence because of the future shock
of Technology right now and so so this
young generation that are here now they
actually have lower intelligence IQ bias
at least than the previous generation
and we mmm because you know attention
spans get cut so much and so on so what
we're gonna have right now is actually
some kind of reactionary resurgence and
and the the major and the major
implication of the corona crisis I mean
hey you see the cute stuff now like okay
people helped our neighbors and so on
but people are gonna like globalization
less and they're gonna like nationalism
more and they're gonna like strong
leaders who do tough and irrational
decisions more and they're gonna like
strangers less and they're gonna like
new perspectives I mean many modernism
often is described as the virus he's
described and that tries to spread it
itself into different context yeah
people aren't gonna want a bunch of new
viruses right and so so so that's where
we're at
I mean quantitatively we're not going
into darker days we need some stupid and
qualitatively in small groups small
settings seeds and DNA DNA's are we you
know put into place new crate I met a
modern movement and a moment later on in
history
so so patience guys and playfulness
let's let's not storm the Bastille yet
hmm
so I ask you a question Daniel there's a
part of me that just wants to be so
selfish and just have a chat with you
myself the whole time but ask you just
one question and anyone who has a
question for Daniel just write in the
chat box and I'll read it for me to read
in your pack just indicate that so
what's coming alive for me right now is
sort of the skill set the embodied
skillset of meta modernism and how we
got on each other's radar was when I
released that culture war 2.0 piece and
mimetic tribes and at a time I had no
idea what meta modernism was I just
heard it from maybe that country singer
guy Sir Jill Simpson and but I viewed
that kind of the essence of that piece
was like a healthy poem Oh like a
healthy post-modernism where you have
the capacity to not just speak past the
ideological Turing test of someone
else's reality tunnelled like speak to
propositions charitably but also method
act their worldview where when you talk
about what they believe to be true you
feel what they feel when they believe to
what they believe to be true and some
people know this on the channel but
Jordan Peterson was actually my
therapist for two years in Canada before
he went famous and Mike can recruit
eeeek
and like anyone from multiple angles and
what I'm called to critique Peterson was
essentially this is my essence was that
he was not talking with people he was
talking about people he wasn't sinking
in to their maybe emotional reality and
something of that piece I was talking
about mimetic mediation and that's
something like how do we mediate which
is a very Minamata skill set how do we
mediate amongst all these different
tribes and and you mentioned something
about like Nazis UFOs New Age people we
should not agree with them and I'm
totally on board with that but a part of
me wants to be able to not only speak to
them propositional II as if like I'm one
of them but also feel what they feel
like when they
or not see when they are UFO because I
think if I can't be able to do that then
I can't really talk to them so yeah so I
guess the question is um do you think
this is true and if so how do we
collectively cultivate disability okay
so I actually had a long interview with
genre Baker yesterday we have this topic
particularly up and nowhere to talk
about the future of Education and in
verba keys view is about reducing
foolishness and so we all have a
propensity to bullshit ourselves and
there there are actually epistemic and
existential and emotional and social
technologies which we could do to
deceive ourselves less and to act less
self-destructively and I mean mmm
rationalist have like these little these
little books where where you go through
all the fallacies you can practice those
I suppose hasn't been shown to to be
super effective but at least knowing
about them and calling each other out in
discourses and but other than that of
course integrating negative emotions and
so on and then creating the space for
that and then observing ourselves so
generally speaking this is interesting
and it just came to me anecdotally by
people around me and some people have
like extra layers on their thoughts so
some people have just like one one train
going but others have like one
commenting on the train and others have
like one copy on the commentator on the
come like a and and that's what meta
cognition can look like and we can but
can actually change those inner
landscapes and make us more apt at at
seeing those
those those connections and it's subtle
but it's real so just because it's
subtle and difficult to describe and
difficult to ping down and difficult to
catch it's it's still real so so what
Reiki suggests is that we should have
like a a multi-dimensional practice like
like what the religions used to do and
and really reinvented based actually on
on cognitive science and
[Music]
multi-dimensional transdisciplinary
cognitive science so that I mean mystic
side and all the pitfalls of linguistic
exchange and the emotional side and the
psychological side of the self and the
logical side and and and of course
reasoning and complexity and all of that
stuff so so that might be we need some
kind of project and that might be I
suppose the II met a modern project to
create generative conditions for this
kind of new discipline like this
religion of tomorrow or whatever you
want to call it so that really creates
these meaning structures for us and
supports us to be like less mutilated I
suppose alive but also you know grow
better
so yeah just just to answer what you
said about about you know not I have
three rules no Nazis no UFOs no magic
and I mean I realize it gets over the no
Nazis thing because people think about
oh you're gonna be like the anarchist
you put up those stickers but but that's
not the point the point is Nazis are
actually showing up today you know like
real Nazis and so there's even a meta
modern Nazi who claims to work at meta
moderna
on this Facebook profile and I mean
people don't believe me when I say this
but yes there's transcendental evil you
Julius evil up based Nazi Asma showing
up and they want a piece of metal
modernist for instance and UFO people
show up they call me up and they say hey
Daniel
awesome stuff when did they contact you
because they think I heard it from the
aliens you know because they had the
similar ideas and but they heard it from
the aliens in 6 1969 you know and of
course people really believe in magic so
hey on the one hand we need to live to
be very very clear that there are limits
to our epistemic openness on the other
hand once you are clear about those
boundaries then I mean the sky's the
limit in terms of openness of course if
we can look in the eyes of Satan himself
and understand him well we're gonna be
much smarter for it and that's just a
capacity but just for it for more so
sewers so what you're talking about is
the deeper level I'm talking about the
the more superficial level where I mean
I have to communicate people around me
who am i what do I believe in so okay I
don't cast spells I'm a level zero mage
sorry and I am NOT a Nazi and I don't
think UFOs are here like and that just
needs to be stated because when we
opened up things this much and things
get really crazy and and you know these
are crazy times and things are going
wheel to really crazy out there also on
the web yeah I think I guess we should
get go on with that's really good I will
ask another question in the from some in
the chat box but what came to mind there
was uh going back to the Nazi thing and
then there's like different degrees of
it obviously there's all right neo-nazi
but just go to like kind of a more
darker layers there's like if you just
feel into that there's this intense
fucking
hatred for the world
you know it's almost like an evil hatred
and that's in all of us and building a
relationship with that state like a
healthy relationship for that state is
really really tough I think to do so
that came to mind I think we have to
build a relationship with that state so
it doesn't get pathological and spread
so yeah that and something else just
came because that Peter did you see did
you did you read a second
Mountain book like Norfolk I haven't
read the second one so in the end there
is like a chapter called here the
partial glory of fascism and actually
makes this disappoint the truth you're
making here that meta modern is when it
goes political because here we're
talking about the politics and changing
right when meta modernist is political
then it shares this demonic quality
actually with fascism like okay I'm
gonna try and be a hero I'm gonna try
and like do something awesome and
glorious and you know take over the
world
I mean okay but I'm gonna fail I'm gonna
need my friends and I'm still a fucking
joke and you know so so there is like a
kernel of truth in all of these things
and and of course it's okay you know to
you know upset at injustice and that you
just have to make sure well you know
with all the emotional integration and
all of that stuff that we don't have
anger stuffed inside of us that didn't
get out and occur in the right way and
then we just left it in there and Iran
it for 20 years
and then I mean who knows I mean hey
this goes for all of us like you say and
so I will ask questions but something
goes alive and I want to say it so I'm
gonna junked researcher at Jon's
consciousness and wisdom studies lab and
I'm good friends with John and we're
studying these these authentic relating
practices and the ecology of practices
that might emerge from it and it's like
stoicism
jumper Bay yeah so something about
stoicism it's like I was like a secret
closet stored for a long time I didn't
talk about it publicly but now it's
coming online and I feel really called
to talk about it and just thinking into
it I probably wouldn't have been able to
write that white paper without my
stoicism his stoicism has this ability
to kind of like diffuse yourself from
your emotions so you don't get a mesh
with them and then you can kind of look
back if you choose and build a
relationship with each emotional reality
so that I'm just flaking that because I
was never really comfortable with using
the meta modern term I'm definitely not
a modernist stoic from water stoic so I
might be a meta modern stoic so that's a
threat I might want to tug on and
something interesting also came up as
you mentioned that like and like an
invitation and one thing I'm also doing
with this project
the stoah I had this like post-punk
minimalist ethics and having all these
sexy events like existential
speed-dating or existential of dance
parties there's not critics need dating
and so it's a it has like a playful vibe
to it and I imagine a wisdom gym might
emerge from all these different colleges
that I'm on with Jim yes yeah yeah I
have a proclivity for jazzy coinage but
even I just wanted to all that came
alive and it's felt right to say so I
wanted to say it and thank you for
engendering that my friend so let's turn
to if you had me a fairly thought scheme
a live wait there let me know but I'll
turn to some questions if not veldt if
you couldn't unmute yourself and ask
Daniel no question yes hey Daniel thanks
I do see kind of your argument about
meta modernism naturally evolving
through our time and I think it's
inevitable but I also think it's not
possible like that's not gonna happen a
viable timeline and so I personally am
very hesitant to just accept that this
is going to naturally evolve and we not
really we can't really do anything about
that so do you see any possibility for
strategies towards kind of bringing
this kind of nonlinear phase shift
what's that right so so I mean we're
looking for nonlinear revolutionaries so
meaning that when being a meta modernist
actor so first of all it's much less
staged teleological then then then these
then these stage theories or the
language that they invite us to would
suggest rather I mean rather you have
different waves like this and like that
when one wave is at the top and the
other is beginning and and then when the
other is ending and the other is at its
top and then you have the top then you
have the beginning of the next one and
and if you want to like draw out the
qualitative stuff of what is like meta
modernism well it starts now and then
you know it has a long future a little
bit but it'll s long for you of course
that modernity because they go shorter
and shorter because of the acceleration
of history and of course there's the
risk of collapse so I mean when I when I
say this stuff I mean it sounds weird
but I mean I mean it in a religious
manner you know I don't mean it like
yeah so on Tuesday or we're gonna
implement these meta modern policies and
you know and on Friday we're gonna have
like many modern council rule the world
with their meta modern f with our meta
modern information architecture which
meta modern business leaders will have
invented and then we will dismantle
capitalism and create something fair and
sustainable and you know like that's not
what I'm talking about I'm talking about
okay there is a developmental direction
and if you know the direction and if
many people know the direction and they
have resonance with one another then
when they are in a million complex
interrelated situations that they choose
you know it'll be a your B then the they
climb in there lay labyrinths
so somebody climbs in art labyrinth
somebody climbs facilitation space event
making our in somebody climbs a politics
labyrinth somebody climbs a therapeutic
Calabrian somebody climbs a mounted Emma
Culebra and somebody climbs a business
labyrinth somebody climb you know but
but there there's a deep structure there
is a pattern here you know and I'm not
saying we have it down the pattern of
doors or that I have down but but there
are some contour or so that pattern if
people see roughly the same pattern and
then then they can jive together on a
subtle level and then the position here
or no the hypothesis here working
hypothesis is that seeing this pattern
makes you competitive in the games of
the logic of the previous pattern so
like being more meta modernist tends to
put you in a better position in just
just normal modernist both friends does
profit-seeking for instance healthcare
implementation policies for instance
being on the beat with arts and media
for instance building relationships and
networks because it has competitive
advantage because it follows from the
logic of the previous that's what we
know creates an impetus that is complex
and then people come up with different
projects so a thousand different people
come up with a thousand different
projects of these maybe just to succeed
nevertheless the world depends on those
two projects succeeding and if we don't
have those 1,000 projects and the
learning processes that come from all
those failures then were cooked so so so
that's the like nonlinear revolutionary
thing that's why it requires of
okay I'm gonna do this because the
structures point in this direction and I
realize I'm gonna be a fucking joke and
I might even ruin my life in the process
and I could have been a good
middle-class person but I'm actually
putting all that on the line for a
higher purpose
which my family doesn't understand I
mean this is a bit crazy but it's the
right thing to do if you're if you see
the pattern strong enough so so I mean
that's that's the kind of
revolutionaries we want I mean not not
people who want to risk their lives by
robbing a train and then chopping the
head of someone but revolutionaries who
can gamble with their life livelihood
and good reputation especially
reputation you know like people are
slaves to all these social games as
status tough and so on
so whoever can make a fool out of
themselves is like the meta modern hero
and and and and that's and that pushes
the game you know that pushes it has
good and bad effects but I'm a ver egde
if we write about the general direction
I mean the world depends on it
Wayne you have a question sorry so I saw
a few people over at both books of box
ago I really loved the critique of
Marshalls question had to do with when
you discuss participatory democracy in
there's no mention of at all comment
which is the process of making you feel
like Michelle no one's from into Haiti
for instance so I'm curious why you know
I mean maybe people want that internal
society where I see comics is something
deeper and stand for that period food
here you're awesome you know so it was
simple reason actually no so the first
two books are politics and third one is
on history fourth one is on the economy
so Commons shows up there and including
including Michelle bounce and all the
rest so but just to say something
mmm I mean the number four on the cold
list out competing capitalism and we try
to write them timelessly so people can
enter the series through whichever
pathway that you want so we we don't
write I'm gonna write this in a future
book we write like as if the books were
already existent but it's gonna take
years to finish it so I mean the Commons
theories and they have a very important
element and yet I when I mean I might
know too little about this to give a
full response but and but what I have
seen and heard thus far is that I don't
see a viable pathway for the effective
of competition of the capitalist system
as coordinator of human agency for
across millions of you know literal
billions of people on the same market so
what what I would like instead you said
you like that our Marxist critique well
I would still actually like some for
comments Tyrion and all of the other
actual heterodox economics and more
progressive theories of both governance
and and production distribution and
coordination of human agency I would
like to for all of them to find their
Marxist you know so like like it marks
it in the 19th century he was like the
bad boy of socialism like because the
other socialists were like
the beauty and dignity of man and he was
like no no no we're gonna kill him and
and we're not looking for somebody who
says we're gonna kill this or that but
we have to look at okay how are we
seriously out-compete this machine you
know which is normally powerful at
controlling human agency you know and I
mean I don't see a really serious
engagement with that question and the
comments theories so I can only imagine
that there would be relatively small
islands so at this point I think come
become us theory remain an important
aspect of meta modernism but but kind of
much like the idealist
what like the Marxist would call prior
socialists they would call them idealist
philosophers or or utopian philosophers
and and I kind I'm kind of looking for a
non utopian pathway here okay yeah it
isn't as utopian as it may seem first of
all there's a lot of discussion about
precisely that whether words so how do
you do what's called trans vestment in
other words you have you have a building
Commons the federal economy and the
problem is how do we bring capital in
some sense through a semi-permanent
memory within suicide are different in
there and a lot of meaningful ways for
people's where lives it outcompetes
what's there's actually a fair amount of
work being there meaning more than
you're aware of into when I shot off
particularly so I see David ba BAA is a
little bit more sorry I sort of
imagining things that are for us that
don't happen
whereas p2p and that maybe is actually
working
documenting things that are actually
going on reasonable scale and working on
ideas about how to how could be right
there's more all right so I mean I'd be
happy to pick up some links and so on on
that and I mean in the long run and the
long run this is some kind of I mean if
we just look at the overall the overall
math in the sense of direction we're
gonna go I mean because there are so
many comments and they are so
fundamental we're going to go in the
comments direction we're also going to
go in a sharing economy direction and
we're also going to go in in you know
exchange economy direction where we
exchanged for other means and capital
we're also going to go in a
decentralized currency direction and
there's some kind of coordination to
happen between these things and there's
going to be like have to be some kind of
some kind of you know internet driven
social media driven connection between
these like an like an information
architecture for that for all of this
and that being said I mean the contour I
shared I share this impetus or this
direction there are other things I don't
believe in that are showing up today for
instance giving economy gift economy is
and has too many flaws for instance of
Charles Eisenstein and and so so so
there are other things that are
happening that I'm that I'm less
enthused about today I just want to say
that yes I do
think that's a promising direction and
I'm actually involved with something
called the one project right now and San
Francisco based small think-tank and and
my colleagues there are actually
particular commons economics and so on i
take a little look at it myself and I'm
working on governance systems and we're
going try to cover this this is actually
what I'm going to do right after this
call and what I was doing before the
call also great
do you have time for one more question
or should we wrap it up right now and no
I have okay so yeah Yoshio if you can
unmute yourself and ask your question I
was just wondering what the role of
Technology as in the metamodel
transition is there a crucial role for
general AI blockchain other distributed
systems Elon Musk talks about a
bandwidth issue the idea that we can
download ask you much greater than we
can upload so if you have anything to
say about that okay the last part again
like download faster than up yeah he you
know he mentioned that we have a far
greater capacity to receive information
from the internet and and we have a
limited capacity to affect or to upload
our various aspects of recognition to
the internet so that's what he calls the
bandwidth issue just wondering if you
see there if there's any relation there
to this madammadam
transition right so so I mean people
have the opposite argument as super
empowers us as as ascenders of content
and knowledge and it it create it
creates like a hyper you know a high
saturated space of content and like
hyper production of knowledge like as if
I didn't already exists enough in
mmm in academia so I mean well let's say
we're at the end of the modern and a
long period of cycling a long cycle
where a long sight cycle or period and
and then we what happens here is that
knowledge and production of science and
knowledge is is viewed as very very
important than you know pivotal and
fundamental to to the modern project at
the same time of course production is
number one thing in modern history you
know increase your GNP GDP you you
increase production you increase the
speed of distribution and so on so what
we're and what we end with when all have
you know the Omega Point a modern
society is a humongous deluge of tillage
of you know new knowledge being produced
of various quality and you know you you
add you lower the price for putting
knowledge out there and grandeur the
synthesizing and creating new knowledge
so everybody starts we're like super
super super super like it so most papers
never get or only getting read a few
times by the by that people are paid to
to review them you know and most papers
are never cited and let alone knowledge
being applied and used and have any sort
of impact on the world and then of
course everybody kind of has the
klondike dream that you know my my I
know maybe I'm making a difference I
mean this this feels a little good
might as well publish it rather than
just journal for myself so because then
I mean I will make the opposite argument
like the bottom like is not the
production and the bottleneck is the
download the cognitive overload
and not on the kannada overload but the
application of knowledge so and the
non-arbitrary sorting and evaluating the
right knowledge at the right time at the
moment this is an unresolved problem
it's it's tackled a little bit by the
Google IO race and so on but is an
unresolved problem of the informational
system and coordination system that we
have that people people are stuck in a
system which feeds us know doesn't
opt-in doesn't effectively optimize that
the right person is the right Knology at
the right time right so we're all to the
even to the detriment of our mental
health we are we are over information
alized and there's too much content and
there's too much and and we can't
download that much and we can't
synthesize that much and we can't think
that deeply about so much so the major
challenge then is the complexity
management of that knowledge creation so
and so which requires epistemic
communities like I like like we just
talked about earlier it requires like we
together like bounding out like an
alliance and oh we're gonna help each
other out we're gonna you know try to
send only was relevant we're gonna try
to not waste each other's time we're
going to try to like support one other
in the understanding that things have
may take longer to reply to and so on
and we're gonna we're gonna try to find
different strengths and weaknesses of
one another and and leverage those so
part of it is that like internet
internet you know clubs or tribes
showing up men and modern tribes and
another part then and this is a Holy
Grail really you know is another part is
the informational architecture so
somebody out there is working on this
I'm sure you know working on me I was in
the IT I was an in-house philosopher out
of 90 company a while ago and and they
were in fact at least in the long run
trying to tackle this problem that okay
we need to revamp the information
architecture so that the the user
experience the interface of every person
is really optimized for their health
while being an empowerment over the long
run it last one and this just isn't
resolved yet so we're looking at like
we're in a very early phase of the
internet future internet must be like
much much much more sensitive the
algorithms we much smarter and so on the
last part I wanted to say is that so
knowledge creation is no longer is no
longer like the the sheer production of
new knowledge of ground science is no
longer actually the viscosity the
scarcity is translation and application
and transdisciplinarity and and and the
use of knowledge in the right place at
the right time if everybody could
actually just download all the knowledge
in the world then we would probably have
all enough knowledge to resolve all of
our problems but we can't the right
knowledge is and at the right time isn't
at the right place at the right time so
there is a whole class of people this
big percentage of the population will in
the new labor market start you know
being connectors of knowledge and
translators of knowledge between
different fields and this is like the
major and it's and we can be helped by
algorithm's to be done by human beings
probably for a long time to come
and this application is creativity this
this yeah so so and and that connects of
course the meta modern society you need
a new kind of you need to support this
new emergence of this new class of free
agents which roam the internet and apply
knowledge to new to to to new con
contexts cool so let's stop there
because we were past the are a lot of
time so Daniel I was gonna call you
Hansie but tell you Daniel thanks so
much for coming into the stove today is
greatly appreciated
and yeah it's the next session it's
oddly enough it was on the gift economy
something you were just storing a slight
shade on its with Andrew tag art my
philosophical mentor at 4:30 p.m.
Eastern time you can our street there
he's going to talk about the gift
economy and the stola is actually based
off the gift economy right now I'll let
you know how it goes the idea is is that
the Stowe is a gift for all of us to
freely use in this time of need
and if you're inspired to provide a gift
to the stoah you can just do so on the
website WWE
if you put the gift there's more
information there alright everyone
thanks so much for coming up today hey
thanks guys
sorry for being late